  SPECIAL P. A. MEETINGS
RE. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
2.11.90/16.11.90/7.12.90


               CHIEF
               CONSTABLE
       SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY MEETINGS RE. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
                2 NOVEMBER, 16 NOVEMBER & 7 DECEMBER 1990

                                INDEX

Police Authority paper used at meetings held on 19.10.90 and 2.11.90
including:-

a.   applications dated 21.9.90 and 24.8.90 from Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield   -   together with:

       (i) accompanying solicitor's letter dated 17.9.90;
      (ii) Finance & General Purposes Committee paper dated 15.9.90;
     (iii) extract from Police Authority minutes dated 8.4.88;

b.   application dated 24.9.90 from Superintendent   Marshall;

c.   application dated 1.10.90 from Superintendent   Murray;

d.   application dated 1.10.90 from Superintendent   Greenwood;

e.    application dated 19.9.90 from Russell Jones & Walker (Federation
     solicitors) on behalf of Constables Illingworth and Smith;

f.   Home Office Circular 77/1987.




Appendix showing details of expenditure (as at 1.11.90) incurred by the
Officers THIS WAS NOT CIRCULATED TO COMMITTEE MEMBERS.




Copy of Deputy Chief Constable's address given at the Special Police
Authority meeting on 2.11.90 THIS WAS CIRCULATED TO COMMITTEE MEMBERS
together with copy of Chief Constable's press release issued immediately
after Authority meeting and associated papers.




Letter from Bob Johnston dated 13.11.90 enclosing:

a.   Copy letter from Bob Johnston to members of the Authority dated
     12.11.90;

b.   Copy letter from Hepworth & Chadwick (David Duckenfield's solicitors)
     to Bob Johnston dated 7.11.90;

c.   Extracts from the press on 31.8.90;

d.   Copy letter from Russell Jones & Walker (Federation solicitors) to
     Bob Johnston dated 7.11.90.




Agenda plus supporting papers for 16.11.90 meeting together with copy
of Chief Constable's press release issued immediately after Authority
meeting.
Letter from Stephen Walker dated 14.11.90 enclosing a copy of the notes
taken by Belinda Norcliffe (Hammond Suddards) at Pre-Inquest Review
held on 30.10.90.

Letter from Secretary, Supts' Association (national office) dated 9.11.90
to CC together with reply concerning legal representation and HOC 77/1987.

Personal letter to CC from Mr Wilburn (P.A. magistrate member) re.
outcome of Special P.A. meeting held on 16.11.90.

Letter from CC to Sir Jack Layden re. outcome of Special P.A. meeting
held on 16.11.90.

Copy letter dated 30.11.90 to all P.A. members re. item concerning
financial assistance on 7.12.90 P.A. agenda.

Special P.A. meeting 7.12.90:

a.   Report of Clerk & Financial Officer
b.   Report of Chief Constable
c.   Judgment - R. -v- Derbyshire Police Authority ex-parte
       Wilson and Dalton
<tTt.-V=€>2_
      (5tSTB3>   f   A~ lT >t                              I   NJ r.        f~y-tZ c _ £

                           ~                           T-i-^vo Tb            Pa-y          Cu-+-sx-*£j&          )

       (a~Gr^> f/VlTtf              v                            C- (Ju.JJ'C-O-C^Xr v
                                                    ■^7"
                                            V-A"*-fC<y£_        (Ix&JLt .



\xjf<srt t i K v r

                 T A^'sOrrt^Ns/         •




 ^4tc '                  ^ ^^TM-ccL^lrxvr                      rv^ (Sv^lvCetC<




                                                                                                          T
   n                            0           __         ___             j ^ T A^J- ^ " T 'PVS'^ .

  _                                          ^             t                           - fCv/OL'tc^S-J' €^rt>p
  f facrT*^              OjrftZ^^K'
                      Lf^DV^
  \      ^-^SZPTL^ *5^?*^ *
                           V s^^             \\K#»#»s*i^ S^                aJJk “Waw-j              f ■* «o C st-ki (icL^ .we. 3
                  «w.'t*w.^»v      ^ia-'^V    p    5*c..-i^-,*'t   ,   ^       sU L V    4 ^        W   « ~ . .      r   •                                 ^   -•« >       ^ W   J . . .   a . ^   « A U i

                                                                                                                                                  ■jt 3wtv» '& 82 ■ '!'r
                                                                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                                    ■f- -^-«VK.
                                                                                                                                                                                              x 239* ^ ^ g2L
                                                                                                                                                                       V p

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                                                                                                         C <M~V4 •€ ' foTa )
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 1991/92

                                   BIDS PER PBS/PER                        BISS ACC0RDIN8 TO                      PROVISIONAL HOME                    ANTICIPATED
                                    FORMS (SEP 90)                            HOME OFFICE                         OFFICE ALLOCATION                 EXPENDITURE PER
                                                                                                                                                   CAPITAL PROSRftHME

                                                  | £000's3                               £000*5'                              lEOOO's                           £000's I c d a i ^ o                      J
MAJOR SCHEMES                                         7? A                                 37.0                                    37.0 (I)
                                                                                                                                                                         \                             /
                                                                                                                                                                  37-°
«IN0R SCHEMES                                       671.7                                 658.0                                  462.0 (25                       639.2

VEHICLES PLANT                                                                                                                                                                                         c.o
AND EQUIPMENT                                     3,458.5                               1Jj0«9
                                                                                        •  LlLirt                                                              4,367.0 (41
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qS-X
                                                                                                                                                                                                   M

                                                  *,167.;                               3,907.0                              1 17? rt
                                                                                                                             •J | i -J f i V                   5,043.2




                                ( I S Top slice of Hose Office provision for all Police Authorities
                                     to be used to finance committed major schesss

                                (2) Based on establishment of 2998 3 154 per san

                                !3S Based on establishment of 2998 2 880 per man

                                (4! Includes is tor Control Equipment originally submitted for 1990/91
                                    when should have been 1991/92
                                                                                                                                                 FIN/HHF                    11/28/90
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                      POLICE AUTHORITY
 R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P.FA.                                                             Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
 Clerk and Financial Officer                              Please reply to:                     Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                                P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

 Our Ref     SW/MR                            Your Ref.                              Date:   4December     1990
 This matter is being dealt with by   Mr S Walker                                    Telephoneext   520




    Mr R B Wells QPM
    Chief Constable
    South Yorkshre Police
    Police Headquarters
    Snig Hill
    SHEFFIELD


    APPLICATION BY POLICE OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
    HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS
   As agreed yesterday, I look forward to receiving your report to the
   Authority on Friday by the end of today.
    For your information, I enclose a copy of the Judgment in the "Derbyshire"
    case on which I have relied quite heavily in preparing my report.
   Yours sincerely
           __________




  S WaTJcer
^ Solicitor to the Authority

   Enc
    Information from:

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
    AUTHORITY
    REGENT STREET, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2PQ
    No:                           Date:




                                                 7 December 1990




      HILLSBOROUGH POLICE OFFICERS’ LEGAL REPRESENTATION

     South Yorkshire Police Authority meeting in Barnsley today
(Friday 7 December) considered afresh the application by 6 Police
officers for financial support towards the cost of their legal
representation at the Hillsborough Inquest. They had before them
information which had not been made known to them previously and
on the basis of this information decided to give that support.



                               ENDS




                                              Kath Finlay
                                              0226 248739 or

    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
    PRESS AND PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICER:
    BARNSLEY (0226) 733222 EXT 233/160 OR (0226) 248739 (Direct Line)
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

                             7 DECEMBER 1990

                             AGENDA ITEM 18




               FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN
                            LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


                         SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS




WP006687/SJL
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS


YELLOW    -    Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer to Police Authority -
               7 December 1990.

GREEN     -    Report of Chief Constable to Police Authority - 7 December 1990.

MAUVE     -    Report of Chief Constable to Police Authority - 19 October and
               2 November.

BLUE      -    Letter from Messrs Hepworth and Chadwick (representing Chief
               Superintendent Duckenfield) and application for assistance from
               Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. Extract from a note of the
               meeting of the Police Authority on 16 November 1990.




WP006687/SJL
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 7 DECEMBER 1990


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATION
Ih fMcEEDINGS ARISING OUT 6F TOE HILLSBOROUGH bl&STER- - - - - -


REPORT OF THE CLERK AND FINANCIAL OFFICER

1     Matter for Consideration
      The provision of financial assistance to the following police
      offleers
,     Chief Superintendent Duckenfleld
m     Superintendents Murray Greenwood and Marshall
^     PCs Smith and Illingworth
      under the terms of Home Office Circular No 77/87.
2     Information
2.1    Members have before them a report from the Chief Constable
      which gives the background to the applications and recommends
      the Authority to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation. The recommendation Is
      related to the Inquests but, as can be seen from the written
      applications which are appended to the Chief Constable's
      report, 1n certain cases the applications are much wider.
2.2    Home Office Circular No 77/87 (Appendix F          to the Chief
      Constable’s Report]


•
      This provides guidance to Police Authorities when considering
      applications for financial assistance to police officers.
      The central principle which should guide such consideration
      1s that where a Police Authority considers that an officer
      has acted In good faith 1n pursuance of his duties, or that
      the Interests of the Force as a whole are Involved, the
      officer should have the support of the Police Authority.
2.3 There 1s judicial authority for the proposition that this
    creates a presumption that an officer Is entitled to
    reimbursement of his reasonable costs and this can only be
    rebutted If there Is some relevant factor which could
    reasonably justify the refusal. This Is the case of R V
    Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton. The
    transcript of the judgment In this case will be available at
    the meeting for reference purposes.


        NOT FOR PUBLICATION as I t
        contains      exempt      Information
        within para. . . / . £ • • • • • • • • of
        Sch.l2A to the Local Government
        Act 1972 as amended.
Proceedings to which the Applications relate
C1v11 Action
Chief Superintendent Duckenfleld In his application dated 21
September 1990, Appendix A to the Chief Constable’s report
referred to In paragraph 2.1, requests financial assistance
from the Authority In connection with the civil hearings due
to begin on 2 October 1990. These proceedings concern the
principle of contribution to the damages awarded or agreed In
   ’L / laims *r,1sl?9 out of the disaster, by Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and their engineers, Eastwood and
Partners. No civil action has been brought against Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or any other Individual officers
and therefore the application for financial support In
connection with civil proceedings need not concern Members at
the present time.
Criminal Proceedings
Superintendent Hurray has requested financial assistance for
legal representation 1n connection with any criminal
proceedings which arise.        (Appendix C to the Chief
Constable’s report). There are none at present but paragraph
3 of the Home Office Circular deals with this situation. The
guidance given 1s that 1n a public prosecution the police
officer 1s expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he
1s acquitted the Police Authority are 1n a position to decide
on the full facts, whether or not to nake a payment to the
officer or to the Police Federation.
As there are no criminal proceedings, this particular
application could stand adjourned 1n accordance with the
Circular until after such proceedings have been completed.
Discipline Proceedings
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield In his application nakes
reference to the possibility of discipline proceedings
following the Inquests. It 1s not clear whether he 1s
seeking financial assistance from the Authority In connection
with any such proceedings but as 1t Is well settled principle
that the Authority should not provide assistance In these
proceedings this can be rejected.
Inouests
All of the officers nake application for financial assistance
to be separately represented at the Inquests which are
presently ongoing. Paragraph 13 of the Circular provides the
necessary guidance In this situation and It reads as
follows:-
      Separate representation for Individual officers whose
     Interest Is Involved nay be necessary. For example,
     there will be occasions when (a) the chief officer’s
     legal representative cannot reasonably be expected to
     represent the separate Interests of such officers and
     (p) the police authority considers that such Interests
     should be represented. In such cases the authority
     should give financial assistance to the officers. In
     considering (b) above, the authority will wish In
     particular to assess whether the officers are at risk of
     Delng held to blame for actions In connection with the
     death to which the Inquest relates and whether any such
     finding night give rise to legal proceedings for the
     costs of which the police authority would be liable
     under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964 or for which
     financial assistance night be appropriate within the
     terms of this Circular.
The question to be answered under this paragraph Is whether
separate representation of the officers Is necessary.
Paragraph 13 asks the Authority to consider this question 1n
two parts.
(a) Can the Chief Officer’s legal representative reasonably
    be expected to represent the separate Interests of the
    officers and;
(b) Does the Police Authority consider that such Interests
    should be represented.
The answer to (a) 1n this case 1s straightforward. The Chief
Constable’s legal adviser has already advised that he cannot
represent the separate Interests of the officers.
In determining (b) the Circular asks a Police Authority to
consider the following factors
(i) The risk of the officers being held to blame for actions
    1n connection with the deaths to which the Inquests
    relate
     and
(11) whether any such finding night give rise to legal
     proceedings for which financial assistance night be
     appropriate within the terms of the Circular.
There Is little doubt that some If not all officers run the
risk of being held to blame for their actions. It has to be
further considered whether there Is a risk of further
proceedings which night be the subject of financial
assistance under the Circular.
8 The Director of Public Prosecutions has already decided there
  1s Insufficient evidence to bring criminal proceedings
  against any of the officers but fresh evidence nay come out
  at the Inquests and the Coroner has already alluded to this
  fact; this Might give rise to a change of Mind on the part of
  the Director of Public Prosecutions. From press statements
  which have previously been Made, there Is obviously a risk of
  a private prosecution but In til of this It would be
  unreasonable In the view of the Authority's legal adviser, to
  speculate.
  6ood Faith and Reasonable Judgement
1 A decision of the Divisional Court In the case of R v
  Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton
  clearly, establishes that It Is reasonable for a Police
  Authority to have regard to these two Matters In deciding
  whether or not to provide financial assistance In any
  proceedings, whether covered by the Circular or not.
   In his judgment, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said:-
   •If therefore there was, on the part of an officer,
   negligence 1e failure to exercise such care as was reasonably
   to be required in the clrcimstances of an officer of his rank
   and experience doing his job in the Force, then, in My view,
   the Police Authority is entitled to have regard to it if such
   negligence was so connected to the subject Matter of the
   legal proceedings or to the causing of the legal proceedings
   to be taken that It can fairly be regarded as a substantial
   cause of the Incurring of the costs. I have no doubt that a
   Police Authority, If satisfied of good faith on the part of
   the officer, would nonnally act, and be pleased to act, on
   the central principle stated In the Circular; but the
   discretion Is given to the Authority and It Is iHposslble, In
   My view, to hold that once good faith Is established, a
   Police Authority Must disregard clear evidence of negligence
   or of failure to "exercise judgement reasonably".
   So to hold would Mean that a Police Authority would be
   required to disregard acts of substantial negligence such
   that It could fairly be said that, although acquitted of bad
   faith, the officer had "brought the proceedings on hlMself."
   The decision whether evidence of such negligence In a
   particular case justifies withholding relMburseMent, wholly
   or In part, 1s of course entrusted to the Police Authority."
2 The Police Authority should, when considering the two Matters
  of good faith and reasonable judgement, have regard to the
  Information that Is available. The only real Information
  that Is available In this connection 1s that contained In
  Chapter 18 of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor which
  1s appended.
4.3 It 1s Important at this juncture to remind members that each
    officers application should be considered separately.
5    Financial Implications
5.1 Derbyshire case which has previously been mentioned In this
    report, Is also authority for the proposition that
    alternative funding should not be taken Into account by the
    Authority when deciding whether or not to provide financial
    assistance. However, this particular case concerned
    reimbursement of the Police Federation.
5.2 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendents Murray,
    Greenwood and Marshall have policies of Insurance which can
    and are being used to finance legal representation at
    present. In the view of the Authority's legal adviser, a
    decision to provide financial assistance to PCs Smith and
    Illingworth must cover the full cost of legal representation,
^   whereas support for the other officers could be by way of a
P   contribution to the extent that the policies of Insurance do
    not cover the full cost of representation.
5.3 It would also be reasonable for the Authority to determine
    the level of representation, whether 1t 1s solicitor, alone,
    solicitor and counsel, etc. However, again, In the view of
    the Authority’s legal adviser, 1n the event that financial
    assistance 1s granted, this decision should be left to the
    Individuals concerned but with the condition that, failing
    agreement on the amount of the costs, they should be taxed.

6   Refusal of Application
6.1 Paragraph 15 of the Circular provides that 1f the Authority
    were to refuse an application for financial assistance and
    then discover 1n the light of events at the Inquests that
    assistance shoul dhave been given, 1t should meet the
    reasonable costs Incurred by the officer. If an application
     is refused for proper reasons theAuthority would be acting
    reasonably 1f they made 1t clear to the officer(s) that this
    would not preclude a further application which would be
    considered 1n the light of events at the Inquests.
7   Recommendation
     That the Authority consider the applications.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
                                                     CHAPTER 18

                                                        POLICE
    Choice of Ends by the Police
       272. There was much bitterness amongst Liverpool supporters that they bad to make do again for the
    second year with the Leppings Lane end. But, cogent as their complaints were, they amounted to reasons for
    choosing a different ground altogether. Given Hillsborough as the venue, I think the police were right to
    allocate the sections of the ground as they did. The direction of arrival and the need for segregation made it
    sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangements would have made for confusion. As with choice of venue, 1do
    not consider choice of ends was causative of the disaster. Had it been reversed, the disaster could well have
    occurred in a similar manner but to Nottingham supporters.
    Police Planning
      273. The Operational Order for 1989 left much unsaid. Apart from the lack of any provision for late or
    congested arrivals, or any provision for the avoidance of overcrowding on the terraces, there was a number of
    other omissions. For example, there was no specific deployment of officers to man the perimeter gates. The
    Order did not detail the duties of the mounted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, who included
    Liverpool officers to assist in marshalling their own fans. The duties of Superintendents (especially Mr
    Greenwood and Mr Marshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
W   provision requiring mobile (Tango) patrols to assist the emergency services was omitted from the text.
      274. The 1988 Order was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the number of officers deployed in
    shopping areas and to emphasise in capital letters the embargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
    with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some thought the pens overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was
    closed off on that occasion did not figure in or influence the plan for 1989.
       275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge ofF Division only 21 days before this semi-final. The
    pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It
    might have been wiser to have left Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
    understandable that Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
    from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and of a semi-final match,
    however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he should also brief himself.
      276. He was not informed of the crushing incident in 1981 nor did he make inquiries which would have
    revealed it. He did not know the arrangement as between Club and police for monitoring the Leppings Lane
    terraces. He did not visit and tour the ground before approving the Operational Order. Although he attended a
    match on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present and he left control of the game to the Superintendents.
    Policing on the Day
      277. One of the regrettable features of the football scene as it has developed is the enormous expenditure of


•
     money, time and effort in employing large numbers of police all over the country to guard against the sort of
    disorder and misbehaviour which have become endemic. Police management of a game of football has become
    a military operation. The problems faced and the responses received must be disheartening and may have
    tended to harden police attitudes to supporters in general.
      278. It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
    public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully at a large number of football games
    including major matches, during strikes in the coal industry and the steel industry, and in other contexts.
    Unfortunately, their policing on 1S April broke down in the ways already described and, although there were
    other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.
       279. In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report that for the most
    part the quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables
    who as witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. On the day. they and many others strove heroically in ghastly
    circumstances aggravated by hostility to rescue and succour victims. They inspired confidence and hope.
      280. By contrast, with some notable exceptions, the senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
    witnesses. Their feelings of grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine. No doubt those feelings were
    intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their management. But, neither their
    handling of problems on the day nor their account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be
    expected of their rank.
   281. Mr Duckenfield learn heavily on Mr Murray's experience. Between them they misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received Mr Marshall's request 10 open the gate. They did not.
for example, check the turnstile figures available from Club control or check with Tango units as 10 the
numbers still to come. They did not alert Mr Greenwood to the situation at the fringe of his area of command.
They gave no instructions as to the management of the crowd at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined to
postpone kick-ofT.

  282. When Mr Marshall's request came, Mr Duckenfield's capacity to lake decisions and give orders
seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary
consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence oj-
fans from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure of the problem, he sent others down to “assess the situation"
rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information to the crowd.

   283. Most surprisingly, he gave Mr Kelly and others to think that there had been an inrush due to Liverpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was not only untruthful. It set off a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence and distress. It revived against football fans, and especially those from
Liverpool, accusations of hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationwide but from Europe too. 1can
only assume that MrDuckenfield’slack ofcandour on thisoccasionwasoutofcharacter.Hesaid his reason for
not telling the truth was that if the crowd became aware of it there might be a very hostile reaction and this
might impede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell Mr Kelly the truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant Chief Constable Jackson was at hand. Mr Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to him
until much later.

  284. The likeliest explanation of Mr Duckenfield'S conduct is that he simply could not face the enormity ojt
the decision to open the gates and all that flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to Mr Kelly, wha^
he did not say to Mr Jackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the
disaster situation. He froze.

The Police Case at the Inquiry
  285. It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield, under pressure of
cross-examination, apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans forcausing the deaths. But, that apart, the police
case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Clubforfailingtomonitorthepens.lt was
argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being
defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would
have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.




                                                                                                                ••



                                                        50
 j g p y T OF   fn griff Comstart.»
 1           ^ ^ t r jp* eo«f?**ratitpn

             ot*i£:yti9i0*       °f    fia*ncl*l *aai*tanee          to   the     following    police

                          Chiof Superintendent DucXenfield
                          Con!^Kitenfl!nt',>1Urr*y' Cr»*nw°©d *nd Marshall
                                   * Steith And Illingworth

          U”4*' th* * « “        of « » • Offlo. Circular *,. 77/1*87.

2         Information


         11 a.t«j^V*oc\ V bV / y1/,y/V vu*a,,.tK!!^ ‘c ti' th*                                 »hich
2 .2
         p » p * r.d by « , ? ci.V l? >‘rto .B = u l O f U c .r ? " 1* '" 1' 10'' *           * •» •«
2.3
         I h i. r.p o rt should b . r ..d 1„ „ » J u » = ti.„ „ l th             p n rU m




         *•      S L s f f i a . * 1 “ • i",u,,t ef *                            «

        *’      °!i*k“ itl0''*1         ‘•i-* 9l»» at th. Inau.it
                which nay eauee tha Director of Public Prosecution.
                u J m * yh rr *e M i 4 *r th* * ’• • « “            m      is s .
        J.      Pecently in a aiaiilar oaaa where the Director
                of Public Proaeeution. decided againat eriminai
                proceeding., r.preaentative. of ^
                l».tij«.d , Juiicl.l ».vi.» of u .
                t h l i ’u u .        •* « “ “   •* «   th i.   „   D C .ib l.   IB


        I.      Private criminal proaecutiona aay be brought.
                                        -   2   •




             H ! , " ! } " ' ' *?'• P°**ibl* « “ lpXi»»ry P T K M U I 4 I
             ,                requlreaent to resign or reduction
             In rank are all possibilities.
 3.2
        aunnJlVi<C*   !   r M t M t ri#,t *nd therefore no at la need of your
        •upport is Chief Superintendent David Duckanfiald.
 3.3
        I™-*    C!#*        Duck#ll*i»« *>*■ Mnaneial provision Has already
                 i«»ufficiont     toprovide proper      And adequate legal
          presentation for hinaalf et the on-goingInquest proceedings.
               .     v t0 **     •**a        anreprasented at the Inquest,
        conserving the scant resources he does have for those tlaes when
        personal representation is absolutely accessary, from every point
           view this is totally unsatisfactory and, la ay view, nadesirable.


        l^gal Reprcaentatlop

        Counsel representing the force is, of course, responding to the
        evidence given at the Inquest as appropriate to ensure that the
        Interests of the Force and the -Police Authority are properly
        represented and to a eat21 degree he is, at the aaae tine,
        representing the interests of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
        Thia is not sufficient to allow for evidence to energe to best public
        advantage.

        The other officers w*e are represented, and who are funded through
        private insurance, have already nade significant in-roads into that
        provision. The Inquest is proceeding slowly and so their financial
        problems will become greater over time.


5      Good Faith and Reasonable Judgment

5.1    in the case R. -v- Derbyshire Police Authority ex*parte Wilson and
        Dalton (an extract of this is contained In the Clerk * Financial
        Officer's peper) it was ssid           Police Authority if •stlsfied
        of good faith on the part of the offleer(s) would errrsaTlj act cad
        he plaased to act on the central principle stated in the Circular...”
           (BOC 77/07). Zt was held In that case thst this *«»«&eeat that
        there la a preemption that if as officer la thorn to l m actad
                                                                                ••
        in food faith la pursuance of hie duties (this haa already tnnrr
        acoaptad to be the case by this Authority at their asst tea cm
        1C Sovaaber 1*90), be should be antitied to celabcraeaeat of his
        reasonable costa aad that a rafaaal to raiaburae la aach
        clxenaataaeas aast be a bed daclsioa nalesa tbara is acae relevant
        factor which could reasonably justify the refusal. Mthout each
        Jeatlfiaatice the felloe Authority aaat be takaa fa bav* failed
        to have bad proper regard for the oantral principle.-

5.2    The Clerk ft Financial Offleer advises that a felloe Authority
        satisfied the officers acted la food faith aay consider further
        the extent to which those coaceraed la an application for aueh
       assistance are subject to evidence of negligence peaaibly cubetaatlal
       aegligeace or ef eny failure to nsarelee jodgast reaaoaably.
                                                     -4 : -i= - = i;   ;                                         O i 'l c    T ~ e -;J I;ta   4




                                                                   -       3   •



        5.3
                   til                           V V*nC#i tht vi€w thAt                                   i> no doubt all
                   end in good faith.             ** "*** *ctXBS in                                       of their duties

        5.4
                dif ficultie*** whieh**                                    in tmrm§ cf         wh«t occurred end the
                •*P*rlence, and probably^ler'yon^..*, J a V ^ u . .                                               ** *****
        5.5

                rH i
               »»"5.                         *•»*»*• 1 « . « 4                        of th. Jill.borough footb.ll

        5.6    » e     te e ia lM .   « IU c h   m             aM . u t            a h lo h   I m    im    u *    a n        .till

               -     ' S Z r ' T L Z * * * * * * '°*‘lrr- —                               “ *• f                  “ —          “ or

%              ! M c ‘”°v?.0U™ ^ r m.*rt'.k1°,1,^ e*1 pr0bl“ • *“ a                                                         •tr...
               «eocnt*                        *•!•*»« t i n m .d. to b.                                          uk.»         into

    5.8
               e    .» - « «„.*Vo ^ r . ^ : vor,t a*ei-ton                                           • * * * * * * - . *•«
    5.9
                        ef£ic#r*' deluding Chiaf Superintendent Duckenfield, were
               ec.xng in accordance with their duties, la food faith, end, despite
               what occurred, were exercising their judgment to the best of their
               abilities in the circumstances.
    5.10       The Clerk » Financial Officer has drawn your attention to the
               question of reasonable judgment.
    5.11
               If the issue of negligence or the exercise of judgment is a relevant
A                             in *0*r **lib*rltlcn» th,r*        be clear evidence
9   *              eegligence, possibly tabataatial ttfliftace.     Your attention
    W         h## h*en dr«wn to the report of Lord Justice Taylor, it must t»
               remembered that Lord Justice Taylor was acting aa the chairman o
               a Public Inquiry which is not a judicial hearing and that the
               witnesses were not giving evidence la the strict tense that applies
               in normal legal proceedings.

    5-12                                                                                            t*.
              of criminal liability against all er any of the officers concerned
              in this application of eouree could do to only on the basis of altar
              evidence. Be utilised the aervices of the «tat Midlead* Police
              to investigate and compile a report which was based on the tvidaaoe
              available. Bis conclusion waa, after considering the Veat Midlands
              Police report, there waa laaafficiest evidence to jaatify pmrssil[iiijs
              tfaiaat aayone.

    5.13      it aay be concluded that what this means la that there was
               insufficient evidence of negligence or failure to txereiae judgment
               reasonably, on the part of aay police officers, whieh would amount
               to criminal culpability.
                                     -   4   -




 !‘14 AuthoritT
      Iw“.'£.ln,<..In
                    1
                      ,U”V*      *’,V" eone«»*a «*•> miun «eae.n>iB«
                            It would probably be imprudent of th* Police
                 VI * ? * !, 3ud!rs#ntal conclu.ion. on the question. of
        gligence or reasonable Judgment in advance of tha Inquest findings.

 *      finance

 e.i
                           4t el#ar that «xpenditure incurred in this regard
        !• eligible for poliee grant.
 €.2
        Jjhen this Committee lest considered these applications questions
             %rai,#® About the private insuranoe available to the chief
        •uperintendent and three superintendents, the position i«i*

        •.   through the insurance provided by Allianz Cemhill
             •ach offleer has a financial limitation of £50,000
             which after VAT is taken into account Mounts
             in fact to £42,500 each.

       b.    The policy does not tpecifically cover Inquest
              lurin^t but it is understood that the Insurers
              are prepared to provide cover In this Instance.

       c.    In relation to future risks the officers aay need
              further legal advice and representation after
              the Inquest Hearings have been concluded, for
             examplei in relation to criminal# private or
             discipline proceedings, if the Director of Public
             Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings,
             in the first instance the Police Authority could
             net - even if they so wished - fund the officers*
             legal costs.     There is no provision for the
             Authority   to    fund  legal   representation   at
             discipline hearings, therefore, in terms of the


                                                                               ••
             insurance   provision,    such    possible   future
             requirements must be borne In mind.

«.3    In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance
       but to date have been aupported from Police Federation funds, their
       application,   as   with   the   chief   auperintendent And     three
       •uperlntendents, le for Police Authority funding in relation to
       legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest Bearing only.

       tS'tS'fJeJ                   10 hii !,tMt *****       dr,«> attention
       that                                4* *ttthority for     proposition
       that, when deciding whether or act to provide financial Assistance,
       Alternative fending should mot be taken into Account. Certainly.
       cL'slS?       * n" fll of tht o f , i w * «   described Above Bust £

••5    whilst it is difficult to aaaeas the Amount of money involved In
       these applications, the position in respect of each officer at the
                                                    -   5   -




                    •                                                              w    th. curl,


                             ? m h “ .by. « * , n U ^ « * d . « L . t0t*l“Fr rt      " *“ ef th*
                   South Yorkahir. »oilc.                             ^           °" ,e'c•
                   Performing difficult and o#t»n d«na                       tbair daily duties
                   that thay have th* full auooort                              th# iinc*r# b*li*f
                   °* th*ir function ttriva              «    ?!*         * Authorifc* "ht>   P*rt
                   eonvars*.              triv* t0 *>rovi<s# -“eh aupport and Bot th.


     ^ .Q n c lu .ie n


                                                                ^
                                                              « » « th. offio*r.« th. b...
     avK.»e. .ntr9i„,          „ t i r puu u                 •“ "'f* th* « • » « • * M la..
     Of th* Pore*.                     P       -nt*r*«t - wh*th*r to tha eradit or d«trim*nt
%
    * B HELLS
    Ch i e f c o ns t a b le



                                                        HOT FOR PUBLICATION as         1t
                                                        contains   exempt   Information
                                                        within para.                 of
                                                        Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                        Act 1972 as amended.



••
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

19 october 1990   AND 2 NOVEMBER 1990
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


1-    Matter for Consideration

1.1   The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved in
      legal proceedings arising from the events at Hillsborough Football
      Ground on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information

2.1   Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987 and
      adopted by this Authority on 8 April 1988, provides guidance to Police
      Authorities in considering applications, on behalf of police officers,
      for financial assistance in legal proceedings.

2.2   The central principle which should guide consideration of individual
      cases is that, where a police authority considers that an officer has
      acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that the interests
      of the force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the
      support of the police authority to ensure that he has the services
      of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.

2.3   After the publication of theInterim Report        of Lord Justice Taylor
       into the Hillsborough Disaster the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
      Police was appointed to enquire into        the possibility of criminal
      proceedings arising from the disaster.      Atthat time an application
       for  financial  assistance   was  received   from Chief   Superintendent
      Duckenfield, the officer in command at Hillsborough on the day of the
      disaster.

2.4   At the time of that application it was acknowledged that similar
      applications for assistance, under the terms of Home Office Circular
      No.77/1987, could be anticipated from other officers directly involved
      in legal proceedings arising from the Hillsborough Disaster.

2.5   The application from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was considered
      by the Finance and General Purposes Committee on 15 September 1989
      when the matter was deferred for further consideration of the role
      of the Authority's insurers.

2.6   Following advice from the Authority's insurers and solicitors, Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield obtained independent legal representation
      from solicitors engaged through his staff association and financed
      by his personal legal insurance.

2.7   The funds available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield under this
      policy amounted to £50,000.   His solicitors have advised him that that
      amount may be exhausted by one or both of the on-going Civil
      Contributions Hearing and the forthcoming Coroner's Inquest.
                                           -   2   -




      2.8   A further application has now been received from Chief Superintendent
            Duckenfield for his original application to be re-considered and, as
            anticipated,   similar  applications   have   now  been received from
            Superintendents Marshall, Greenwood and Murray; and an application
            has also been received from Russell Jones and Walker, solicitors, on
            behalf of Police Constables Smith and Illingworth.

      2.9   All officers making application have been the direct subject of
            enquiries by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police arising
            from allegations of criminal conduct received from third parties.


      3     Comment

      3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry conducted
            by Lord Justice Taylor, the interests of the Police Authority, the
            Chief Constable and all officers of the Force were represented by legal
            officers appointed by the Police Authority insurers.      In relation to
            the subsequent criminal enquiry and possible proceedings the insurers
            indicated to seven South Yorkshire Police officers that a possibility
            of conflict could arise between the interests of the Force and each
            of them independently.   The question of separate legal representation
            was considered, one officer continued to be represented by the insurers
            and the six applicants obtained independent representation.

      3.2   Members will be aware that the Director of Public Prosecutions, having
            considered the evidence resulting from the enquiry by the West Midlands
            Police, announced on 30 August 1990 his decision that there was
            insufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against any South
            Yorkshire Police officer.    There are, however, certain civil actions
            under-way and the Coroner's Inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough
            will resume on 19 November 1990.

      3.3   At the Coroner's Inquest the officers concerned are likely to be called
            upon to give evidence. It is acknowledged that cross examination by
            Counsel representing other parties may be prejudicial to the individual
            officers in respect of their personal liabilities.       These officers
             consider it necessary to continue to be independently represented at
             this hearing where the Chief Constable's legal representative cannot
            reasonably be expected to represent the separate interests of each
• •
            of them.

      3.4   It will be seen from paragraph 13 of the Home Office Circular that
            separate representation should be provided at a Coroner's Inquest where
            (a) the Chief Officers legal representative cannot reasonably be
            expected to represent the interests of such officers and, (b) the Police
            Authority considers that such interests should be represented.        In
            such cases the authority should, in the terms of the Circular, provide
            financial assistance to the individual officers concerned.

      3.5   It will be noted at paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing
            to seek financial assistance from his police authority should have
            the opportunity in advance of the proceedings to submit to the Chief
            Constable an application for financial assistance.   The Chief Constable
            is obliged to put such application to the authority for decision.
            It will be further seen that the applying officer should normally be
            given the opportunity by the police authority to make representations
            to them if he wishes to do so.
                                         -   3   -




           The events at Hillsborough were extraordinary in respect of the
           potential  individual  liability of police officers     involved.   The
           officers were acting in good faith in accordance with established
           practice. The nature of the various investigation into the Hillsborough
           Disaster also means that the interests of the South Yorkshire Police,
           as a whole, are involved.    For these two reasons (see para 2.2 ante)
           it is recommended that these officers should have the support of the
           Police Authority to ensure that they each have the services of a lawyer
           representing their individual interests, at the forthcoming Coroner's
           Inquest.

     3.7   It would be sensible for the officers concerned to retain the services
           of those lawyers who currently represent them throughout subsequent
           proceedings.


     4     Financial Implications

     4.1   The cost of independent representation has to date been met by personal
           legal insurance arranged through The Superintendents' Association for
           Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendents Marshall, Murray,
           and Greenwood.   Constables Smith and Illingworth, meanwhile, have been
           represented by Messrs Russell Jones and Walker, the Police Federation
           solicitor, paid for by central Police     Federation funds.

     4.2   The extent of future costs will be       determined by the time taken           to
           conclude the Inquest.   There is no specific provision in the Revenue
           Budget for these costs.


     5     Recommendation

     5.1   The Authority is recommended to approve a commitment to provide
           financial  assistance   for  legal representation at the forthcoming
           Inquest, to the officers concerned, in accordance with the principles
           of Home Office Circular No.77/1987.




••                                                   NOT FOR P U B L I C A T I O N as it
     RICHARD WELLS                                   contains   exempt information
     CHIEF CONSTABLE                                 within para. .                   of
                                                     Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                     Act 1972 as amended._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
     APPENDICES:   A.   Application from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

                   B.   Application from Superintendent Marshall

                   C.   Application from Superintendent Murray

                   D.   Application from Superintendent Greenwood

                   E.   Letter from Messrs Russell Jones and Walker,
                        solicitors representing Constables Smith and Illingworth

                   F.   Home Office Circular No.77/1987




••
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:        DGD/CJD

     From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield               Station/Dept:
     To:      The Chief Constable                            Date:         21 September 1990



             SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

             On 24 August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
             No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
             consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
             representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
             from the Hillsborough Disaster.

             These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
             Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
             19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
             Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

             Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
             of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
             assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
             the position with regard to myself and other officers.

             There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
             families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
             prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
             Police.

             It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
             legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

             My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
             it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
             for my legal defence up to the sum of £5 0 ,0 0 0 .

             If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's


••
             Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
             and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
             and Private Prosecution).

             I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
             contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
             agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
             assured.

             I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
             papers.




             Chief SuperintendentJ




 Gen/2
Solicitors                T elep h o n e
                          0 5 3 2 43(1391
C lo th H all C o u r t   T elex                                                        H tP V 'O R T H
Infirm ary Street         557917
Leeds                     Facsim ile
                                                                                        &       C H A D W I C K
LSI 2JB                   0532 456188                                                   A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                          D X 12(127 L e e d s




                                                                                                               17 September 1990

                                                                                        Your Rcfcrcncc




                                                                                        O ur Rcfcrcncc        L/CCC/3/lBCi
                                                                                                                DUCKENFIELD

Chief Snngr-int-pndent D G Duckenfield

SHEFFIELD


Dear David

Hillsborough

As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
resume on 19th November 1990.

In addition to representing your interests at the above, your position
will also need consideration and yourself possible representation at the
disciplinary hearing, as and when this commences.

Finally,   there is, of course,     the spectre                                                 of       a      possible            private
prosecution which may arise at some stage.

It seems likely that the present funds available under the Allianz
Personal Law Plan may well be exhausted by one or both of the Civil and
Coroner's hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that you make the
strongest representations both to the Home Office and to the Chief
Superintendent's Association to ascertain the availability of funds to
assist you with legal representation. This must be carried out as a
matter of priority for you, based on the time scale for the various
hearings.




y ours _sincere ivy-

C C COUGHLIN^'




                           C I C Bramley         D. J. Cray       A. N. Brown               Other Principal         Regulated by The Law
 D. F L Sykes              R M. Potterton        J. R. Heaps      i- A. Richardson          Evercheds offices at    Society in the conduct
 J P Margenson             P. E. A Winter        J. M. Foster     D. M. Strachan            Birmingham. Cardiff.    of mwestfnent business
 J H. Bryan                R. Chapman            J. R. Guest      Alison J Staniforth       Derby. London.
 J H Fmmgan                A. W Larchmore        R. M. Aimcoe                               Manchester. Newrasde.
 P J. S Thompson           P. R P Chadwick       P. A. Smith                                Norwich. Nottingham.
                           R C Davis             B. J. Horrocks                             Warrington
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
      Staff in confidence
                                                                     Ref:         TWS/MR
             From: Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield              Station/Dept: Headquarters
             To:   The Chief Constable                               Date;        24 August 1989



                   SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                    The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                    the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                    published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989. The report was very
                    critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                    and a number of other police officers.

                    National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                    the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                    the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                    negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                    August 1989-

                   The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested    to examine
                   Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and subsequently instructed    the West
                   Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not    limited
                   to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events    that
                   occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989-

                   Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                   possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                   interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
                   investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
                   disciplinary allegations made against me for which a Regulation 7 Notice
                   has been served.

                   I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                   resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
r                  legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                   criminal charges had been made. I am now obtaining independent legal advice


    ••
                   through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

                   The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000. If I need legal representation
                   at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                   criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, which
                   are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                   my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                   If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
                   Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                   in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
                   officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best possible
                   legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

                   Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                   are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
                   different individuals.




    G en/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'. I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive. In accordance with paragraph 13,
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that I am properly advised and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.




Chief Superintendent
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY          NOT FOR PUBLICATION as 1t

FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE contains        exempt         information
                                          within para. . . . # 5 ', . ............ of
15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                          Sch.l2A to the Local Government
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE             Act 1972 as amended.                          ^


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.        Matter for Consideration

          The provision of financial assistance to police officers Involved In
          legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
          on 15 April 1989.


2.        Background Information

2.1 Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on * Pecember 1987, provides
     guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion In
     considering applications, on behalf of police officers* for financial
     assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
     from Involvement In legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, In
     good faith, of their duties or where the Interests of the Force ac
     whole are Involved. A copy of the Circular Is attached.

2.2 Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
     Into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
     Constable of the West Midlands Police to enquire Into the Justification
     for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
     Coroner's Inquest Into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
     received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfleld who was Involved In
     command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
     similar applications from other officers similarly involved might be
     anticipated.


3.        Comment

    3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of
          the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officers of the Force
>         have been represented by legal officers appointed by the Police Authority
          Insurers. The legal officers appointed by the Insurers have indicated
          that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
          representation for Individual officers who should seek Independent legal
          advice and representation.

    3.2    It will be seen from the Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, that the
           central principle which should guide consideration of Individual cases Is
           that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has acted in
           good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the Interests of the
           Force as a whole are Involved, the officer should have the support of the
           Police Authority to ensure that hehas the services of a lawyer and that
           he should not be out of pocket.


    3 3    It will be further seen that inrespect of criminal proceedings P«rfu^
           by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
           be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
                                      - 2 -

      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circumstances. It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to   seek
                                                                   financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer a
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority togeter
      with hi. own recommendation. It will be farther teen that the
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to make representations to them if he wishes to do so. At this • a«*
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were acting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided in paragraph three of the Home Office Circular.
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal enquiry
      with its wide implications for the interests o£ **L Porc* J* *          .
      such that the Police Authority may wish to c o n a l A p at tbJ*            .
      commitment to the funding of independent legal_«d%e for the officer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is likely t o g ^
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during i n t e m * g i ^
      undertaken by West Midlands Police officers in the course of their
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal
      extend to representation at the Coroner s Inquest which will ultimately
      be held.
3 5   At this stage it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
 ’    subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority insurers.

3 6    It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of
       superintendent and chief superintendent rank who *ave        *°    .
       contribute a measure of personal liability insurance • " a“fefJby1the
       Superintendents’ Association of England and Waies. The individual
       liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


       Financial Implications

       It 1. not possible .t thl. .tag. to ...... the financial
       this Matter which will depend entirely on
       criminal enquiry and the ultiMte outco.e                   JeMnue
       Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
       Budget for this expenditure.


 5.    Recommendation


       s s s s s r
        77/1987.


 P WRIGHT
 CHIEF CONSTABLE
- 5


147,
       FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
       A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
       Constable was submitted on the guide|J"« '“J**’"«? ’2u? ™ r i t U s in
       Circular No. 77/87 on the responsibilities of Police Minorities i
       roenprt of 1 eaal costs arising from the involvement of police o
       and non-police employees of Police A u t h o r i t y in legal proceedings.

       The Circular both confirmed and expanded c u ^ e n t ^ l l c i e s within the
       South Yorkshire Police and recommended crl * « ™ £ *!*ls?hoSld be
       Authorities in considering ^ ethe;\f1nanc} ? f*f?!J£j the criteria
       annroved in any particular proceedings. If followed, tne
       would ensure
       from the     that Fund
                Police   any Payments. ^ th5r1s®
                              would qualify      ^ n0fOffice
                                            for Home     r ^ e qg?ant
                                                                   grant.
       RESOLVED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures inHome
       Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current pollc es <letailed#



       Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any p

148.   HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
       The Authority considered a leCter clated 8th ^ “^ • j ^ ^ C o u n c I l
       Management Co-ord1nator of the Barnsley Metropolitan ooro a
       requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of tne
       Council's Consumer and                         Concern over the availability
       January,
       of high velocity c a t a p u t s . The letter included
                1988 relating      “    theT?°u?'tter          a report four
                                                      inciuo^eu^i'on     considered
        by the Committee detailing the tes                         Department     of Civil and
        catapults P “ « h a s e d locally and tested at th•                 it^
        Structural Engineering of t h e University

••      were considered to be disturbing;-
        The Chief toConstable
        referred                                      §
                                                 ^ady^esponded6t<fthfAMA
                      and reported that he had already respon       ^       that
        K E M S ?               also6pointed out that the Criminal Justice .111
        would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
        RESOLVED:-
        1 •                                                             th^Association
               M e t r o p o l i t a n Authorities be supported.

         2.    That the Cler* an<. FInanclal Ojrf«cer b                         ,         *

               ■ S          &               A            s a            *       - , ,
                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                Re*:              f /f m /g p

     From :   Superintendent Marshall, 'F' Division              Station/ Dept:      F DHQ

     To       Deputy Chief Constable, Mr P Hayes, HQs           Date:    24 September 1990



              SUBJECT:                  hillsborough disaster -
                                   RESUMED INQUESTS 19 NOVaBER 1990


              Sir

              Through my solicitor, Mr Vincent Hale, of Nash House, 140 Upperthorpe,
              Sheffield, I have received intimation of the resumed inquests into the
              deaths at Hillsborough.    I shall be required to give evidence at this
              inquest which resumes on 19 November 1990.

              You will perhaps be aware that I have been represented throughout the West
              Midlands Police enquiry into the disaster by Mr Hale and that his costs to
              date are subject of a claim upon private insurance effected by myself
              through      membership of the Superintendents Association.     Mr Hale has
              submitted an interim account upon the insurers, which has not yet been met.
              I wish, ^therefore, to make formal application under the terms of the Home
              Office Circular 77/87 to tfte South Yorkshire Police Authority for financial
              assistance towards Mr ^yiKcent Hale's costs in connection with his
              representa :ion of my intffijests at the forthcoming inquest.




                    intendent




••




 GEN/2
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               Ref:

     From :     Superintendent Murray                          Station / Dept:Rawmarsh

     To   :     Deputy Chief Constable                         Date:    1 October 1990



              SUBJECT:         application for financial assistance




                In connection with the Hillsborough tragedy of 1989 and allegations
                made against me, I have been taking legal advice from Walker, Morris,
                Scott and Turnbull, Solicitors of Leeds, and in particular Mr Richard
                Manning of that company.      The finance for this advice has been
                available through my own private insurance.    Although the Director of
                Public Prosecutions has stated that proceedings will not be taken
                against any Police officer, there are still many matters unsettled and
                I may still require significant legal advice and assistance.

                I have been informed that the Coroners Inquest is to start on 19
                November 1990, and that this will be a lengthy enquiry and it is
                probable that my legal costs will exceed the limit of my Insurance,
                particularly if other matters follow the Inquest, e.g. criminal or
                disciplinary proceedings.

                Accordingly under Home Office circular No. 77 of 1987, I ask that an
                approach be made to the Police Authority to give consideration to
                making funds available for my Legal Representation in connection with
                the forthcoming Inquest, civil hearing and any criminal proceedings
                which may arise, which would allow me to maintain the services of Mr.
                Manning,   who  with   his   existing   knowledge   of  my    particular
                circumstances, I feel is the best person to represent myself.

                A ~______________________




••




 GEN/2
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                 Ref:
         From:   Superintendent Greenwood                        Station/Dept: A1 Doncaster

         To:     Chief Constable                                 Dat6:        1st October 1990



                 SUBJECT: FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN RESPECT of legal support

i
                 Emanating from the 'Hillsborough Disaster' certain proceedings require to
                 be finalised, in particular the inquest proceedings which I understand
                 will commence on the 19th November.

                 I hereby make formal application,through you,to the Police Authority for
                 funding in respect of such legal advice and representation as is deemed
                 necessary by my legal advisors.

                 I am represented in this matter by Messrs Barlow, Hyde and Gilbert,
                 Beaufort House, 15 Batolph Street, London, EC3A 7NJ.




                 Superintendents




    ••




     Gen/2
                      RUSSELL JONES & WALKER
                                       -    --------------------------------------------------------------------     -------- S O L I C I T O R S ______________

                          4 t h F l o o r B r a z e n n o s e H o m e B r a z e n n o s e S t r e e t M a n c h e s t e r M i S A Z T e l e p h o n e : 0 61 8 3 2 8 8 7 7
                                                                           F ax : O ft! 8 3 ’ 70()f>      DX     14340

                                                                                                                                                       APPBMPIX                     U




                                                                                                                                     VourRef:      DCC/JEL
The Deputy Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police                                                                                                               Our Ref: NH/LP/HILLSBR0/387044
Police Headquarters                                                                                                                       Date:
Snig Hill                                                                                                                                           19 September 1990
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Disaster - Inquest
We have been notified by Her Majesty's Coroner of his intention to resume the
Inquests in the deaths of the 95 people on the 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough
Stadium, which Inquests are to resume on the 19 November 1990.
We would refer to previous correspondence and, in particular, to our letter of
the 6 April 1990, addressed to the Chief Constable, and to your response of the
11 April 1990. We would take this opportunity to repeat our request for financial
assistance for separate legal representation out of Police Authority Funds,
pursuant to the provisions of the Home Office Circular No 77/87.
It is our intention to provide representation by Counsel on behalf of two
police constables in particular, Police Constable David Alfred Illingworth and
Police Constable Peter Edward Smith. It is our firm view that these officers
remain open to substantial criticism, despite the decision of the Director of
Public Prosecutions not to bring criminal proceedings. As you will fully
appreciate, there is still a threat of private prosecutions by individual
complainants. We are satisfied that if called to give evidence before the
Inquests, these officers are reasonably likely to face examination by solicitors
or Counsel on behalf of relatives of the deceased, which may be prejudicial to
the officers. There also remains the threat of disciplinary proceedings,
arising out of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Again, as lor j as
that threat remains, we feel that representation can be justified.
You will no doubt appreciate that the allegations made against these particular
officers, are of a serious nature and include abuse to members of the public, a
failure to act with speed, which individual complainants will say, had a direct
bearing upon the deaths of individuals and further, allegations of assault. In
the case of Constable Illingworth, there are a number of allegations, but in
particular there is a complaint by Edward Spearritt, father of the deceased
Adam Edward Spearritt, who alleges that the officer failed to open Gate 4 in
the perimeter fencing, despite loud appeals directed to him, his position being
in such close proximity to the complainant which, it is alleged, had a direct
bearing on the death of his son and the cause of injuries to himself. In the
case of Peter Edward Smith, he faces allegations by a David Anthony Lackley to
the effect that the officer failed to open Gate 3 when asked, which had he done
so, would have saved the life of some supporters and when the gate was opened,
Police Constable Smith pushed one person back into the crowd.   This presents a
                                                                                                                                                  Cont/d. . . . . .
 J.M . Webber T .D .B . Taylor I.J. Walker A .F Whitehead R.J. Turner R.SI. Abbey l.R . Fletcher G .C . Solly W.D. O 'B rien R.A. Plane RJ. Davis J.M .R Colman R.C. Langron D .R . L o iw
      J.L . Raskin S Raskin E J O- Cooper S.G. Ingram N .B . Holroyd J C Clarke-W illiams S .L. Webb D A B. Twigg PR. Ashurst J.M . Pirrie S .J..V Allen Cousuftaut: J C. Walker


                                                   Re gulated by T h e Law Socie ty in th e co n d u c t o f I n v es tm en t Bu siness
                                                   LONDON           LEEDS        BIRMINGHAM               BRISTOL         MANCHESTER
                                                                 Pj$eSo   ^

The Deputy Chief Constable                                19 September 1990

This presents a general allegation that the officer's behaviour on the day in
question, had a direct bearing upon the deaths of a number of unnamed supporters.
Additionally, he faces an allegation by Stephen Paul Hendry to like effect, in
that it is said he failed to open Gate 3, despite protestations and ordered
people to push back. It is also alleged against this officer that he assaulted
an unknown person by pushing him back over the fence, into Pen 3.
We anticipate that you will see from these allegations, that these officers are
at risk and the interests of justice require them to be represented.
We would maintain that in this instance, the officers were acting at all times
in good faith and in pursuance of their duties. We would also maintain that
the particular interests of these officers are such that they could not properly
be represented by those representing the interests of the Police Authority/Chief
Constable. We are sure that you will give our above comments full consideration
and we would ask that appropriate recommendations be made to the Police Authority.
We thank you in anticipation.




cc:   Constables' Central Committee
                                                       HOME OFFICE
       JJgS T                                Queen A n n e ’s Gate London S W lH 9 A T
       S- iii y jfl i                                     D : n : i !in.-Oi-213
                                                       s-1!:ht^s o; •:: 3 3000                    |*       ^

       c^i'              POL/87   1027/1/2
       V...* *vyv*i..Y




      The Clerk to the Police Authority

      The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                  4 December 1987




       ear Sir


     HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR HO 77/87

     FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
                                                                                         « V .?        "



     There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Polica Act 1964 for
     payments to be made from the police fund to meet expenditure incurred
     by police officers in defending proceedings in tort*.’ Also, acting in
     pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and
     efficient police force for its araa, the polica authority lias
     discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds % f
     legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
    pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the forca as a vhole
     are involved.   The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
  /^police authorities to help them in considering raquests on bahalf of
  '-^officers for financial assistance.   This guidance has baen discussed
^    and agreed with the local authority and with the polica staff
W ^ p s o c i a t i o n s •

     2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
     individual cases is that, where a police authority considars/that an
     officer has acted in good faith in pursuanca of his duties (or\ that
     the interests of a force as a vhole are involved, the officar~~£nould
     have the support of the polica authority to ensure that ha has the
     services of a lawyer and that he should not ba out of pocket.     The
     following paragraphs provide ganeral guidance to the different
     classes of proceedings. Payments made to officars in accordance with
     this guidance will be eligible for police grant*



                                                                                                               1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution bv the Crown Prosecution Service

3.   An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the cost* of his defence.   If he is acquitted, he
should,   like any other defendant,       look to the court for
reimbursement of his expenses.   If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to sake a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.    There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty.   This may arise for example in      f**®8
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.


Private PrpsegyUens
4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties
confidence that, if he acts in good faith and exercises
judgement reasonably, his police authority vVfll support him.   If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has
in thin way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may o r d e r the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incurred by the defence?
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds.  In either of these cases, the question^of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where the costs of an acquitted officer^are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reirt>urse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed*


CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
civil A ctions   Against   the   chief Officer for Wrongful Acts M
Constables
6.   Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the
ot a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes »P«cial ^nstables
and officers of other forces serving in the police
mutual   aid arrangements)     in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
costs he incurs himself, and any sun paid in connection with the
settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
police authority, must be paid out of the police fund.      In such
cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


Civil..Act ions Against Individual Police Officers

7.   Alternatively, the plaintiff nay be awarded damages against an
individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
twice over against the chief officer as well. Section 48(4) of the
Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority "to auch
extent as they think fit" to pay out of the polica fund any damages
or costs awarded against an officar, any costs ha incurs himself,
and any sums paid in connaction with the settlament of a claim.
This   provision applies to actions against officer* of the
authority's own force, officers of anothar force carving tha police
area under mutual aid arrangements, and special constablas for the
police area.    In considering whether to.give financial assistance
the authority will wish to consider in particular vhathar the
officer concerned acted in good faith and axercised his judgement
reasonably. Where the court find* for the officer, ha may seek his
costs     from the plaintiff; should the costs not ba awarded or
awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ’ into account the
reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
claimed.
8.   Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
police officar may be brought in some cases.   In such cases it is
important that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
proposed settlement should involve all tha parties named in the
claim    together with advisers avan if they are represented by
different advisers.


Civil Act ions Under the Data Protection Act ,1 M 1
9.   Under sections 22 and 23 of tha Data Protection Act 1984 an
individual who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy, loss
or unauthorised disclosure of parsonal data is entitled              to
compensation from the data user. Zn tha absanca of any case law on
thasa provisions, it is unclear vhathar tha acts covered by
sections 22 and 23 amount to torta, to which tha J P U w *            in
paragraphs 6 and 7 above applias. If not, section 48 of tha y i p ®
Act 1964 does not apply.       However, the                         ^
same.     Under section 38(3) (a) of the 1984 Act constablas are
traatad as servants of tha chief officar fortha p^rpo*** of the
Act.   A chief constable is therefore liable for tha
officers falling within sections 22 and 23 in the a a m a w a y a* be is
liable for their torts under section 48 (1) ‘                   °
police officers is lass d e a r but it is possible     flL 211
the chief constable might be regarded as havinJ. 1 ^ f
acts.  It follows that it would be proper for tha polica authority
                                                                                 \


       to meet all costs, including any award ofcompensation,      arising
       from this liability.  It should be noted that the liability of the
       "data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
       liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
       obtaining, checking and racording data which would reasonably guard
       against error and loss under section 23(3) of the Act should meet
       his responsibility under section 22(3) and he should not be held
       liable if one of his officers disregards the system established.

       10.   Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
       police authority will wish, in considering whether to meet the
       costs which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take account of
       the same matters as in exercising their power under section
       of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7).        Police authorities
       should apply the same broad principles and in particular, * e®t
       costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
       non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
       have liability for the actions performed.


       Police Officers Bringing Civil   Actions ,for PggftffiftUan
       11.   There may be occasions when financial assistance is sought
       from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
       bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority has
       discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
       police grant only if the following criteria are all mets-

            (a)   the defamation is serious;
            (b)   it relates to the actions of an officer acting      or
            said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;

            (c)   it has attracted public attention;
            (d)   to bring the action is considered to be in the
            interests of the force or of the police service as a
            whole; and


••
i.*'        (e)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.

       Criterion (d) is central. If only the reputation of the individual
       officer is in question, he is in the same I*****®” ••             °
       citizen and sust be expected to seek his own
       allegation against a particular officer say well reflect on the
       reputation of the whole force or be an •x.a*P1% ° f t.wid^ ^ueh^cases
       against the force or a significant section of it.         In *uch caiti
            naiie* authoritv provided the other criteria are satisfied,
       S J ?«.on.bl y ^ .^'.c!5rto h.lP to d.f.nd th. r.p»t.tion of th.
       force.




                                                                            4
  INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES A?TD TRIBUNAL

  L e g a l Representation for Chief Officers

  12.  Any interested arty nay be legally represented at an inquest
  but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
  and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled to be
  legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
  Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be appropriate
  for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
  officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.


  Legal Representation for Individual Officers

 13. Separate representation for individual officers whose interest
 is involved nay be necessary. For exanple, there will be occasions
 when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot reasonably
 be expected to represent the separate interests of such officers
 and (b) the police authority considers that such interests should
 be represented.   In such cases the authority should qive financial
 assistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
 authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
 are at risk of being held to blane for actions in connection with
 the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
 night give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of which the
 police authority would be liable under section 48(1) of the Poll$e
 Act 1964 or for which financial assistance night be approprf
 within the terns of this circular.


 APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE                                4

 14.    An officer wishing to seek financial assistance fron his
 police authority should have the opportunity in advance or u well
 as on the conclusion of the proceedings to subnit to the chief
 officer an application for financial assistance. The chief officer
 •hould put this, together with his own recommendation to the police
 authority for decision.   The officer should noraally be given the
 opportunity by the police authority to make representation* to then
 if he wishes to do so.
flfe.5.  if it decide* to give financial assistance, the authority
   should inforn the officer concerned that, if the information on
   which they based their decision to grant the assistance is «hown_ in
   subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate or                     ^
   authority will noraally expect to recover the
   satisfied that no c ilpable nisrepresentation was involved
   to recover the noney would involve the applicant in substantial
   hardship.   On th* other hand, if an authority refuses financial
   assistance and then discovers in the light o f s u b s e ^ e n t       ®
   that such assistance would have been warranted, then **A**cial
   assistance should be granted in order t o n e e t t h e reasonable costs
   incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.
      'Assistance from Police Federation Funds

       16. Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
      as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
      incurred by a member in connection with criminal proceedings
      brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
      enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
      drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
      offences of causing the death or injury of any person, or for any
      assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
      officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered by
      Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
      in the first instance.   If the police authority does not consider
      the request to fall within the terms of this circular, the
      Federation may then consider the application within the terms of
      Regulation 19.   If the officer receives legal assistance from the
      Federation the terms of Home Office Circular No 26/1967 will
      continue to apply.
      17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular may be
      addressed to Mr Waghorn, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
■rs                                                Yours faithfully




                                                   M J ADDISON




••



                                                                        6
    Solicitors               Telep h o n e
                             0 5 3 2 4 30 39 1
    C lo th H all C o u rt   Telex                                                            HEPWORTH
    Infirm ary Street
    Leeds
                             557917
                             F acsim ile                                                      & CHADWICK
    LSI 2JB                  0532 456188                                                     A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                             D X 1 202 7 L e e d s




                                                                                                              5th December 1990
                                                                                             Date


                                                                                                              SW/MR
                                                                                             Your Rcfcrcncc
South Yorkshire Police
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat                                                                             L/3/CCC/WMG
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
BARNSLEY
South Yorkshire    S70 2PQ



FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR S WALKER



Dear Sir

Applications by Police Officers for Financial Assistance:
Hillsborough Inquests

Thank you for your letters of 28th and 30th November together with that
of 4th December.

With regard to the meeting on 7th December we will not be in attendance
due to the very limited funds available to our client Chief
Superintendent D G Duckenfield.   In the circumstances, Mr I Walker of
Russell Jones & Walker will be representing our client's interest at the
meeting together with those of the other Officers, as indicated in his
letter to you of 3rd December.

We note,    however, your confirmation that all representations, both
written and oral, already submitted on behalf of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield will be before, and considered at, the meeting.  By way of
summary, the following in particular should be noted:-

1             Chief Superintendent                           Duckenfield's                 applications                 for      financial
               assistance.

2               Letter from Prosecution Service to Chief Constable South Yorkshire
                30.08.90

3             Letter from Chief Constable L Sharp                                      to Hepworth & Chadwick dated
               6th September 1990.

4             The written and oral representations made to the Police Authority
               meeting on 2nd November by the South Yorkshire Deputy Chief
               Constable Peter Hayes and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield (extract
               attached).

5             The oral representation of the writer Mr C Coughlin to the
               authority meeting on 16th November (the minutes will recall what
               was said)


     Partners                  C. I. C. BramJev      D. J. Gray      A. N. Brown               O ther Principal          Regulated by The Law
     D. F. L. Sykes            R. M Poderton         J. R. Heaps     I. A. Richardson          Evetsheds’ offices at     Society in the conduct
     J. P. Margeriwm           P. E. A. Winter       J. M. Foster    D. M. Strachan            Birmingham.Cardiff.       of investment business
     J. H Bryan                R. Chapman            J. R. Guest     Ahson J. Staniforth       Derby. London.
     J. H. Finmgan            A. W. Latchmore        R. M. Ainscoe                             Manchester, Newcastle,
     P. J. S. Thompson        P. R. P Chadwick       P A. Smith                                Norwich. Nottingham.
                              R C. Davis             B J. Horrocks                             Warrington
CO NTINU A TION




     6        The letters from the writer to you of     14th and 20th November
              (copies attached).

    We have read the correspondence forwarded by you under cover of your
    letter of 4th December, namely the Russell Jones & Walker letter to you
    of 3rd December and your response of 4th December. Mr Walker will be
    addressing you on the application of the "Derbyshire" case.

     We note that you lay stress on the question of the Officers acting in
     "good faith", "reasonable exercise of judgement" and "clear evidence of
     negligence".

     With regard to the question of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield acting in
     good faith and indeed acting in the interests of the force as a whole, it
     is our view that this cannot be in issue based on the full support
     provided by both the Chief Constable Richard Wells and the Deputy Chief
     Constable Peter Hayes in representations made to you and the Authority
     both in writing and orally.

     As to the question of "reasonable exercise of judgement" and there being
     "clear evidence of negligence" we would say there is insufficient
     evidence or information upon which the Authority could seek to refuse to
     grant financial support to our client.   In this regard, we would support
     the points already made by Russell Jones & Walker in their letter of 3rd
     December and to be made to you personally at the forthcoming meeting. We
     would say, however, that whilst parts of the report of Lord Justice
     Taylor may be critical of the Police as a whole, the Director of Public
     Prosecutions, in arriving at his decision on 30th August 1990 (see
     extract attached), concluded that there was "insufficient evidence to
     justify the institution of proceedings against any Officer in the South
     Yorkshire Police Force..."

     The reality now, however, is that we are faced with inquests which have
     been running for some days and which will run to some several weeks. At
     these inquests, as you are aware, there is likely to be heard the
     evidence of in excess of 200 witnesses. The point which must be grasped,
     therefore, and already made by personal representations to the Authority,
     is that each witness will give oral testimony.      That evidence is then
     subject to cross examination.    Without representation, there can be no
     challenge on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of any
     criticism of his control or conduct of proceedings on the day in
     question.   As you are well aware, on the opening day of the Coroner's
     proceedings, the press recorded the comments of a number of individuals
     that new evidence may well emerge which may cause the DPP to re-consider
     his decision.    There can be little doubt that certain group(s) at the
     Inquest will endeavour to show the police actions on the day in a
     than favourable light.   We refer you to our letter of 20th November with
     enclosure.   The point must be made again that unchallenged criticism of
     our client will be considered by the DPP and we refer you to the letter
     of the Chief Constable of Cumbria, Mr Leslie Sharp dated 6th September
      1990 in which he made it clear to us that any new evidence which arises
      in the Coroner's Inquest will be considered by the DPP.

         In conclusion, we would ask the Authority to consider our client's case
         so far presented together with the representations of Mr Walker to be
         made on behalf of all applicants on the 7th and that the Authority does
         grant financial assistance. In our view, they ought properly so to do in
     C O N T IN l'A T IO N



           accordance with the home office circular for the purposes of providing
           financial assistance for our client's representation at the inquest.

           Please do not hesitate to contact the writer, Mr Coughlin, should you
           require further information.

           Yours faithfully
               I




           HrifctoORfh &     ch X d w i c k




••
                    D irector o f Public Prosecutions                              Deputy Director and Chief Executive
                                   Allan Green Q C                                 D S Gandy CBOBE




                                             D irecto r o f H e a d q u a r te r s C asework
                                                          C W P Newel!




                                                                                           Crown Prosecution Service
     The Chief Constable
     South Yorkshire Police                                                                Headquarters Casework
     Snigg Hill
     Sheffield                                                                             10 Fumival Street
     S3 8LY                                                                               London
                                                                                          EC4A 1 PE

                                                                                          Telephone 071 -831 -3038
                                                                                                    Lxt



■f                                         O u r Ref                                                D a te

                                                   PGK.3341.89                                         30 August 1990



     Dear Sir

     H I L L S B O R O U G H S T A D I U M DISASTER

     The Director of Public Prosecutions has now received from the West
     Midlands Police the final report in this criminal investigation together
     with substantial supporting evidence and documentation. Y o u will recall
     in August 1989 that the Director requested a full criminal investigation
     following publication of the Interim Report produced after the Public
     Enquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor into the circumstances
     surrounding the disaster a; Hi 11she rough Stadium, Sheffield on 15th April
     1989.

     The most careful consideration has been given to all the evidence and
     documentation. The Director has decided that there is no evidence to
     justify any criminal proceedings being instituted against South Yorkshire
     Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Messrs Eastwood and Partners:
     or Sheffield City Council in connection with the disaster at the
     Hillsborough Football Stadium Sheffield on 15th April 1989.

     The Director has also concluded that there is insufficient evidence to
     justify proceedings against any officer of the South Yorkshire Police or
     any other person for any offence.

     I am sending a copy of this letter to you by FAX.

     I am also sending copies to the investigating officer, Chief Constable
     Leslie Sharp, to the Coroner Dr Fopper and to the Police Complaints
     Authority. Copies will also be sent to solicitors representing the
     Hillsborough Steering Committee, the Sheffield City Council, Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Club and Messrs Eastwood and Partners.
                                          -   2   -




     I also enclose a copy of a press release to be issued by the Crown
     Prosecution Service Press Office at 3.00pm today.

     Yours faithfully




     C J Cleugh
     Head of Police Complaints Division




••
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
C H IE F CONSTABLE:           L. Sharp   Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO “THE CHIEF CONSTABLE”

M y Reference:       CC/BMT                                              POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                CARLETON H A L L
Y o u r Reference:   L/CCC/3/CH                                                         PENRITH
                                                                             C UM BR IA CA10 2AU
                                                                          TELEPHONE: 0768 - 64411
             Hepworth and Chadwick                                                  TELEX: 64240
             Solicitors                                                           FAX: 0768 66106
             Cloth Hall Court
             Infirmary Street
             LEEDS
             LSI 2JB

                                                                       6 September 1990




            Dear Sir

            HILLSBOROUGH - Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD

            I reply to your letter dated 31 August 1990 which was     addressed to the
            Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.

            You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided that there is
            insufficient evidence to prosecute your client for any criminal offence
            arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy.    It is also correct to say that
            the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by South Yorkshire Police
            in consultation with the Police Complaints Authority.

            I believe you are also aware that there are outstanding civil actions being
            brought by various parties with an interest in the matter, and that there
            are 95 Coroner’s Inquests to be reconvened.

            I am aware that at the interview on 3 July 1990 your client intimated that
            once the DPP had made his decision in respect of the criminal issues, he
            would consider being interviewed in respect of any disciplinary matters.
            If that is still his wish then I am ready to conduct that interview but it
            must be understood that the disciplinary matters are very closely related
            to the criminal issues, so any interview would have to be conducted under a
            Police and Criminal Evidence Act caution, and the transcript of the
            questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP for further
            consideration of the criminal matters.
     That is the position in respect of any new or additional evidence which
     comes to light, for example, that which may arise out of the civil actions
     or the Coroner’s Inquests.   It is not for me to advise you or your client
     as to how you, or he, should proceed, but it seems to me that you should be
     aware of the foregoing information.

     If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact
     me.

     Yyurs faithfully




           -      I
     Chief Constable
     Investigating Officer




••
                 SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990


Introduction

This meeting is considering an application from six officers (a chief
superintendent, three superintendents and two constables) for financial
support to provide them with legal representation at the forthcoming Inquest
Hearing into the Hillsborough tragedy.

They have all been investigated by the West Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in relation to the question of criminal
liability.   The  Director has    announced  that  at   this time there   is
insufficient evidence on which to bring criminal proceedings.

All the officers continue to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
consider independent legal representation absolutely essential for each
of them.

The risks arise from the following factors:-

   1.      The   possibility   at   the   Inquest   of   a   verdict   of   unlawful
           killing.

   2.      Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest which
           may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions to further
           consider the question of criminal liability.

   3.      Recently in a similar case where the Director of Public
            Prosecutions    decided   against    criminal   proceedings,
            representatives of the deceased instigated a Judicial Review
            of the Director's decision.      The officers see this as
            possible in this case.

   4.      Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.

   5.      The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings where
            dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are
            all possibilities.


Relevant Considerations

All the officers thus far have provided for                   their own legal advice and
representation and the application today is                  concerned solely with costs
likely to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

 To help you with your decision clear      advice is             provided     in Home Office
 Circular 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

 This Circular refers to a central principle:  this is "that where the Police
 Authority considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
 of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
 (and both of these considerations are fully satisfied in this case) the
 officer should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure that he
 has the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of-pocket .
                                               - 2 -


      I wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
      pursuance of their duties" and undoubtedly "the interests of the Force as
      a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
      very real.

      Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Representation for Individual
      Officers"   particularly to occasions when  "the Chief   Officer's legal
      representative cannot reasonably be expected to represent the separate
      interests of officers".

      This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
      the Authority and the Chief Constable in this matter. Their advice is that
      independent legal   representation  is appropriate for all the officers
      concerned.

      In    the Circular reference is specifically made to the Authority "wishing
      in   particular toassess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
      for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
      where any such finding might give rise to legal proceedings for which the
      Police Authority   would beliable or for which financial assistance might
      be   appropriate". It will be seen therefore the advice in this Circular
      relates very precisely to our situation.


      Finance

      The Circular makes it clear       that   expenditure   incurred   in   this   regard   is
      eligible for police grant.

      When this Committee last considered these applications questions were raised
      about the private insurance available to the chief superintendent and three
      superintendents.  I can now inform you that:-

         a.     Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill each
                 officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
                 VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

         b.     The policy does not specifically cover Inquest Hearings

• •              but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
                 provide cover in this instance.

         c.     In relation to future risks the officers may need further
                 legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
                 have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
                 private or discipline proceedings.  If the Director of Public
                 Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings, in the
                 first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
                 they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs.    Also there
                 is   no   provision   for  the   Authority   to   fund   legal
                 representation at discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms
                 of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
                 must be borne in mind.
                                           - 3 -


      Some information   is now available as to the extent these officers have
      already incurred   legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
      incurred through   representation at the Inquest Hearings. I can provide
      you with the details as you wish.

      In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
      to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Theii■ aPPllc* l o n '
      as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for .olice
      Authority funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
      Hearings.


      Separate Representations

      The Circular , at paraoraph 14, makes clear that officers should normally
      be given the opportunity by the Police Authority to make representations
      to them if they so wish.

      With the exception of Constable Smith, all the officers and some legal
      advisors are in close attendance.     Some of them have intimated they may
      wish to exercise their right to appear before you today and make their own
      representation as to their application for financial assistance.



      Recommendation

      South Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about t h e - norma1 duties
      secure in the knowledge that provided they act in good faith and- to the
      best of their ability they will always be deserving of and receive the
      support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for legal
      representation when that is appropriate.

      I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
      of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




• •    Deputy Chief Constable
       2 November 1990
S o I k ’Mo i s               le lep hnn e
                              OS32 4303‘>l
C’l o i h I Jail i   ottii   T elex                           HEPWORTH
in lirm jry S ueel           5579)7
I oeds                       facsim ile                —      & CHADWICK
I .S I 2.1 li                OS32 4 5 M S H            ~M W   A   M E M B E R   O F   E V E R S H E D S
                              l ) X 12(127 L e e d s




                                                              iw              14 November 1990



IN CONFIDENCE                                                      R,VI,v.,   L/CCC/3/mci/
                                                                                DUCKENFIELD

Mr S Walker
Solicitor to the South Yorkshire
Joint Secretariat
PO 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
S YORKSHIRE S70 2DX


SENT BY FAX 0226 730442 AND POST

Dear Sir

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield - Hillsbrough
Inquests

We refer to the Writer's letter to Mr                                dated 7th November,
together with our subsequent telephone                     conversations from which we
believe you now fully appreciate Chief                     Superintendent Duckenfield's
position.

We  are   grateful   for y ou r  confirmation    that   in r e s p o n s e to
representations, the Police Authority will review its decision as to the
provision of funds to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. We understand the
specially convened meeting will be this coming Friday

You asked for some clarification on the question of the suggested figure
for costs as set out in our letter of the 7th November. This figure was
considered on the basis of the Inquests running for 8 weeks and was
exclusive of VAT.

Counsel's Clerk has agreed to reduce the Brief fee to £5,000 with a daily
refresher fee of £500, together with VAT thereon. An articled clerk will
need to be in attendance to instruct Counsel. In addition, there will be
cost of Briefing Counsel and Instructing Solicitors' attendance at Court
as required. Therefore, we would consider that a figure of £40,000 for
the 8 weeks would be the minimum realistic figure for representation,
together with VAT and disbursements such as travelling expenses.

If the Inquests run over the 8 week period, we consider                                 the mininum
weekly cost to be £5,000 plus VAT and disbursements.

Finally,   we can confirm that the Allianz/Cornhill Insurers have
re-affirmed that no funds will be available to Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield over and above the agreed limit of £50,000. As you know, this
     (<iNTIN'l \!|()\


           sum has largely been exhausted     during   the   previous   12   months   in
           representing his interests.

           At present, the Writer would anticipate attending the hearing on Friday
           together with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

           Should you require any further information, please do not hesitate to
           contact the Writer, Mr Coughlin.


           Yours faithfully



           HEPWOftTH & CHADWICK




••
           . ic ito rs           T elep h o n e


     C l o t h M all C o u r t
                                 0 5 3 2 4 30 3 91
                                 T elex                                                              HEP WORTH
     In firm ary S treet
     Leeds
                                 557917
                                 F acsim ile
                                                                                                     & CHADWICK
     LSI 2JB                     0532 456188                                                         A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                                 D X 1 20 2 7 L e e d s




                                                                                                     i),!<                       20 November 1990

                                                                                                     V'Hjr R c tc r c iK t

     IN CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                     O u r R clcttT tcc                 L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                                                                        DUCKENFIELD
     Mr S Walker
     Solicitor to the South Yorkshire Joint
     Secretariat
     PO Box 37
     Regent Street
     Barnsley
     S YORKSHIRE S70 2DX


     SENT BY FAX 0226 730442 AND POST


     Dear Sir

     Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield
     Hillsborough Inquests.

     We refer to Chief Superintendent's Duckenfield's application for
     financial support to the South Yorkshire Police Authority and the meeting
     held on 16th November 1990.

     As you are well aware, it is our view, expressed to you and the Authority
     both in writing and by way of verbal submission, that the principal risk
     to our Client lays in new evidence being adduced before the Coroner which
     in turn may be submitted to the DPP who may review his decision not to
     institute criminal proceedings. As you know, of equal concern, was that



••
     any new evidence may provide a platform for individuals intent on
     bringing a private prosecution.

     I now attach a copy of the front page of the "Sheffield Star" for
     yesterday Monday 19th November 1990. The article is self explanatory and
     is clearly supportive of our concerns on behalf of Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield as to the risks faced by him, if his own position is not
     properly protected by legal representation at Court. Will you please
     ensure that this information is placed immediately before the members of
     the Authority and steps taken to reconsider their decision, as the
     Inquests are now in session and evidence is being heard.          Due to
     insufficient funds, we have had to take a decision to limit Chief
     Superintendent's Duckenfield's representation to a matter of days in
     Court. This decision is made so as not to exhaust the monies left
     available to him under the Insurance Policy, in order that we may provide
     some representation to him in respect of any forthcoming disciplinary
     proceedings.




                                   (       J ( to.,nil,A     I) J ( It .is    A \         i>              OihoH'tMKipj*                      R*j!uU«rd by The I * *
       0 r I su .-s                    K M K xu-rton          J R Hups        I A Kul.dirtsnn             I'v rn iu -iK                     fcvwrtv hi ihe «*Kh>ci
       1 »’ M                          I' I   A W intrt      J M f-iKti'i     I) M                        ftommplw m, ( *>*«.«.             ,»t mvcxmcn!
       i ii it*\.iti                   k                      j k             Aii^wi j s«.in.i,mi.        r v iiiv .i.w t jm i
       I U I iiiuv.,1!              \      V. |     Unwi.t   H M A m -.* -                                 M.iii>           N>-*>
       r    1 s                    y       \J   V            »•   V Si"it^.                                \        i,       .-i, ...
 %




     Will you please contact the Writer, Mr   Coughlin, without delay.


     Yours faithfully

     HEPWORTH & CHADWICK.




••
 Solicitors              T e lepho ne


 C loth H all C o u rt
                         0 5 3 2 430391
                         T elex                                                          HEPWORTH
 In firm ary S treet
 Leeds
                         557917
                         F acsim ile
                                                                                         & CHADWICK
 LSI 2JB                 0532 456188                                                     A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                         D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                                           5th December 1990

                                                                                                           SW/MR
                                                                                         Y our Rcfcrcnce
South Yorkshire Police
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat                                                           '"-V. L/3/CCC/WMG
P 0 Box 37                                                                                             ‘Y
Regent Street
BARNSLEY
South Yorkshire    S70 2PQ

                                                                                                  m

FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR S WALKER



Dear Sir

Applications by Police Officers for Financial Assistance:
Hillsborough Inquests

Thank you for your letters of 28th and 30th November together with that
of 4th December.

With regard to the meeting on 7th December we will not be in attendance
due to the very limited funds available to our client Chief
Superintendent D G Duckenfield.   In the circumstances, Mr I Walker of
Russell Jones & Walker will be representing our client's interest at the
meeting together with those of the other Officers, as indicated in his
letter to you of 3rd December.

We note,    however, your confirmation that all representations, both
written and oral, already submitted on behalf of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield will be before, and considered at, the meeting.  By way of
summary, the following in particular should be noted

1             Chief Superintendent                      Duckenfield's                  applications                  for       financial
               assistance.

2              Letter from Prosecution Service to Chief Constable South Yorkshire
               30.08.90

3             Letter from Chief Constable L Sharp                                  to Hepworth & Chadwick dated
               6th September 1990.

4             The written and oral representations made to the Police Authority
               meeting on 2nd November by the South Yorkshire Deputy Chief
               Constable Peter Hayes and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield (extract
               attached).

5             The oral representation of the writer Mr C Coughlin to the
               authority meeting on 16th November (the minutes will recall what
               was said)


    PMtners                C. I. C. Bramtey    D. J. Gray       A. N. Brown                 Other Principal            Regulated by The Law
    D. F. L. Sykes         R. M. Potterton     J. R. Heaps      I. A. Richardson            Eversheds' offices at      Society in the conduct
    J. P. Margerison       P. E. A. Winter     J. M. Foster     D. M. Strachan              Birmingham.Cardiff.        of investment business
    J. H. Bryan            R. Chapman          J. R. Guest      Alison J. Staniforth        Derby. London.
    J. H. Finnigan        A. W. Latchmore      R. M. Ainscoe                                Manchester. Newcastle.
    P. J. S. Thompson     P. R. P. Chadwick    P. A. Smith                                  Norwich. Nottingham.
                          R. C. Davis          B. J. Hortocks                               Warrington
    UATION




6        The letters from the writer to you of   14th and 20th November
         (copies attached).

We have read the correspondence forwarded by you under cover of your
letter of 4th December, namely the Russell Jones & Walker letter to you
of 3rd December and your response of 4th December.     Mr Walker will be
addressing you on the application of the "Derbyshire" case.

We note that you lay stress on the question of the Officers acting in
"good faith", "reasonable exercise of judgement" and "clear evidence of
negligence".

With regard to the question of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield acting in
good faith and indeed acting in the interests of the force as a whole, it
is our view that this cannot be in issue based on the full support
provided by both the Chief Constable Richard Wells and the Deputy Chief
Constable Peter Hayes in representations made to you and the Authority
both in writing and orally.

As to the question of "reasonable exercise of judgement" and there being
"clear evidence of negligence" we would say there is insufficient
evidence or information upon which the Authority could seek to refuse to
grant financial support to our client.   In this regard, we would support
the points already made by Russell Jones & Walker in their letter of 3rd
December and to be made to you personally at the forthcoming meeting. We
would say, however, that whilst parts of the report of Lord Justice
Taylor may be critical of the Police as a whole, the Director of Public
Prosecutions, in arriving at his decision on 30th August 1990 (see
extract attached), concluded that there was "insufficient evidence to
justify the institution of proceedings against any Officer in the South
Yorkshire Police Force— "

The reality now, however, is that we are faced with inquests which have
been running for some days and which will run to some several weeks. At
these inquests, as you are aware, there is likely to be heard the
evidence of in excess of 200 witnesses. The point which must be grasped,
therefore, and already made by personal representations to the Authority,
is that each witness will give oral testimony. That evidence is then
subject to cross examination.    Without representation, there can be no
challenge on the part of      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of any
criticism of his control     or conduct of proceedings on the day in
question.   As you are well aware, on the opening day of the Coroner's
proceedings, the press recorded the comments of a number of individuals
that new evidence may well emerge which may cause the DPP to re-consider
his decision.   There can be little doubt that certain group(s) at the
Inquest will endeavour to show the police actions on the day in a less
than favourable light. We refer you to our letter of 20th November with
enclosure.   The point must be made again that unchallenged criticism of
our client will be considered by the DPP and we refer you to the letter
of the Chief Constable of Cumbria, Mr Leslie Sharp dated 6th September
1990 in which he made it clear to us that any new evidence which arises
in the Coroner's Inquest will be considered by the DPP.

In conclusion, we would ask the Authority to consider our client's case
so far presented together with the representations of Mr Walker to be
made on behalf of all applicants on the 7th and that the Authority does
grant financial assistance. In our view, they ought properly so to do in
     CONTINUATION



        accordance with the home office circular for the purposes of providing
        financial assistance for our client's representation at the inquest.

        Please do not hesitate to contact the writer, Mr Coughlin,   should you
        require further information.

        Yours faithfully__________________ ^




—




••
                                                                    ftrrero


                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                     Ref:      DGD/CJD
         From:       Chief Superintendent Duckenfield                Station/Dept:
         To:         The Chief Constable                             Date:       21 September 1990



                 SUBJECT:     Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

                 On 24 August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
                 No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
                 consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
                 representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
                 from the Hillsborough Disaster.

                 These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
                 Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
                 19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
                 Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

                 Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
                 of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
                 assume that if further evidence carte to light he would reconsider
                 the position with regard to myself and other officers.

                 There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
                 families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
                 prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
                 Police.

                 It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
                 legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

                 My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
                 it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
                 for my legal defence up to the sum of £5 0 ,000.

                 If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
                 Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured


••
                 and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
                 and Private Prosecution).

                 I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
                 contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
                 agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
                 assured.

                 I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
                 papers.



                 C

                 Chief Superintendent j




 Gen/2
S o lic ito rs            T elep h o n e


C lo th H all C o u r t
                          1)532 4 303 91
                          T elex
                                                                     J f e HEPV ORTH
Infirm ary Street
Leeds
                          557917
                          Facsim ile
                                                                     1 S S .v C H A D W I C K
LSI 2JB                   0 5 3 2 4 5 f t 188
                                                                                            A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                          D X 1 20 2 ’' L e e d s




                                                                                            Date                    17 September 1990



                                                                                            Our Rclorcncc           L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                                                     DUCKENFIELD

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield

SHEFFIELD


Dear David

Hillsborough

As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
resume on 19th November 1990.

In addition to representing your interests at the above, your position
will also need consideration and yourself possible representation at the
disciplinary hearing, as and when this commences.

Finally,   there is,   of course,   the spectre                                                       of        a      possible            private
prosecution which may arise at some stage.

It seems likely that the present funds available under the Allianz
Personal Law Plan may well be exhausted by one or both of the Civil and
Coroner's hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that you make the
strongest representations both to the Home Office and to the Chief
Superintendent's Association to ascertain the availability of funds to
assist you with legal representation. This must be carried out as a
matter of priority for you, based on the time scale for the various
hearings.




 Yoyrs_sincerely.

 C C COUGHLIN""




                                                                     A. N. Brown                   Other Principal          RrguJaied by The Law
                              C- I C Bramkv         D. i Gray
                                                    J R Heaps        I. A Richardson               Eversheds' offices at    Society in die conduct
    D F L Sykes               R M Pottertor                                                                                 of investment business
                              R E A Winter          i. M Foster      D. M Strachan                 Birmingham. Cardiff.
    } P Margerison
    } H. Bryan                R. Chapman            } R Guest        Alison i. Staniforth          Derby. London.
                              A. W Latchmore        R M Ainscoe                                    Manchester. Newcastle.
    i. H. Fmmgan                                                                                   Norwich. Nottingham.
    P }. S. Thompson          P R. P Chadwick       P. A. Smith
                              R C Davis             B. i Horrock-*                                 Wamngton
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
S t a f f i n c o n fid e n c e                                       Ref:            TWS/MR
        From:     Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield                Station/Dept:   Headquarters

        To:       The Chief Constable                                 Date:           24 August 1989



                 SUBJECT:         APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                    The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                    the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                    published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989- The report was very
                    critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                    and a number of other police officers.

                    National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                    the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                    the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                    negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                    August 1989.

                    The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested           to examine
                    Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and subsequently instructed           the West
                    Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not           limited
                    to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events           that
                    occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989-

                    Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                    possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                    interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
                    investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
                    disciplinary allegations made against me for which a Regulation 7 Notice
                    has been served.

                    I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                    resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
                    legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                    criminal charges had been made. I am now obtaining independent legal advice
                    through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.


••                  The policy gives a maximum cover of £ 5 0 ,0 0 0 . If I need legal representation
                    at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                    criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, which
                    are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                    my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                    If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
                    Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                    in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
                    officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best possible
                    legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

                    Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                    are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
L                   different individuals.




Gen/2
    Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
    Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'. I draw your attention
    to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive. In accordance with paragraph 13,
    I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
    Authority for financial assistance in order that   I am properly advised and
    represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
    As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any payments made toofficers
    in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.




i


    Chief Superintendent
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY        NOT FOR PUBLICATION as 1t
                                        contains   exempt      information
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
                                        within para.                 of
15 SEPTEMBER 1989                       Sch.l2A to the Local Government !
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE           Act 1972 as amended.                 ^


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.    Matter for Consideration

      The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved in
      legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
      on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information

2.1   Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, provides
      guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in
      considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
      assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
      from Involvement in legal proceedings which result fro* the pursuance, in
      good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force as
      whole are involved. A copy of the Circular is attached.
                                                                                 v   *■

2.2   Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
      into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
      Constable of the West Midlands Police to enquire into the Justification
      for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
      Coroner's Inquest into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
      received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield Who was involved in
      command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
      similar applications from other officers similarly involved might be
      anticipated.


3.    Comment
3.1   vMlnuine the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of




      advice and representation.
                      from the Home Office Circular Ho. 77/1987, that the




      he should not be out of pocket.
                                          - 2

      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circumstances. It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to Jhe Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the c
      Officer should refer the application to the Police
      with his own recommendation. It will be further
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police
      to make representations to them if he wishes to do so. At this *tage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.A   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of          potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were act ng
      in good faith in accordance with well established practicesand any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a testcasesimilar tothe
      example provided in paragraph three of the Home Office Circular. ThJ^
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular «i»inal «nqu ry
      with its wide implications for the interests of tta
      such that the Police Authority may wish to                         SJie M C s )
      commitment to the funding of independent i e g a l ^ d ^ e for the <office
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is Ukely
      commence with advice and representation prior to and d uringinter^lw
                                                                                      &    * •*   •
      undertaken by West Midlands P olice officers in J *
       enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue
       throughout the enquiry and any subsequent crimina! procee^ ngs Mlllttgl
       extend to representation at the Coroner's Inquest which will ultimately
      be held.
       At this stase it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
3.5
       s u b s e q u e n t lypursuedvi 11 S, provided by th, Pollc. Authority ln.«r.r..



3 6    It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of


       Sup.tlntend.nt.' Association of Enjl.nd «»dW.l.s.
       liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


       Financial Implications




                                t5£ tirs s s s M r s r 1*. ~
       Budget for this expenditure.


 5.    Recommendation
        Th. Cownltt.e 1. reco-ended to . p p r o v e . c o ^ l ^ n t t o p r o v l d . fla.ncl.1



        77/1987.


 p WRIGHT
 CHIEF CONSTABLE
- 5 -


147.    FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
        A joint report of the Cleric and Financial Officer and the Chief
        Constable was submitted on the guidelines contained in Home Office
        Circular No. 77/87 on the responsibilities of                      "
        respect of legal costs arising from the involvement of police officers
        and non-police employees of Police Authority in legal proceedings.
        The Circular both confirmed and expanded current policies
        South Yorkshire Police and recommended criteria to assist P o n c e
        Authorities in considering     w   fin anc ial assistance should be
                                           h   e t h       e r


        approved in any particular proceedings. If followed, the criteria
        would ensure that any payments authorised in consequence to be met
        from the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.
        RESOLVED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures in
        Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current po^cies detailed
        in the report now submitted relating to legal costs arising £ ™ m the
        involvement of police officers and non-police employees of the P ? ^ e
        Authority in legal proceedings, subject to any applications continu g
        to be submitted to the Police Authority for consiJfra*1°n
        Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any particular defence.
148.    HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
        The Authority considered a letter dated 8 th February, 1988 from the
        Management Co-ordi nator of the         Metropolitan Borough Counc.l
                                                       B    a    r n   s l e y


        requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of the
        Council's Consumer and Enviornmental Services Committee     8 th
        lanuarv 1988 relating to the Council's concern over the availability
        of high*veloci ty catapults• The letter included a report considered
        by the Committee detailing the tests and test results on
        catapults purchased locally and tested a t the Department; of Civil^and
        Structural Engineering of the University of Sheffield,
        were considered to be disturbing;-
        The Chief Constable displayed to the Authority the
                 to and reported that he had already responded to the AMA that
        re fe rre d
        such catapults should be regarded as designated weapons. The Cleric
        and Financial Officer also pointed out that the Criminal Justice
        would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
         RESOLVED:-
         i       That thp renresentations already made by the Chief Constable and
                 the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council to the Association o
                 Metropolitan Authorities be supported.
         ?       That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to write to
                 t h e C h a m b e r s of Trade to seek their support of a voluntary ban
                 nn the sale of high velocity catapults, pending the
                 implementation of9the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill.
                               Director of Public Prosecutions                                Deputy Director and Chief Executive
                                              Allan Green Q.C.                                D S. GandyCBOBE




                                                      D ire c to r o f H e a d q u a r te r s C asew ork
                                                                    C   W .   P Newell




                                                                                                      Crown Prosecution Service
               The Chief Constable
               South Yorkshire Police                                                                Headquarters Casework
               Snigg Hill
               Sheffield                                                                             10 Fumival Street
               S3 8LY                                                                                London
                                                                                                      EC4A 1 PE

                                                                                                      Telephone 071 -831 -3038
                                                                                                                Ext




Y ou r R e f                                        O u r Ref                                                   D ate :

                                                            PGK.3341.89                      .                    30 August 1990



               Dear Sir

               H I L L S B O R O U G H S T A D I U M DISASTER

               The Director of Public Prosecutions has n o w received from the West
               Midlands Police the final report in this criminal investigation together
               with substantial supporting evidence and documentation. Y o u will recall
               in August 1989 that the Director requested a full criminal investigation
               following publication of the Interim Report produced after the Public
               Enquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor into the circumstances
               surrounding the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium. Sheffield on 15th April
               1989.

               The most careful consideration has been given to all the evidence and
               documentation. The Director has decided that there is no evidence to
               justify any criminal proceedings being instituted against South Yorkshire
               Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Messrs Eastwood and Partners
               or Sheffield City Council in connection with the disaster at the
               Hillsborough Football Stadium Sheffield on 15th April 1989.

               The Director has also concluded that there is insufficient evidence to
               justify proceedings against any officer of the South Yorkshire Police or
               any other person for any offence,

               I am sending a copy of this letter to you by FAX.

               I am also sending copies to the investigating officer, Chief Constable
               Leslie Sharp, to the Coroner Dr Popper and to the Police Complaints
               Authority. Copies will also be sent to solicitors representing the
               Hillsborough Steering Committee, the Sheffield City Council, Sheffield
               Wednesday Football Club and Messrs Eastwood and Partners.
                                              - 2 -




     I also enclose a copy of a press release to be issued by the Crown
     Prosecution Service Press Office at 3.00pm today.

     Yours faithfully




^ | A c J Cleugh
^ ^ ^ H e a d of Police Complaints Division




••
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
C H IE F CONSTABLE:               L. Sharp   Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO "THE CHIEF CONSTABLE”
M y Reference:       CC/BM T
                                                                          POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                 CARLETON H A L L
Y o u r Reference:   L / CCC / 3 / CH
                                                                                          PENRITH
                                                                              C UM BR IA CA10 2AU
                                                                           TELEPHONE: 0768 - 64411
            Hepworth and Chadwick
                                                                                     TELEX: 64240
            Solicitors
                                                                                   FAX : 0768 66106
            Cloth Hall Court
            Infirmary Street
            LEEDS
            LSI 2JB

                                                              7        6 September 1990




            HILLSBOROUGH - Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD

            I reply to your letter dated 31 August 1990 which was addressed to the
            Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.

            You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided that there is
            insufficient evidence to prosecute your client for any criminal offence
            arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy.    It is also correct to say that
            the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by South Yorkshire Police
            in consultation with the Police Complaints Authority.

            I believe you are also aware that there are outstanding civil actions being
            brought by various parties with an interest in the matter, and that there
            are 95 Coroner’s Inquests to be reconvened.

            I am aware that at the interview on 3 July 1990 your client intimated that
            once the DPP had made his decision in respect of the criminal issues, he
            would consider being interviewed in respect of any disciplinary matters.
            If that is still his wish then I am ready to conduct that interview but it
            must be understood that the disciplinary matters are very closely related
            to the criminal issues, so any interview would have to be conducted under a
            Police and Criminal Evidence Act caution, and the transcript of the
            questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP for further
            consideration of the criminal matters.
     That is the position in respect of any new or additional evidence which
     comes to light, for example, that which may arise out of the civil actions
     or the Coroner’s Inquests.   It is not for me to advise you or your client
     as to how you, or he, should proceed, but it seems to me that you should be
     aware of the foregoing information.

     If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact
     me.

     Ygurs faithfully




     Chief Constable
     Investigating Officer




••
                  SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990



 Introduction

 This meeting is considering an application from six officers (a chief
 superintendent, three superintendents and two constables) for financial
 support to provide them with legal representation at the forthcoming Inquest
 Hearing into the Hillsborough tragedy.

 They have all been investigated by the West Midlands Police, acting f°r
 the Director of Public Prosecutions, in relation to the question of criminal
 liability.   The Director has     announced  that  at   this time there   is
 insufficient evidence on which to bring criminal proceedings.

 All the officers continue to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
 consider independent legal representation absolutely essential for each
 of them.

 The risks arise from the following factors

     1.     The   possibility   at   the   Inquest   of   a   verdict   of   unlawful
            killing.

     2.     Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest which
            may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions to further
            consider the question of criminal liability.

     3.     Recently in a similar case where the Director of Public
             Prosecutions    decided   against    criminal   proceedings,
             representatives of the deceased instigated a Judicial Review
             of the Director's decision.      The officers see this as
             possible in this case.

     4.     Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.

     5.     The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings where
             dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are


••
             all possibilities.


 Relevant Considerations

  All the officers thus far have provided for                 their own legal advice and
  representation and the application today is                 concerned solely with costs
  likely to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

  To help you with your decision clear      advice is             provided    in Home Office
  Circular 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

  This Circular refers to a central principle:  this is "that where the Police
  Authority considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
  of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involve
  (and both of these considerations are fully satisfied in this case) the
  officer should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure that he
  has the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of pocket .
                                             -   2   -




     I wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
     pursuance of their duties" and undoubtedly "the interests of the Force as
     a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
     very real.

     Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Representation for Individual
     Officers"  particularly to occasions  when  "the Chief   Officer's legal
     representative cannot reasonably be expected to represent the separate
     interests of officers".

     This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
     the Authority and the Chief Constable in this matter. Their advice is that
     independent legal representation    is appropriate for all the officers
     concerned.

     In    the Circular reference is specifically made to the Authority  "wishing
     in   particular toassess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
     for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
     where any such finding might give rise to legal proceedings for which the
     Police Authority would be liable or for which financial assistance might
     be   appropriate". It will be seen therefore the advice in this     Circular
     relates very precisely to our situation.


     Finance

     The Circular makes it clear      that   expenditure   incurred   in   this   regard   is
     eligible for police grant.

     When this Committee last considered these applications questions were raised
     about the private insurance available to the chief superintendent and three
     superintendents.  I can now inform you that:-

        a.     Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill each
               officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
               VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.




••
        b.     The policy does not specifically cover Inquest Hearings
                but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
                provide cover in this instance.

        c.     In relation to future risks the officers may need further
                legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
                have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
                private or discipline proceedings.  If the Director of Public
                Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings, in the
                first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
                they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs. Also there
                is   no   provision   for  the   Authority   to   fund  legal
                representation at discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms
                of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
                must be borne in mind.
                                          -   3   -




                                          ac 1-n the extent these officers have
     Some information   is now available as to t e                 liVpiv    hp
     already incurred   legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
     incurred through   representation at the Inquest Hearings.   I can provide
     you with the details as you wish.

     in relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
     to date have been supported from PoliceFederation funds    Their application,
     as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents,     is for Police
                            i ♦
     Authority funding in relation j_ i^/rai
                                   to              incurred bv
                                      legal costs incurrea  d Y
                                                                them 3t the Inouest

     Hearings.


     Separate Representations

                              v, 14,
     The Circular, at paragraph  ia  mav-oc ciear
                                     makes  pioar that
                                                  mai. officers should normally
     be given the opportunity by the Police Authority to make representations
     to them if they so wish.

     With the exception of Constable Smith, all the officers and some legal
     advisors are in close attendance.         Some of then, have intimated they may
     ^ s i to exercise their right to a p p e a r before you today and make their own
     representation as to their application for financial assistance.



     Recommendation

     south Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about t h e i r n o ™ , ! duties
     secure in the knowledge that provided they act in good faith and to t
     S s t of their ability they will always be deserving of and receive, th.
     support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for leg
     representation when that is appropriate.

      I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
      of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




••    Deputy Chief Constable
      2 November 1990
ORAL REPRESENTATIONS HADE BY CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD TO
THE POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990- - - - - - - - - - - - -

At the outset of the meeting Superintendent Marshall had said he
felt that the Police Authority would expect him to take decisions
in the direst circumstances. That day was direst circumstances.
It was crucial to public confidence that Police Commanders felt
confident that they will be supported.    Thus the application for
legal costs. He thanked the members for the opportunity to speak
to them.

Chief Superintendent     Duckenfield then had the following exchange
with members
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
He would wish to be associated with the previous remarks.      the
Deputy Chief Constable without the support of the Police Authority
would be unable to arrange representation for them.
Councillor G Gallimore
What about the Superintendents’ Association?
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
Not in these circumstances. The cost falls on the individuals.
Councillor G Gallimore
What cost?
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
So far £34,000. About £16,000 remains. If he has to face a
private prosecution or discipline he will have no funding for
representation.
'councillor Swindell
Each of the Superintendents took out £50,000 insurance so there is
a total of £ 2 0 0 ,0 0 0 .
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
This counts individually.    When VAT is considered £50,000 becomes
£42,000.
 ORAL PRESENTATION HADE BY DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE, PETER HAYES TO
 THE POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990
 In relation to a question on the cost of legal representation for
 Police Officers, Mr Hayes said he had asked solicitors for
 estimates of what the costs might be and had some rough figures
 available.
     In response to the following questions from Councillor Walayat:-
     "HOC 77/87
 Did they act in good faith.
     Lot of material facts.
 Whole argument is do they satisfy the criteria.      Until   after   the
 inquest not in a position to make a judgement."
 Mr Hayes said:
 "The officers on the day were faced with a situation which was
 wholly unanticipated. If they were not acting in good faith then
 must have been bad faith, and must have set out to cause the
 disaster."




••
Extract from a note of the meeting of the Police Authority on 16 November 1990
Coughlin and D Duckenfield
Coughlin   Implications for DD of decision today are grave.   No need to speak on
           applicability and qualifications of HO Circular.
           Risk of further prosecution relatively small.   Assessment of risk is
           primary to financial issue.
           2 areas of risk     1    DPP
                               2    Private Prosecution
           DPP decided insufficient evidence for prosecution. Letter. Also
           letter any fresh evidence will be considered by DPP - door not
           closed. Inquests - forum for new fresh evidence.
           Private Prosecution - Inquest - final chance to get fresh evidence
           for private prosecution.
           Inquest - Key point of new fresh evidence - Coroner 238 witnesses as
           to fact - also expert witnesses.
           Majority did not give evidence at Public Inquiry - may have given
           statement to WM Police.
           Inquest - all evidence orally. Coroners rules - not restricted to
           giving evidence as given previously. Every word potentially fresh
           new evidence. Coroner has to decide how died. Danger area is the
           legal representatives of 10 groups who will examine witnesses.
           Practical effects of lack of representation - anything affecting him
           will go unchallenged.
           Insurance cover - largely expended.
k          Any evidence will go unchallenged. Point is we attend when DD giving
w          evidence. Anybody could give prejudicalevidence then it will be on
            record.
           Likelihood of evidence against DD Man in charge on the day.
           Criticism of him will follow. He is only officer suspended.    He bore
           brunt of Taylor criticism.
           DD bears anguish and anger of relatives.   They will be represented at
           the inquest on every day.
           Relatives - lack forum for their views - DD has to put evidence on
           record.
           If he is not represented then case may be built without any right of
           reply.
           Conclusion that legal representatives for 10 opposing parties - DD
           will be focus of attention.
- 2 -


                DD not asked for full costs - junior Cl or solicitor on each
                day.
                Financial question - risks real as private insurance is largely
                exhausted therefore DD in firing line. Virtually gone.
                Minimum acceptable level of representation - Counsel and
                Articled Clerk.
                My assessment of legal costs for DD - based on 8 weeks - £40,000
                and VAT and disbursements (travelling) - thereafter 4.5 to 5k
                per week.
                Rebate from HO Funds?
                In conclusion - DD has had fully backing of Chief Constable and
                Deputy Chief Constable and DCC that done best and acted in good
                faith - he has inadequate representation - without backing then
                wide open to real risks - tried without success to get funding
                elsewhere.
C Constable     Point clarification.
                DPP - police authorities - insufficient evidence - corporations
                no evidence. You made no distinction.
Coughlin As representative of DD - police officers insufficient evidence.        Any
         evidence against any party could be reconsidered.
C Betts    Clarify - Ivan Walker said   not take a/c of any alternate funding.
            You say DD needs funding.
Coughlin I am saying that DD has no funds.
          Putting position on DD funds.
  Walker   Emphasised that DD under greatest risk of criticism - Coroner - 6
           categories. Need representative on every day?
Coughlin Any fresh evidence - could come from any witness,     There are civil
         proceedings in progress.




WP006684
  S olicitors                T elephone
                             0 5 3 2 43 0 39 1
 C l o t h M all C o u r t
  I n firm a ry S treet
                             T elex
                             557917
                                                     HEPWORTH
 Leeds
 LSI 2JB
                             Facsim ile
                             0532 4 5 6 1  HH
                                                     & CHADWICK
                                                    A M E M B E R OF EVERSHEDS
                             OX 12 0 27     Leeds




                                                                    14 November 1990

                                                    YourRelcicncv
 IN CONFIDKNrK
                                                    OurReference    L/CCC/3/mci/
                                                                     DUCKENFIELD
 Mr S Walker
 Solicitor to the South Yorkshire
 Joint Secretariat
 PO 37
 Regent Street
 Barnsley
 S YORKSHIRE S70 2DX


 SENT BY FAX 0226 730442 AND POST

Dear Sir

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield - Hillsbrough
Inquests

We refer to the Writer's letter to Mr R C Johnston dated 7th November,
together with our subsequent telephone conversations from which we
 e leve you now fully appreciate Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
position.

We are grateful for your confirmation that in response to
representations, the Police Authority will review its decision as to the
provision of funds to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. We understand the
specially convened meeting will be this coming Friday

You asked for some clarification on the question of the suggested figure
for costs as set out in our letter of the 7th November. This figure was
considered on the basis of the Inquests running for 8 weeks and was
exclusive of VAT.

Counsel's Clerk has agreed to reduce the Brief fee to £5,000 with a daily
refresher fee of £500, together with VAT thereon. An articled clerk will
need to be in attendance to instruct Counsel. In addition, there will be
cost of Briefing Counsel and Instructing Solicitors' attendance at Court
as required. Therefore, we would consider that a figure of £40,000 for
the 8 weeks would be the minimum realistic figure for representation,
together with VAT and disbursements such as travelling expenses.

If the Inquests run over the 8 week period, we consider                  the mininum
weekly cost to be £5,000 plus VAT and disbursements.

Finally,   we can confirm that the Allianz/Cornhill insurers have
re-affirmed that no funds will be available to Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield over and above the agreed limit of £50,000. As you know, this
 CONTINUATION



      sum has largely been exhausted     during   the   previous   12   months   in
      representing his interests.

      At present, the Writer would anticipate attending the hearing on Friday
      together with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

      Should you require any further information,   please do not hesitate to
      contact the Writer, Mr Coughlin.


      Yours faithfully




      HEPWORTH & CHADWICK
            /




••
      I                            T elep h o n e
                                   (1532 43 0 3 9 1
          C lo th H all C o u rt   T elex                                                    HEP WORTH
          Infirm ary Street        557917
          Leeds                    F acsim ile                                               & CHADWICK
          LSI 2JB                  0532 456188                                               A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                                   D X 12027 L e e d s




I
                                                                                             Dale                                  20 November 1990


          IN CONFIDENCE
                                                                                             O u r R cie rc ru x '                      L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                                                                        DUCKENFIELD
          Mr S Walker
          Solicitor to the South Yorkshire Joint
          Secretariat
          PO Box 37
          Regent Street
          Barnsley
          S YORKSHIRE S70 2DX


          SENT BY FAX 0226 730442 AND POST


          Dear Sir

          Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield
          Hillsborough Inquests.

          We refer to Chief Superintendent's Duckenfield's application for
          financial support to the South Yorkshire Police Authority and the meeting
          held on 16th November 1990.

          As you are well aware, it is our view, expressed to you and the Authority
          both in writing and by way of verbal submission, that the principal risk
          to our Client lays in new evidence being adduced before the Coroner which
          in turn may be submitted to the DPP who may review his decision not to
          institute criminal proceedings. As you know, of equal concern, was that
          any new evidence may provide a platform for individuals intent on
          bringing a private prosecution.
    • •   I now attach a copy of the front page of the "Sheffield Star" for
          yesterday Monday 19th November 1990. The article is self explanatory and
          is clearly supportive of our concerns on behalf of Chief Superintendent
          Duckenfield as to the risks faced by him, if his own position is not
          properly protected by legal representation at Court. Will you please
          ensure that this information is placed immediately before the members of
          the Authority and steps taken to reconsider their decision, as the
          Inquests are now in session and evidence is being heard.          Due to
          insufficient funds, we have had to take a decision to limit Chief
          Superintendent's Duckenfield's representation to a matter of days in
          Court. This decision is made so as not to exhaust the monies left
          available to him under the Insurance Policy, in order that we may provide
          some representation to him in respect of any forthcoming disciplinary
          proceedings.




                                     . I < Hr«n»k-\      O J < »ia\                              O i b c r Pn n c tp u l                    R egulated by Th<r I
             » I sarv                  M P o itv n o n   J K.            • A   K«t) dn1^>o       l.ivcrvheiK' oflHVN 4t                     SKietvmiOh*conduct
                                                         J M . *<k u <                           B i rm w p ti a in . C d u l i t l .         inv o im cn i Ihimik-ns
                                                                                                 !XmI>\ . ■
                                    .\ W I
Will you please contact the Writer, Mr   Coughlin, without delay.


Yours faithfully

HEPWORTH & CHADWICK.
                                                                                                                                                                     am*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bv Bill Broi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Y O U ’R E N I C K E D , . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    as the stro n g a rm o f the :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    g an g o f villans in Sheflle:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B ra n d ish in g tru n c h v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “ p o l i c c m e n " p i c t u r e d le f t t k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1920 K e y s to n e c o p un ifo rm -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the d esp erate-lo o k in g co n \K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b y th e ir b ail a n d chains.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T h i s w e e k r e a d e r s h a v e th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    h o m e s m o r e s e c u re w ith c a ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sy s te m s o ffe re d in T h e S tar.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *




                                                                                           NEW evidence which could lead to man­
                                                                                           slaughter charges against Hillsborough
                                                                                           disaster police chiefs could emerj
                                                                                           eight-w eek in que st which r
                                                                                           today.
                                                                                              L a w y e r D o u g F r a s e r , w h o rep resen ts .43 o f
                                                                                           the v ictim s' families, said he believed a s u b ­
                                                                                           stantia! a m o u n t o f fresh in fo rm a tio n n o t given
^ O U N D 200 T etley                       r e m a i n d e r m u s t b e s o ld o r       to th e T a y lo r in q u iry h ad n o w been gathered .
vdlords a rc co n s id e r in g             r el ea se d w i t h o u t a n y tie,
                                                                                               F am ilies h ope it will be e n o u g h to b rin g in 95
;ir fu tu re as the b rew -                     B r it a in 's la rg e s t b r e w e r .
                                            B ass, a n n o u n c e d its p la ns
                                                                                           unlaw fu l killing verdicts w hich could force the
• d c c i d c w h i c h p u b s in
                                            la st w e e k , a f f c c i i n g m o r e      D ir e c to r o f P ublic P ro se cu tio n s to p u t several
: r e g i o n t o s e ll o f f .
S o m e 2,000 o f A llied
                                            than - 0 0 S o u th Yorkshire                  s e n io r Sheffield police officers in the dock.
                                            pu b s.
 c u e r > 's 6 ,0 0 0 p u b lic                                                               D P P A llan G re e n Q C                        —      By ■
 u se s — i n c lu d i n g T e ti c y s          All ie d license es h a v e be en         ruled sev eral w e e k s a g o                         B O B WESTERDALE
   wii; be r e l e a s e d b y t h e        o ffe r e d th ree o p tio n s for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A R E L A T IV E of w o
                                                                                           th a t th e re w as no?                                   C h ie f R e p o r t e r
;np;m> u n d e r m o n o p o l i e s        th e ir fut ur e:                              e n o u g h evidence to b ring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      elderly Sheffield
 !<;, it/on.                                • A re iail p a r t n e r s h i p w i t h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sisters w h o died in a
                                            t h e h r e w e r 'u lievc t h e               crim in al ch arges.                 "          . , | f l!w j u r y h e a r s n e w vvi-
N egotiations are under-
                                                                                              A p e titio n o f 5 0.000                    d o n e e o f e v id e n c e p r e s e n te d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h o u se fire a p p e a re d                 s1
  \ '. ‘. i i b a l l l i c e n s e e s .   licensee o p e r a te s m id w a y
                                            b etw een a te n a n t and                     nam es dem anding a U -turn                     in a d if f e r e n t lig ht , th e D P P                                                                                                                                                  in c o u r t t o d a y
H o ug h a de c is io n o n w h o
 ;] b~c a f f e c t e d is s t i l l        m an ag er arrangem ent,                       w a s d e li v e r ed to t h e H o m e
                                                                                           Of fic c las t week.
                                                                                                                                              a n b e 'a s k e d to lo o k a g a in                                                                                                                                                   c h a rged w ith do uble                     U
 ,i(Sed.                                     • A v a n g u a r d lease r u n ­                                                                " W c a r c n o w 19 m o n t h s                                                                                                                                                        m u rder,                                    ar
irc\\crsi
        l
        ^gfch.allowed                       n i n g o v e r 10 y ea rs .
                                             • A l l o w i n g t h e i r p u b to
                                                                                               S p e a k in g b e fo re the
                                                                                           i n q u e s t s t a r t e d a t S he ff iel d
                                                                                                                                           o n a n d e v id en ce n o t a v a il ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ; la n D a v id K en tzer.
                                                                                                                                           a ble t h e n m a y b e n o w , "
                                             b e c o m e a free h o u s e .                T o w n H a ll . M r F r a s e r said:                                                                                                                                                                                                      a g e d '2 4 , o f S p t t a l H i l l ,    dv
                                                                                                                                               H e sa id t h a t “ a si g n if ic a nt
                                                                                                                                           p r o p o r t i o n ” o f t h e 2 00 w i t ­                                                                                                                                                S h e f f i e l d , is a c c u s c d o f    h<
                                                                                                                                           nes ses t o be c a lle d d i d n o t                                                                                                                                                        m u r d e r i n g his g ra n d *
                                                                                                                                           a p p e a r at t h e t i m e o f th e                                                                                                                                                       m o t h e r Jessie T h o m a s .            O.
       n r                        n r v                             h           q          o          r           q                        T a y l o r in q u ir y .                                                                                                                                                                   89, a n d g re a t-a u n i 9 2 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       year-o ld M a ry G o o d -                  ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rich o n o r a b o u t O c t-               c;;

Cash off coats gives                                                                                                                           B arry D evonside. w ho
                                                                                                                                           lost his so n C h r is to p h e r ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o b e r 3 0 this y ear.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H is a p p e a r a n c e c a m e           R
                                                                                                                                           a g e d 18. said : "1 h o p e a t last
                                                                                                                                           w e will get lo th e t r u t h .                                                                                                                                                            a f t e r h e w a s inte rvie w e d             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a n d ch a rg e d at the week-                  H
                                                                                                                                               " W e believe th e in q u e st
                                                                                                                                           sh o u ld p ro v id e sufficient                                   Jessie (left) and M ary before the fatal fire                                                                            end at S h e ffie ld 's                         b:
                                                                                                                                           e v id e n c e to r e o p e n th e issue
                                                                                                                                           o f crim inal ch arg es and.
SHOWER JACKETS.                                                                                                                            bring those people w ho arc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ■
There's £ 5 off th e usual price                                                                                                           so cl e a r ly re s p o n s ib le f o r the
>f all styles (excluding                                                                                                                   d e a t h s to j u s t i c e " .
felem ac and Dannimac),                                                                                                                         M r D e v o n s i d c a d d e d th e
: rom colourful Ski-wear to                                                                                                                 c a m pa ign w a s n o t just on
 lassie designs.                                                                                                                            b e h a l f o f th e 95, b u t t w o
-lg. Continental Style Jacket                                                                                                               o th e rs. T o n y B land a n d
                                                                                                                                            A n d re w D evine, w h o are
Quilt or thermal lined in                                                                                                                   still in c o m a s .
autum n shades. 10 ’s to 2 4 ’s.
                                                                                                                                                  L E G A l, B IL L S
 Jsually
£39.99                                                                                                                                          C o r o n e r D r S te f a n P o p ­
                                                                                                                                            p e r d e v o t e d th e m o r n i n g to                                                                                                                                                     Specialists in ho:
                                                                                                                                            Icga! s u b m i s s i o n s f r o m s o m e
                                                                                                                                            o f th e d o z e n a p p l i c a n t s at                                                                                                  t h o u g h t s a b o u t it a n d p a s s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           window drcssin
                                                                                                                                            th e h e a r i n g .                             A S H E F F IE L D     p u n t-              M b T h a t c h e r ' s a id e s th r e w
                                                                       Exclusive, siylrsn shower jackets shas look great                        T h e p o l i c e m e n in volved,               I..,.            nnn on                  ' v« y l h m 8 >n<° “ A s p e r a t e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t h e m o n to h e r " .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S u c h c o m m e n t s f u e ll e d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               offering an
                                                                                                                                                                                             e r h a s p u t xiJ.U U U o n                 b i d 10 w i n v i c to r y m a q u i c k
                                                                                                                                            in th e in q u i r y , in c l u d i n g su s ­   M rs T h a tc h e r to w in                   yn,                                         th e id e a t h a t to p T o rie s              R | combination c
                                                                                                                                            p e n d e d C h i e f S u p t D a v id                                                                                                     c o u l d u r g e M r s T h a t c h e r to
                                                                                                                                                                                             th e T o r y l e a d e r s h i p   T h e y f ea r t h a t i r v o t i n g by
                     ■ *K                                                                                                                   D u e k c n f i e l d . face h a v i n g to
                                                                                                                                            r e m o r t g a g e (h e i r h o m e s f or      b a ttle                         M Ps goes into a second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s t a n d d o w n i f s h e fa ile d to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       w i n . a u i r i g h l in th e first
                                                C ho ose from an ©(tensive range of styles, some                                            legal bills w h i c h c a n r u n as                T h e w a g e r w a s r« « d ‘hc sklds wi" be                                          ro u n d o f voting tom orrow .
                                                with scarves, som e drawstring, som e stormcoats.                                           h i g h a s £1 . 0 0 0 a d a y .                 revealed by Ladbrokes u c . ' v , . .                                 T                        H cscltin c su p p o rte rs
                                                Eg. Military Style with scarf, quilted lining,                                                 T h e j u r y th is a f t e r n o o n                                                                                                   accused M rs T h a tc h e r's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s all a
                                                size 10’s to 1 6 s .                        «%(•                                            w a s e x p c c ie d to h e a r o u t l i n e     w e ° l o ^ h ^ f lli"?iw u r of            M p 's i'^ M a rc u s Fox today              a id e s o f p a n i c
                                                                                                                                            o f th e tr a g e d y f r o m f o r m e r
                                                                                                                                                                                             o n e t o t h r e e in f a v o u r o f       aCj<;n0W te d g e d it w o u l d be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T h e he a l w a s tu r n e d u p                                           ▼alancc
                                                Usually £5 5.                              1 5                                              W e s t M i d l a n d s p o li c e c h i e f
                                                                                                                                                                                             th e .P ru n e M inister w ith                     i o ta iiy d if f e r e n t ball
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t o d a y a f t e r M r s T h a tc h e r,
                                                {Offer excludes Teiemac & Dannimac)                                                         M ervyn Jones, w h o headed                      c h a lle n g e r M ic h a e l               g a m e " if M rs T h a tc h e r             s a i d M r H e s e l t i n e ’s i d e a s
                                                                                                                                            th e p ol ic e in v e st ig a ti o n ,           H cscltinc a t seven to tw o                 fa ile d t o g e t a first r o u n d         were “ m o re akin to so m e o f
                                                                                                                                                                                             against.                                     kn o ck o u t an d h a d to go               th e L a b o u r P a r t y p o lic ie s. "
                                                                                                                                                T h e y w e r e a ls o to see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I n a n i n te r v i e w m T h e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1000'*ofpa
                                                                                                                                            v i d e o r e c o r d i n g s m a d e by             C o ra l q u o te the sam e              i“ “ a               M o1'
                                                                                                                                            p o lic e a n d T V c o m p a n i e s .          o d d s f or T h a t c h e r a n d f o u r              ‘H y s t e r i c a l ’            T i m e s s h e p a i n t e d h im a s                                      rice c u
  f'es, all fashion and classic styles of ladies full length                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b ac k in g o ld -sty le ideas
                                                                                                                                                                                             to o n e f or b o t h H e s e l t i n e
  varm, wool content coats h av e b een reduced by                                                                                                                                           a n d Foremen S e c r e t a r y                  n ,                ■.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n-hn'h                    ^ "ovt'rv-
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

19 OCTOBER 1.99.0    AMD 2 NOVEMBER' 1990
                                                                               18
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE .TO^POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAt PROCEEDINGS


       Matter for Consideration

1-1    The provision of financial assistance to police. o f f i c e r s involved in
       legal, proceedings; arising from :theevents: at •Hillsborough. Football
       Ground o n .15 .April 1989, /  ;        .      . . /        :      :   :


       Background Information         ....        :    . . /:':■•   :   : .. ’ .
                                                                               •

2,1    Home Office Circular No, 77/1987, published on 4 December 198?
       adopted by this Authority on 8 April 1988, provides guidance to Bo.iice
       Authorities in .considering .applications, •.on :behalf of.police .of fleers,
       for financial "assistance in- legal proceedings.. .    '

       The central principle which           should guide consideration ?of individual
       cases is that:,


       supporter the policie .authority., to. ensure :that he h a s ;the :services
       of a lawyer and that: he should not b e ;out of: pocket. •

       After  the publication of the .Interim ’Report'" of Lord Justice Taylor
       into the Hillsborough Disaster the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
       Police was appointed ' to enquire :into.'/ the. 'possibility / of: criminal
       proceedings arising, from the disaster,:. At that time an .application
       for financial .assistance.' .was received     from . Chief ;S.ttpe:r:inte:nd#nt
       Duckenfield, the officer in command at Hillsborough on the day of the
       disaster./   :                 '   •'              :                  ■. ;.. .....

       At. the time .of '.that application :.it. wag. \acknowledged • that:.
                                                                           .similar
       applications for assistance, under the* terms of Home Office Circular
       No.77/1987, could .be anticipated from other; officers directly involved
       in legal proceedings arising from the Hillsborough Disaster,          ,    ;.

       The application, from/;Chief Superintendent /Duekenfield was considered
       by the Finance and .General Purposes Committee/ on .15 September. 1989
       when the ’matter was deferred for further consideration:.of:/the role
       of the Authority's Insurers. .           :           :       :' • .

        Following advice from the: Authority’s .insurers and. solicitors. Chief
       .Superintendent, .buckenfield: ...obtained independent, legal "■representation
        from solicitors engaged through his staff association/.and financed
        by his personal legal insurance.             aiSr**4'
                                           4t«S» |
2 .7    The funds available to Ghl4f/ Superintendent Duckenfield under : this
        policy amounted to £50".,000,x" His solicitors^ have •:«<Jvised; him;.that that
       .amount , may be exhausted; by / one or .both o f ;■■••the .on-going /Civil
        Contributions; Hearing and the forthcoming .Coroner's. Inquest. . ; .....     i.
                                                            - -»2 -



  2.8 A further a p plication has now-'-.been- receive*! ;f^oar:                             WpeEittfeeii^^tv'v
     '■■ Duckenf ield: for - his o r i g i n a l ' a p p l i c a t i o n .-to' be •.''rft~eia&s&^
       " anticipated:,  .similar : a p p l i c a t i o n s . h a v e ; n o w . been. : '     :received';. .:--£rom;;-'
       ■ Superintendents- .Marshall.,-.'. G-f©.©nwo-od-'-and'.-.'Murray,; .;aiydr .-an:a p p l i cation';;.---
         has also .been received, -fro-in.-'--''.Russell - Jones and Walker, s o l i c i t o r s , on
;.. . behalf of Police-' Constables ■Smith and ''.Illingworth,.

 2,9' A l l officers., m a k i n g - a p p l i c a t i o n . -''haver, b e e n the/;.diE«ctv>#«'b 3 «ot;;--'.of':
- - - enquiries toy-, -the/Chief, Con s t a b l e '-of;.,t he .Wes,t:lMi#iattis':.' Police- .arising;            .
. ' : from allegations of' criminal-.'c6'ft#uct,received-..fro#,; third:';:fattiir§;.r:.-;                         ,
                                                                                                                   -



 3     ., C o m m e n t   .. ,                         ;     ;     ,       .                          ./'V    .




 3.1      Following the disaster '.--and'r.t h r o u g h o u t the Public Inquiry c o n ducted ;.
:         b y Lord Justice:- Ta-yl"©rr".:t h e ;-.-interests o f th.# -".PoliOe-,,;ftuthbrityf..-.the. 1
        ■ C h i e f Constable and a l l officers .-of; t h e - F o r c e were:frfpfes-en%eA--,by':;'lefal;/'
:      ■ officers appointed :by. -;-the- /-folic©- A u t h o r i t y -i'fesayers•»•'../..In r elation -"to •
        - the s u b s e q u e n t / c r i m i n a l '-e n q u i r y ,and'.' 'pots i-ble, .-,p.r©.eeM-i-B9 S' '.the '.insurers-'-.
'         i n d i c a t e d to seven... South f or Ms hire Police o f ficers that a p o s sibility
          of conflict could arise, betw e e n the interests of the Force and each
        : o f them i n d e p e n d e n t l y , The .''fues-tl-on'/ of separate legal r e p r esentation
          was considered,, one officer e.on.tin;iied. to. be r e p r e s e n t e d by the insurers;
       - and. the six-.applicants -obtaiaed-'-riii-d-epeiide-nt 're.pre-s.e;i|tat'i:-6n.; ■•-.                              -

 3.2      M e mbers will be aware that the D i rector of Public P r o s e c u t i o n s , having .
           considered the evidence res ulting from the enquiry by the West M i dlands
: '''■'''■'•'''''#6i'ide>'',''^anhQi4liced . on 30 A u g u s t 1990  his  d e cision       that    there was
           i n s u f f i c i e n t .,evidence to justify criminal proc e e d i n g s against any South',
:'     - Yorkshire . Police-- officer.. -          :.There •are;, .however-1, c e r t a i n .-civil;.; actions//.
:     . under-w.ay and the , c o roner,'s;,,:,l|i;f,uest into the deaths at Hillsborotifh;
           will resume on 15 November.., -l-iSfc---'.. ''.. , '                           ' : ,, ' '

 3.3    At the C o r o n e r ’s Inquest the officers c o n cerned are likely to be; called
        upon to give':,evidence,          -it.-'-is-.-.' a c k n o w l e d g e d that cross examination, by;,
   .
   :    Counsel, representing. -other-, par t i e s may be p r e judicial to the individual
.■   : ,of fleers      in 'res'peet. ;-oft'Hei-'-r';--,,personal "liabilities,,.            These officers -
      -consider it necessary :to             c o n t i n u e . to ,be .Independently r e p resented at
     , this h e aring wherer the Chief .C o n s t a b l e ’s legal repres e n t a t i v e cannot
        reaso n a b l y be. -expected. to, .repr;#s.e:         n t the s eparate interests of each
     -
     ' ; of them, '- ; ..... : -         -    -.           - ---                      -.' ' ;"V '
                                                                                                •                   ’.
                                                                                                                     - .--    '

 3 . 4 : It wi ll be-'S-ee-n,-., ,-',fr-o,jti:',,-',,-pa-ra:
                                                           f--raph --13;:„of the Home office Circular that,
,: , separate ,representation; should-be' p r o v i d e d at a Coroner 1s Inquest where
 : . , (a)       the ..Chief-. O f f icers                legal     representative   cannot r e a s o n a b l y be
         expected to represent .the i n t erests o f such o f f i c e r s %ana) (b) the Police
         Au t h ority cott&i'c&rS that.;.-such, - i n t e r e s t s should be'"'represented.                     In .
       ; s.uch cases :the a u t h ority .shomldr, in the terms of the Circular, provide
       , financial assistance t o t h e ,individual officers concerned.

 3.5       It will be, -noted, a t -p a r a g r a p h - o f the.- C i r c u l a r ";thafe "a.ir-:0ff'-iper :--'Wi's:
                                                                                                                   hi--n-f.
         : to -seek f i n a n c i a l ; a-ssis-t-aae-e from hi# police a u t h ority should have
           the opport u n i t y ..in .advance 'of .the p r o c e e d i n g s to submit to the Chief
         : Constable an application.-.f-©f' - f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e .    The Chief Constable
         :is .o b l iged ..to., .put .such ..appl i c a t i o n ,.
                                                                 to. .t h e a u t h ority for decision.
           It will b© ..further, .seen that the app l y i n g officer should normally be,'
        , given t h e .opportunity,.by-.'th.#-'-police -'authority to make r e p r e s entations ,-
         - to t h e m if he-.wis'he-s to. do so. "'---. ---.     '; - ,         -' . '-
                                                                                      :             '-.r ''-            ,-
                                           _   3   -



      The events :at :Hillsborough were: extraordinary ;in -respect:. of, the
      potential .individual' ;liability V, of .police '
                                                      ■■officers v. Involved,

                     The nature of' the .various, inve.stig^tion/,ijJt0 -:-ther’lili^bofoug-h
              :§r .also means :that the interests; of :the ,South forks,hire >police1*
       as .a ,.whol.e, are. involved. ...For .these, two., reasons .(see. psra.2.2, ante,).-,
       it is recommended that .these officers should have the -'support .of.             'the
       Police Authority to ensure.that.:they each have, the -service#-''of..a lawyer
       representing their individual interests, at the.... forthcoming .Coroner •s
      ■Inquest..       ' v ■■■■ ■....,;: ..... . :

 .7   It would;.be sensible for .the officers concerned to.^-i*.etain.:-the; services
      of those lawyers who currently..represent them, .throughout, subsequent
      proceedings. ■ ■■     :      v : ■ . . ■■: ..... :. .


      Financial Implications

4.1   The cost of .independent representation has to date been met. by ..personal
      legal insurance arranged through The Superi.fttenaents’. Associ.atiQ.n. for
      Chief Superintendent. Duckenfield and -Superintendents Marshall? Murray,
      and Greenwood. ' Constables. Smith and. Illingworth, :ineanwhil.e» have’ been
      represented by Messrs Russell Jones and ..Walker#. the. .Police federation
      solicitor, paid for by central Police Federation funds.:         .. .. .    .

      The extent of future .costs will be. determined by the tiae:.: taken to
      conclude the: Inquest.  There is no specific provision in .the ..Revenue
      Budget for these costs, .   ,  :   '  -      .'  .;                    ;:


      Recommendation

5.1 .The ;Authority is recommended, to approve, a., commitment to. .provide
     financial .assistance for legal representation, at. :the..: forthcoming
 ■ . Inquest, to the of ficers. .concerned, in.. accordance .with . the. principles
     of Home Office Circular No. 77/1387. ..                 . :,      .
                                                                       -
                                                                       . -




                                                        101 .FOR. P.UIL1CAT1.M as : i t
RICHARD WELLS                                           Contains. . exempt "A-nf©.rmat-1on
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                        m th.i n p.ara. » » ' * *-■... .*•. of;
                                                       ;Sc:h.t2A :to-'the-^ tocalr^vernment
                                                        Act...1972 as amended..; . :
     APPENDICES:   A.   Application from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

                   B.   Application from Superintendent Marshall

                   C.   Application from Superintendent Murray

                   D.   Application from Superintendent Greenwood

                   E.   Letter from Messrs Russell Jones and Walker,
                        solicitors representing Constables Smith and Illingworth

                   F.   Home Office Circular No.77/1987




••
                                                                                 'A'

                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                 Ref:        DGD/CJD
         From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield               Station/Dept:
         To:      The Chief Constable                            Date:         21 September 1990



i
                 SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

                 On 24 August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
                 No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
                 consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
                 representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
                 from the Hillsborough Disaster.

                 These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
                 Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
                 19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
                 Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

                 Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
                 of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
                 assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
                 the position with regard to myself and other officers.

                 There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
                 families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
                 prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
                 Police.

                 It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
                 legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

                 My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
                 it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
                 for my legal defence up to the sum of £5 0 ,0 0 0 .



    ••
                 If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
                 Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
                 and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
                 and Private Prosecution).

                 I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
                 contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
                 agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
                 assured.

                 I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
                 papers.




                 Chief Superintendent




     Gen/2
Solicitors                    T elep h o n e


C lo th H all C o u r t
                              0 5 3 2 43 039 1
                              T elex
                                                                     J k   HEPVORTH
Infirm ary Street
Leeds
                              557917
                              F acsim ile
                                                                     " = = & CHADWICK
LSI 2JB                       0 5 3 2 45f t 18 8
                                                                                         A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                              D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                         Date                   17 September 1990

                                                                                         Your Rcfcrcncc




                                                                                         O u i Rcfcrcncc        L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                                                 DUCKENFIELD

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield

SHEFFIELD


Dear David

Hillsborough

As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
resume on 19th November 1990.

In addition to representing your interests at the above, your position
will also need consideration and yourself possible representation at the
disciplinary hearing, as and when this commences.

 Finally,   there is,   of course,   the spectre                                                  of        a      possible             private
 prosecution which may arise at some stage.

 It seems likely that the present funds available under the Allianz
 Personal Law Plan may well be exhausted by one or both of the Civil and
 Coroner's hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that you make the
 strongest representations both to the Home Office and to the Chief
 Superintendent's Association to ascertain the availability of funds to
 assist you with legal representation. This must be carried out as a
 matter of priority for you, based on the time scale for the various
 hearings.
                          /




 Yovj

 C C COUGHLUR




                                                                     A. N. Brown                Oilier Principal         Regulated by The Law
                                   C. I C Bramley    D. J. Grav                                                          Society tn the conduct
                                   R. M Potterton    J R Heaps       I A Richardson             Evei^hc*. offices at
    D     F. L. Sykes                                                                           Birmingham. Cardiff.     of investment buanevs
    J    P Margemon                P E A Winter      J M. Foster     D M Strachan
                                   R. Chapman        j . R Guest     Ataon J. Sumforth          Derby London
    J    H Bryan                                                                                Manchester. Newcastle.
    j.   H Fmnigan                 A. W Lafchmore
                                                     P. A. Smith                                Norwich Nottingham.
    P    J. S. Thompson            P. R P. Chadwwk
                                   R C Davi*         B. J Horrock>                              Warrington
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
    Staff in confidence                                           Ref:            TWS/MR

        From:   Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield              Station/Dept:   Headquarters
        To:     The Chief Constable                               Date:           24 August 1989



                SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                 The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                 the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                 published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989* The report was very
                 critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                 and a number of other police officers.

                 National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                 the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                 the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                 negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                 August 1989-

                 The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested          to examine
                 Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and subsequently instructed          the West
                 Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not          limited
                 to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events          that
                 occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989-

                 Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                 possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                 interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
                 investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
                 disciplinary allegations made against me for which a Regulation 7 Notice
                 has been served.

                 I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                 resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
                 legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                 criminal charges had been made. I am now obtaining independent legal advice
                 through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

                 The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000. If I need legal representation
                 at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                 criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, which
                 are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                 my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                 If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
4       (W*. 'a Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                 in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
                 officer, that those concerned have bad the benefit of the best possible
                 legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

                 Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                 are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
                 different individuals.




    Gen/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'. I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive. In accordance with paragraph 13.
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that   I am properly advised and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any   payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.




Chief Superintendent
                                          NOT FOR PUBLICATION as I t
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
                                          contains           exempt                  information   ID
                                          within para.                                        0f
15 SEPTEMBER 1989                         Sch.l2A to the Local Government
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE             Act 1972 as' amended.


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.        Matter for Consideration

          The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved in
          legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
          on 15 April 1989.


2.        Background Information

2.1       Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on * December 1987, provides
          guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in
          considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
          assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
          from involvement in legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, n
          good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force as
          whole are involved. A copy of the Circular is attached.
                                                                                                     v   •

2.2       Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
          into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
          Constable of the West Midlands Police to enquire into the Justification
          for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
          Coroner's Inquest into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
          received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was involved in
          command of the policing arrangements for the football Seal-Final awl
          similar applications from other officers similarly involved might be
          anticipated.


    3.    Comment

          Following the disaster and throughout the P u b l i c : :
^         the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all °ff*5*r®
          have been represented by legal officers appointed by the
          insurers. The legal officers appointed by the                :^ ^ v J d e
          that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
          representation for individual officers who should seek independent legal
          advice and representation.

    3 2    It will be seen from the Home Office Circular So. 77/1987, that the




           Police Authority to ensure that he has the services o                             wy
           he should not be out of pocket.


    3.3 It .111 be further seen that In r.sp.ct      o   f   c   r   l . l n   . l   proce.dln.s^pursu,^
           by tbt Crown Prosecution Strvlc# against an              police
           be expected to bear the coats of his own defence and the Police
      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circumstances. It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek fJ-“*"cial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to ^ e Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chier
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recommendation. It will be further seen that the
       officer should normally be given the opportunity by the *>li<-® Au™ ° * ity
       to make representations to them if he wishes to do so. At this #t*8e
       Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
       at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were a ting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided in paragraph three of the Home Office Circular. The
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal
      with its wide implications for the interests of tl* Force as a whole is
      such that the Police Authority may wish to c o m ! * * # «t this •tag#, •
      commitment to the funding of independent legal adVUe for the officer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is likely
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during lnt * ™ 5 g , ,,,
      undertaken by West Midlands Polica officers in the courae of their
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent c r i m i n a i * ° lv
       extend to representation at the Coroner s Inquest which will ultimately
       be held.
3 5    At this stage it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
       subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority insurers.

3.6    It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of
       superintendent and chief superintendent rank who Hays chosen to
       contribute, a measure of personal liability insurance             tb*
       Superintendents' Association of England and Wales. The individual
       liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.     Pinancial Implications

       It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial               of
       this matter which will depend entirely on the course and extent of the
       criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
       Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
       Budget for this expenditure.


 5.     Recommendation

        The Committee is recommended to approve a commitment to provide financial
        assistance for legal representation to the officer(s) concerned in
        accordance with the central principle of Home Office Circular Mo.
        77/1987.


 P WRIGHT
 CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                                                                                                                 mmsm
                                                                                                                                                                 WMM sms




         Circular No. 77/87 on the r e s p o n s ^ i l i t i e ^ o r P o                                                                                       officers
                          l l a1emC
                                  p?S
                                    oy“ e                                r            i            r          l            H                 e     9al pP
                                                                                                                                                        rocee<11ngs.

         The Circular both confimed                                                                                                                                ^



         from, the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.

_W       RESOLVED - That the Pollpe Aut S o s e l h f cS ^ e S t ^ “ c ' « ’ d e u ffe d
         ?fnfiChe repor^nov^submitted relating to legal        | ^ ? 9t M c e
         involvement of police officers * " J " ° ^ ^ n y a ^ H t i t Soni?nuin|
          Authority in legal proceedings, JJJJJ   for consideration should the
          to^be                decline6to undertake     particular defence,                                                          a n y




                 VFS OCITY C A T A P U L T S

          The Authority            * ^ B a r n s l e y Metopo™ tM ’B o r o ^ rCouTCil
          Management Co-ordinator of tne Barnsiey         J  t . 1171 0f the
          requesting the Police Authority o x o n s      ^ committee of 8th
          Council's Consumer and                        „cern over the availability
          January, 1988 relating to « « Council s conce                 considered
          of high velocity “ ta?“’t s v J h! ' etH n d test results on four
          by the Committee detailing the tests and t«            ^ t of c1v1i and
          catapults purchased locally and test d at t h « P           The resuUs
^          Structural      E   n of the University
                                   g   i n   e   e   r i n   g


f w p-     were considered to be disturbing.-'
           The Chief Constable displayed to the                      the typc o ^ c a U p ^                        A       u   t h   o   r i t y                       t h   a   t


     .     referred to and reported that h e h a d a l r e a d y r e s p o n     The elefk
                                                                 also6pointed out that the Criminal Justice Bill
           would prohibit th e ir manufacture and s a l e .

            RESOLVED:-
                  ED:-
            1.      SrBarnsTerMet?opo^?Inalorou^hm§ o u                                                                                                  n    c ^            I?
                    M etropolitan                        Authorities be                                      supported.


            2.       That the Clerk and                                voluntary ban
                     the Chambers of Trade to seek tnei    pp end| ng the
                     implementation                   of the Criminal Justice
                                                                 o   r   t   h   e   ' p   r   o   v   i s   i o   n   s
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                    R ef:              F/RM/GP

   From : Superintendent Marshall, 'F ' Division                                    Station/Dept:       F DHQ
                                                                                        .    24 September 1990
   To   : Deputy Chief Constable, Mr P Hayes, H3s



          SUBJECT:                      H IL L S B O R O U G H D IS A S T E R   -
                                 R ESU M ED IN Q U E S T S 1 9 N O VEK B ER 1 9 9 0



           Sir

          Through my solicitor, Mr Vincent Hale, of Nash House, 140 Upperthorpe,
          Sheffield, I have received intimation of the resumed inquests into the
          deaths at Hillsborough.    I shall be required to give evidence at this
          inquest which resumes on 19 November 1990.

          You will perhaps be aware that I have been represented throughout the West
          Midlands Police enquiry into the disaster by Mr Hale and that his costs to
          date are subject of a claim upon private insurance effected by myself
          through my membership of the Superintendents Association.               Mr Hale has
          submitted an interim account upon the insurers, which has not yet been met.
          I wish, 7 t h e r e f o r e , to make formal application under the terms o f the Home
          Office Circular 77/87 to the South Yorkshire Police Authority for financial
          assistance       towards             i^cent Hale's costs in connection with his
          representa ion of                   ests at the forthcoming inquest.




                 ninienaem




GEN/2
           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POUCE
                                                              Ref:
  Superintendent Murray                                       Station / Dept:Ravmarsh

  Deputy Chief Constable                                                1 October 1990



SUBJECT:        APPLICATION FDR   F IN A N C IA L A S S IS T A N C E




  In connection with the Hillsborough tragedy of 1989 and allegations
  nede against me, I have been taking legal advice from Walker, Morris,
  Scott and Turnbull, Solicitors of Leeds, and in particular Mr Richard
  Manning of that company.      The finance for this advice has been
  available through my own private insurance.    Although the Director of
  Public Prosecutions has stated that proceedings will not be taken
  against any Police officer, there are still many matters unsettled and
  I may still require significant legal advice and assistance.

  I have been informed that the Coroners Inquest is to start on 19
  November 1990, and that this will be a lengthy enquiry and it is
  probable that my legal costs will exceed the limit of my Insurance,
  particularly if other matters follow the Inquest, e.g. criminal or
  disciplinary proceedings.

  Accordingly under Home Office circular No. 77 of 1987, I ask that an
  approach be made to the Police Authority to give consideration to
  maki.no funds available for my Legal Representation in connection with
  the forthcoming Inquest, civil hearing and any criminal proceedings
  which may arise, which would allow me to maintain the services of Mr.
  Manning,    who  with   his  existing   knowledge   of  my    particular
  circumstances, I feel is the best person to represent myself.
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            Ref:
   From:   Superintendent Greenwood                        Station/Dept: ^   Doncaster

  To:      chief Constable                                 Dat®:         1st October 1990



           SUBJECT:   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN RESPECT of legal support


           Emanating from the 'Hillsborough Disaster' certain proceedings require to
           be finalised, in particular the inquest proceedings which I understand
           will commence on the 19th November.

           I hereby make formal application, through you,to the Police Authority for
           funding in respect of such legal advice and representation as is deemed
           necessary by my legal advisors.

           I am represented in this matter by Messrs Barlow, Hyde and Gilbert,
           Beaufort House, 15 Batolph Street, London, EC3A 7NJ.




           Superintendent




Gen/2
                        R U SSE LL JONES & WALKER
                                                                                                                                      SOLICITORS

                            4 t h F l o o r B r a z e n n o s e H o u s e B r a z e n n o s . e S t r e e t M a n c h e s t e r M 2 5 A Z T e l e p h o n e : 061 8 3 2 8 8 7 7
                                                                              Fax: 0 6 ! 8 3 2 70 0 6          DX     1 434 0                                    _   _             _




                                                                                                                                           Y our R e f :     DCC/JEL
    The Deputy Chief Constable                                                                                                              O u r R e f:     NH/LP/HILLSBR0/387044
    South Yorkshire Police
    Police Headquarters                                                                                                                          Date:
                                                                                                                                                             19 September 1990
    Snig Hill
    SHEFFIELD
    S3 8LY

    Dear Sir,
    ^illsborough Disaster - Inquest
    We have been notified by Her Majesty's Coroner of his intention to resume the
    Inquests in the deaths of the 95 people on the 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough
    Stadium, which Inquests are to resume on the 19 November 1990.
    We would refer to previous correspondence and, in particular, to our letter of
    the 6 April 1990, addressed to the Chief Constable, and to your response of the
    11 April 1990. We would take this opportunity to repeat our request for financial
    assistance for separate legal representation out of Police Authority Funds,
    pursuant to the provisions of the Home Office Circular No 77/87.
    It is our intention to provide representation by Counsel on behalf of two
    police constables in particular, Police Constable David Alfred Illingworth and
    Police Constable Peter Edward Smith. It is our firm view that these officers
    remain open to substantial criticism, despite the decision of the Director of
    Public Prosecutions not to bring criminal proceedings. As you will fully
    appreciate, there is still a threat of private prosecutions by individual
    complainants. We are satisfied that if called to give evidence before the
     nquests, these officers are reasonably likely to face examination by solicitors
*      Counsel on behalf of relatives of the deceased, which may be prejudicial to
    the officers. There also remains the threat of disciplinary proceedings,
    arising out of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Again, as long as
    that threat remains, we feel that representation can be justified.
    You will no doubt appreciate that the allegations made against these particular
    officers, are of a serious nature and include abuse to members of the public, a
    failure to act with speed, which individual complainants will say, had a direct
    bearing upon the deaths of individuals and further, allegations of assault. In
    the case of Constable Illingworth, there are a number of allegations, but in
    particular there is a complaint by Edward Spearritt, father of the deceased
    Adam Edward Spearritt, who alleges that the officer failed to open Gate 4 in
    the perimeter fencing, despite loud appeals directed to him, his position being
    in such close proximity to the complainant which, it is alleged, had a direct
    bearing on the death of his son and the cause of injuries to himself. In the
    case of Peter Edward Smith, he faces allegations by a David Anthony Lackley to
    the effect that the officer failed to open Gate 3 when asked, which had he done
    so, would have saved the life of some supporters and when the gate was opened,
    Police Constable Smith pushed one person back into the crowd.   This presents a
                                                                                                                                                             Cont/d. . . . . .
      J M Webbei T .D .B . Tavlor I J Walke, A.F Whitehead R J Turner R M Abbey I.R. Fle.che, C .C . Solly KVD O 'B rien R A Plane RJ Davs j M .R Colmar, R C U n g io n D .R . L o u .
           J L   Raskin S Ra,k,n E J O Cooper S O. Ingram N .B Holroyd J C C la rk .-W illi.m s S L Webb D A B                  Tw.gs PR Ashur,. J M P .m c S.J V        Allen G W w . J.C. W .lke,


                                                        R eg u l a te d bv T h e Law S oc ie ty in th e c o n d u c t o f I n v e s t m e n t B us in es s
                                                        LONDO N           LEEDS         BIRMINGHAM               BRISTOL           MANCHESTER
                                                                 PagfS’&


The Deputy Chief Constable                                19 September 1990


This presents a general allegation that the officer's behaviour on the day in
question, had a direct bearing upon the deaths of a number of unnamed supporters
Additionally, he faces an allegation by Stephen Paul Hendry to like effect, in
that it is said he failed to open Gate 3, despite protestations and ordered
people to push back. It is also alleged against this officer that he assaulted
an unknown person by pushing him back over the fence, into Pen 3.
We anticipate that you will see from these allegations, that these officers are
at risk and the interests of justice require them to be represented.
We would maintain that in this instance, the officers were acting at all times
in good faith and in pursuance of their duties. We would also maintain that
the particular interests of these officers are such that they could not Pr° P ® r ^
be represented by those representing the interests of the Police Authority/Chier
Constable. We are sure that you will give our above comments full consideration
and we would ask that appropriate recommendations be made to the Police Authority.

We thank you in anticipation.
YoLH^fal^hfully,                                                                   ^

 UOOLLLUUIMLO   o   nni_!\l_f\




 cc:   Constables' Central Committee
                                                                                  •#
                                                                        HOME OFFICE
                                                                  n Anne’s Gate L o n d o n S W l H 9 A T
                                                                           D ; r t ; t !tne   01*213
                                                                                                    3 3cw f l p p g N P I X   p


        t   • v v v w           PO L /8 7         1 0 2 7 /1 /2
              *YVrt>!»V




        The Clerk to the Police Authority

        The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                                              4 December.-1987



-“ "v




        HOKE OFFICE CIRCULAR MO 77/87

        FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS II U 6 U . PROCEEDINGS


    There is statutory authority in section 48 of the
    ^ i p e n t s         t o     b t   l t d *     £i       "                    ■
                                                                                              •**        •*             « c t * n g in
    purauanc* o f * l ta^anaral atatutiry duty                                        o maintain aiT'adequate and
    efficient, police force for its mrmm,                                             the. pellet <authority ..|u m


  .purmaane®..©f -their duties, 1                                . .-
  are. involved.    The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
/^police authorities to help then in considering requests on behalf of
'-^officers for financial assistance.   This guidance has been discussed
        agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
     lociations.

    2.     The central principle which should guide consideration of
    individual cases is that, where.-a. police .authority considers- that an
    officer., has acted-in-good' faith in pursuance-of his duties
    the Ihtereste of .a fore# as a whole are iavelvedf the officer! "
    have the support of the police authority to ensure that he hi
    services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.        The
    following paragraphs provide general guidance to the
Prosecution bv the Crown.Prosecution Service

3.   An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police:
officer is in the sane position as any other defendant and oust oe
expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he is acquitted, he
should,   like any    other defendant,   look to the court tor

paid in full fron central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to * a^®




civil   metlen.fi   Against
      costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
      costs he incurs himself, and any s u b paid in connection with the
      settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
      police authority, must be paid out of the police fund.      In such
      cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
      whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


      Civil Actions Against Individual Police Officers

      7.   Alternatively, the plaintiff may be awarded damages against an
      individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
      twice over against the chief officer as well. Section 48(4) of the
      Police Act 1964 specifically empower* a police authority "to such
      extent as they think fit" to pay out of the police fund any damages
      or costs awarded against an officer, any costs he incurs himself,
      and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of a claim.
      This   provision applies to actions against officers of th*
      authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
      area under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
,-v   police area.    In considering whether to. give financial assistance
      the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
   jM^pfficer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
   ^treasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek his
      costs from the plaintiff; should th* costs not be awarded or
      awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
      to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ’ into account the
      reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
      claimed.
      8.   Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
      police officer may be brought in some cases.   In such cases it^ls
      important that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
      proposed settlement should involve all the parties named in the
      claim together with advisers even if they are represented by
      different advisers.


      Civil Actions Under the Data       Protection Act l i f t i
n       9.     Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data protection Act 19841 an
^ ^ ^ n d i v i d u a l who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy, loss
               unauthorised disclosure of personal data is entitled to
        compensation from the data user. In «»e absence of any case law on
        these provisions, it is unclear whether the acts
        sections 22 and. 23 amount to torts, to which the
        paragraphs 6 and 7 above applias. If not, s e c t i o n 4*
        Act 1964 does not apply.          However, the P®*1**®” i L i X X S s are
        same.         Under section 38(3) (a) ot tbm 1984 Act                       *5*
        treated as servants of the chief officer for the p w p o w * of the
        Act.       A chief constable i s ,therefore liable
        officers falling within sections 22 and 23 in the same way as:he is
        liable for their torts under section 48(1) •            *®‘\ * « o m e c a s e s
        police officers is less clear but it is possible thjt
        the chief constable might be regarded as hJvinJ.
        acts.       It follows that it would be proper for the police authority
to meet all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
from this liability.  It should be noted that the liability of the
"data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having institutsd a system of
obtaining, checking and recording data which would rsasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3) of th* Act should
his responsibility under section 22(3) and he should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the system established.

10.  Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering whether to meet the
costs which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take account of
the same matters as in exercising their power under section 48(4)
of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7).        Police authorities
should apply the same broad principles and in particular, meet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
have liability for the actions performed.


Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions for DefMMtlQn
11.   There may be occasions when financial assistance is sought
from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority has
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible tor
police grant only if the following criteria are all mets-

     (a)    the defamation is serious;

     (b)   it relates to the actions of an officer         acting   or
     said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;

      (c)   it has attracted public attention;

     (d)   to bring the action       is consideredto be in the
     interests of the force or       of the police   service as a
     whole; and
      (e)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.

Criterion (d) is central. It only the reputation ofthe i n d i v i d u a l ^ ®
officer is in question, he is in the same position as any other
citizen and must be expected to seek his own                   • “t an
allegation against a particular officer may well reflect on the
reputation of the whole force or be an example of wider allegations
against the force or a significant section of it.     2n such cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
nay reasonably be expected to help to defend the reputation of the
force.




                                                                         4
  INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AJTD TRIBUNAL

  L e g a l R e p r e s e n t a t i o n for Chief OffiCftES
  12.  Any interested party nay be legally represented at an
  but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
  and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled.to ©e
  legally represented at a public enquiry or other public trib      *
  Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be aPP*°P“ J*f
  for th* polic* authority to provide at it* expense for th* chi
  officer to be legally r*pr***nt*d on b*half of th* fore*.


  Legal Representation for Individual W i g t lf
    13. Separate representation for individual o f f i c e r s whos* interest
    i* involved may b* necessary. For example, there will b*
    wh*n (a) th* chi*f officer's l*gal representative c a n n o t . i m h W
    be expected to r*pr*s*nt th* separate inter*«t. of ^                 officers
    and fbl th* colic* authority considers that such interests sn
    be represent ed.       In such cases th* authority * ^ u l d giv^fintwicial
    assistance to th* officers.            In considering (b) «b°vj. » •
• A u t h o r i t y will wish in particular to asssss whether th* officers
^          /t riik of being held to blan* for actions in connection with
    the death to which th* inqu*st relates and                     o*fU^ i c h t h 2
    night giv* rise to l*gal proceedings for the costs of                        »
    police authority would be liabl* under section 4 8 (1 ) of the Poliee
    Act 1964 or for which financial assistance night b* approprUt*
    within the terms of this circular.


   APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
   u         officer wishing to                 seek    financial   sssistanc*
   police authority should_have                                            to °the*chief


   •hould put thi., tog.th.r                                                    « iv*" th.
   ^ ^ t y % « V V o U c .               »uthority to           r«p!Si»nt»tloi2 to
   if he wishes to do so.

   Is.      If it d.cid.a to giv.                                                          «
   should inform th* officer                                       assistance is shown in
   which they based th*ir d e c i s i o n to grant                        incomplete, the
   subsequent l*gal Proceedings to be i ^ c u r a t j o r „ i t                            is
   authority will normally expect t                                     involvsd and that
   satisfied that no c llpable misrepresent**                      u    t in substantial
   to r*cov*r the money w o u l d f i n a n c i a l
   hardship.        On th* other band#                       light of subsequent events
   assistance and then discovers in the^ - J S s n i d Y t h S i financial
   that such                                   in order to meet the reasonable costs
    I “ i r » r S y % ^ U^ ? i c . ,rr int « . x ni n T u 9.l ^ i c . or . . . i . t « , c


                                                                                            5
A s s i s t a n c e from Police Federation Fvnfl.S
16.  Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a member in vonnection with criminal proceedi g
brought against him for an offence under the road trail
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired y
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or
offences of causing the death or injury of any person, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. £n
officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances coversd ey
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the policeauthor y
in the first instance.   If the police authority does n o t consider
the request to fall within the terms of this c i r c u l a r , rne
Federation may then consider the application within the^ terms oi
Regulation 19.   If the officer receivss lsgal              A * “ in
Federation the terms of Home Office Circular Ho 26/196
continue to apply.
17.   General snquiries about the content of this circular may be
addressed to Hr Waghorn, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
                                                     Yours faithfully




                                                     H J ADDISON
                                                 APPENDIX




Chief Supt Duckenfield has to date expended circa £34,000.

The anticipated   costs   of   representation   at   the   Inquest    Hearings
are as below:-

Brief          £7,000 with refresher at £750 per day plus VAT

Solicitor      £80 per hour, say £700/£800 per day plus VAT
               together with travelling expenses

                                                                                          s-
Articled Clerk £45 per hour, say £400 per day plus VAT
               together with travelling expenses




Superintendent Murray has to date expended circa £12,000.

The anticipated costs     of   representation   at   the   Inquest    Hearings^^X
are £750 per day.




Superintendent Marshall has to date expended circa £9,000.

The anticipated costs of representation         at   the   Inquest    Hearings.
are £1,000 per week inclusive of VAT.
                                                                 6,               -
                                                                        ■IP ^     ’



Superintendent Greenwood has to date expended circa £17,500
exclusive of VAT.

The anticipated costs of       representation   at   the   Inquest    Eearli
are £550 per day plus VAT.




Constables Illingworth and Smith

The anticipated   costs   of   representation   at   the   Inquest    Hearings        ^
are as follows

Junior         £3,500 plus retainer of £350 per day (the              retainer
Counsel        to increase to £400 from 14.1.91 onwards)

Also an additional fee in respect of guidance at circa £7,000.
               SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990


Introduction

This meeting is considering an application from six officers (a chief
superintendent, three superintendents and two constables) for financial
support to provide them with legal representation at the forthcoming Inquest
Hearing into the Hillsborough tragedy.

They have all been investigated by the West Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in relation to the question of criminal
liability.   The Director has announced that at this time          there  is
insufficient evidence on which to bring criminal proceedings.

All the officers continue to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
consider independent legal representation absolutely essential for each
of them.

The risks arise from the following factors:-

   1.   The possibility   at   the   Inquest   of   a   verdict   of   unlawful
         killing.

   2.   Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest which
        may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions to further
        consider the question of criminal liability.

   3.   Recently in a similar case where the Director of Public
         Prosecutions    decided   against    criminal   proceedings,
         representatives of the deceased instigated a Judicial Review
         of the Director's decision.      The officers see this as
         possible in this case.

   4.   Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.

   5.   The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings where
         dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are
         all possibilities.


Relevant Considerations

All the officers thus far have provided for their own legal advice and
representation and the application today is concerned solely with costs
likely to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

To help you with your decision clear advice is              provided     in Home   Office
Circular 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

This Circular refers to a central principle:   this is "that where the Police
Authority considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
(and both of these considerations are fully satisfied in this case) the
officer should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure that he
has the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of-pocket .
I wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
pursuance of their duties" and undoubtedly "the interests of the Force as
a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
very real.

Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Representation for Individual
Officers"  particularly to occasions  when  "the Chief Officer's   legal
representative cannot reasonably be expected to represent the separate
interests of officers".

This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
the Authority and the Chief Constable in this matter. Their advice is that
independent legal representation    is appropriate for all the officers
concerned.

In the Circular reference is specifically made to the Authority "wishing
in particular to assess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
where any such finding might give rise to legal proceedings for which the
Police Authority would be liable or for which financial assistance might
be appropriate".   It will be seen therefore the advice in this Circular
relates very precisely to our situation.


Finance

The Circular makes it clear      that   expenditure   incurred   in   this   regard   is
eligible for police grant.

When this Committee last considered these applications questions were raised
about the private insurance available to the chief superintendent and three
superintendents. I can now inform you that:-

  a.      Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill each
          officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
          VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

  b.      The policy does not specifically cover Inquest Hearings
          but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
          provide cover in this instance.

  c.      In relation to future risks the officers may need further
          legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
          have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
          private or discipline proceedings.  If the Director of Public
          Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings, in the
          first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
          they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs. Also there
          is   no   provision   for  the   Authority   to   fund  legal
          representation at discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms
          of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
          must be borne in mind.
                                    - 3 -


Some information is now available as to the extent these officers have
already incurred legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
incurred through representation at the Inquest Hearings. I can provide
you with the details as you wish.

In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their application,
as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for Police
Authority funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
Hearings.


Separate Representations

The Circular, at paragraph 14, makes clear that officers should normally
be given the opportunity by the Police Authority to make representations
to them if they so wish.

With the exception of Constable Smith, all the officers and some legal
advisors are in close attendance.     Some of them have intimated they may
wish to exercise their right to appear before you today and make their own
representation as to their application for financial assistance.


Recommendation

South Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about their normal duties
secure in the knowledge that provided they act in good faith and to the
best of their ability they will always be deserving of and receive the
support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for legal
representation when that is appropriate.

I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




Deputy Chief Constable
2 November 1990
It would       be    hard     to   pretend   that       I'm    not        very    disappointed

at    our     Police       Authority's     decision.           My        view    is     that    the

officers       were        performing     public      duty      on        the     day    of     the

Hillsborough         tragedy.       Any   acts     or   decisions           they       made    were

therefore unequivocally in the public domain.                                   My request for

assistance         with      funding does    not    relate          to    some     activity      in

their private lives, but their action as public servants, acting

in good faith under the most trying of circumstances.                                    I think

it is a legitimate use of public funds to allow such officers

adequate       legal        representation       at      the        forthcoming           inquest

hearing, to ensure that the fullest and fairest body of evidence

is available          to    the public     advantage.          The        private       insurance

they have is likely to be insufficient to promote that advantage

and       should    not,     anyway, be    allowed      to divert attention               from

the fundamental principle of public funding.




As    a    result     of     today's decision      the officers                  are    likely to

be    less     well        represented    than     other       organisations             with    an

interest       in    the     outcome of    the   proceedings.                   That    cannot be
                I S o
7 f ^DD   -4-
                 SCMD
                •"V C ■>




                                    S s'*
                                      <©o
                                 ? ^ 00 0

                        1 7s ^

                    2Ar-




                                            ••
            South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                                ECCLESFIELD DIVISIONAL AND
                                                                                                                SUB-DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                                321 THE COMMON
                                                                                                                ECCLESFIELD
                                                                                                                SHEFFIELD   S30 3WL
           _____________                                                                                        TELEPHONE: SHEFF 570200

           A L L C O R R E S P O N D E N C E t o B E A D D R E S S E D T O " T H E C H IE F S U P E R IN T E N D E N T "
 r
                     Mr R C Johnston BA IPFA                                                                      YOUR REFER EN C E

                     Clerk and Financial Officer
                     South Yorkshire Police Authority                                                            OUR REFEREN CE               F/JAN/DR
                     South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                     P O Box 37                                                                                   DATE                6 November 1990
                     Regent Street
                     BARNSLEY
i_                   S70 2PQ




                                                                                                     a


                     Dear Mr Johnston

                      I refer to the Police Authority meeting held on 2 November 1990 regarding
                      the funding of legal representation for four members of this branch of
                      the Police Superintendents' Association.

                      I write to you on behalf of these officers, and request that you forward
                      to me, as a matter of urgency, the full reasons for the refusal of that
                      application.

                     Yours sincerely




                 ( J A Nesfeft QFM
                  ^-€hiof -Superintendent
                    South Yorkshire Branch
                    Police Superintendents' Association
                       of England and Wales




A D M /3   T H E O F F I C E R D E A L IN G W IT H T H IS C O R R E S P O N D E N C E IS                                                      E X T E N S IO N
  At   a    special    Police Authority meeting           held on Friday 2 November199CT,           theT
  Authority was requested to consider the payment of the legal costs of four of
  our members and two constables who were involved in the Hillsborough tragedy at
                     — -■* 7* bllf T» •vrWMlO/otf iq.ll'tm .
  the ftn-p34m»ii*qr; inquest.     The submission of the Deputy Chief Constable fully
  recommended approval and pointed out that the four members of the superintending
  ranks had funded themselves up to now through a locally negotiated voluntary
   legal insurance    package    which,     in    some   cases,   is     in   real   danger   of being
  exhausted.


  The Police Authority refused the application.


  In a statement issued immediately following the meeting, the Chief Constable of
  South    Yorkshire,     Mr     Richard     Wells,      issued   a     statement      expressing     his
  disappointment at the decision and pointing out that it cannot be right for the
  officers involved to be less well represented than other organisations at the
  forthcaning inquest.


  At a special meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Superintendents' Association
  today,   members    echoed     the views       of   the Chief Constable       in expressing       their
  surprise and disappointment at the Police Authority's decision.


  It   is appreciated     that    in   these days of        increasing accountability when all
  expenders of     the public purse are constrained,              all bids      for expenditure are
  subjected to the most careful scrutiny.


^^At   the same time it is most important that corananders of large numbers of police
  officers should       face   their      daily responsibilities confidently, secure in               the
  knowledge that their Police          Authority is supporting than, providing, of course,
  that they do their duty in good faith.


  Police officers are not political animals and do not wish to become embroiled in
  any public slanging match with             the Police Authority.             In    these most   trying
  circumstances,      however,   we       feel   that we ought        to make publicour feeling        of
  being let down and somewhat          isolated by those whose job it is to support us.


  We can do no better than quote an extract from the speech of the Hone Secretary,
  Mr   David Waddington,       Q.C.,   to    the National     Meeting     of    the Superintendents'
Association held in Blackpool as recently as the 25 September 1990 when he said:
"In     the   aftermath   of   a    number    of   major   and   tragic   incidents,   including
Hillsborough, your members have been put under the microscope and you have asked
me    to look into the arrangements           for legal representation of police officers
when litigation arises.            You point out that the relevant Home Office Circular
does not require police authorities to provide legal representation, but gives
than discretion in this area.                In that respect     the circular reflects, as it
must,    the statutory position.             But   it does encourage police authorities       to
exercise their discretion wherever              the guidelines are met.       I very much hope
that authorities will do this."
               SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990


Introduction

This meeting is considering an application from six officers (a chief
superintendent, three superintendents and two constables) for financial
support to provide them with legal representation at the forthcoming Inquest
Hearing into the Hillsborough tragedy.

They have all been investigated by the West Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in relation to the question of criminal
liability.   The Director has announced that       at this time    there is
insufficient evidence on which to bring criminal proceedings.

All the officers continue to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
consider independent legal representation absolutely essential for each
of them.

The risks arise from the following factors:-

   1.   The possibility   at   the   Inquest   of   a   verdict   of   unlawful
         killing.

   2.   Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest which
         may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions to further
         consider the question of criminal liability.

   3.   Recently in a similar case where the Director of Public
         Prosecutions    decided   against    criminal   proceedings,
         representatives of the deceased instigated a Judicial Review
         of the Director's decision.      The officers see this as
        possible in this case.

   4.   Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.

   5.   The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings where
        dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are
        all possibilities.


Relevant Considerations

All the officers thus far have provided for their own legal advice and
representation and the application today is concerned solely with costs
likely to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

To help you with your decision clear advice is             provided     in Home   Office
Circular 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

This Circular refers to a central principle:   this is "that where the Police
Authority considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
(and both of these considerations are fully satisfied in this case) the
officer should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure that he
has the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of-pocket".
I wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
pursuance of their duties" and undoubtedly "the interests of the Force as
a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
very real.

Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Representation for Individual
Officers"  particularly to  occasions when  "the Chief Officer's   legal
representative cannot reasonably be expected to represent the separate
interests of officers".

This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
the Authority and the Chief Constable in this matter. Their advice is that
independent legal representation    is appropriate for all the officers
concerned.

In the Circular reference is specifically made to the Authority "wishing
in particular to assess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
where any such finding might give rise to legal proceedings for which the
Police Authority would be liable or for which financial assistance might
be appropriate".   It will be seen therefore the advice in this Circular
relates very precisely to our situation.


Finance

The Circular makes it clear      that   expenditure   incurred   in this   regard   is
eligible for police grant.

When this Committee last considered these applications questions were raised
about the private insurance available to the chief superintendent and three
superintendents.  I can now inform you that:-

  a.      Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill each
           officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
           VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

   b.     The policy does not specifically cover Inquest Hearings
           but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
           provide cover in this instance.

   c.     In relation to future risks the officers may need further
           legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
           have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
           private or discipline proceedings.  If the Director of Public
           Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings, in the
           first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
           they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs. Also there
           is   no   provision   for  the   Authority   to   fund  legal
           representation at discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms
           of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
           must be borne in mind.
                                   -   3   -




Some information is now available as to the extent these officers have
already incurred legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
incurred through representation at the Inquest Hearings. I can provide
you with the details as you wish.

In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their application,
as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for Police
Authority funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
Hearings.


Separate Representations

The Circular, at paragraph 14, makes clear that officers should normally
be given the opportunity by the Police Authority to make representations
to them if they so wish.

With the exception of Constable Smith,     all   the officers and some legal
advisors  are in close attendance.    Some of them have intimated they may
wish to exercise their right to appear before you today and make their own
representation as to their application for financial assistance.


Recommendation

South Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about their normal duties
secure in the knowledge that provided they act in good faith and to the
best of their ability they will always     bedeserving of and receive    the
support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for legal
representation when that is appropriate.

I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




Deputy Chief Constable
2 November 1990
                                                   APPENDIX




 Chief Supt Duckenfield has to date expended circa £34,000.

 The anticipated    costs   of   representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
 are as below:-                         '

_ Brief        £7,000 with refresher at £750 per day plus VAT

 Solicitor     £80 per hour, say £700/£800 per day plus VAT
               together with travelling expenses

 Articled Clerk £45 per hour, say £400 per day plus VAT
                together with travelling expenses




 Superintendent Murray has to date expended circa £12,000.

 The anticipated costs      of   representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
 are £750 per day.




 Superintendent Marshall has to date expended circa £9,000.

 The anticipated costs of representation          at   the   Inquest   Hearings
 are £1,000 per week inclusive of VAT.




 Superintendent Greenwood has to date expended circa £17,500
 exclusive of VAT.

 The anticipated costs of        representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
 are £550 per day plus VAT.




 Constables Illingworth and Smith

 The anticipated    costs   of   representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
 are as follows:-

 Junior        £3,500 plus retainer of £350 per day (the retainer
 Counsel       to increase to £400 from 14.1.91 onwards)

 Also an additional fee in respect of guidance at circa £7,000.
                                                                    DCC/JEL
                                                                    2 November 1990

NOTE FOR FILE;


SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY - 2 NOVEMBER 1990


The purpose of the meeting was for the Authority to consider a request from
six police officers involved   in the Hillsborough tragedy for financial
assistance for legal funding.

The Police     Authority    papers    attached      hereto    were circulated          before   the
meeting.

The document headed 'Special Police Authority Meeting - 2 November 1990'
was used by me, read out word-for-word and then copies immediately circulated
to members in order that they could be precisely aware of what I had just
told them.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield together with Superintendents Greenwood,
Marshall and Murray all made personal submissions to the Authority.

Mr Stephen   Walker (MMI) thenaddressed members               on    the position        regarding
the Force insurance cover.

A discussion then followed.

Councillor Whitfield raised doubts as              to the aspects of        "good faith".         I
gave her strong advice on this point.

Councillor Cromar expressed doubts as to whether the officers had exercised
their judgment reasonably.

Councillor Gallimore - from          the   Chair    - made    it    clear   he   would    not   be
supporting the application.

Mr Stephen Walker (Joint Secretariat) advised that potential conflict clearly
existed sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the Circular.

In terms of risk he said that unless significant or substantial new evidence
emerged at the Inquest it was unlikely the Director of Public Prosecutions
would change his decision that insufficient evidence existed for criminal
proceedings.   That if private prosecutions are brought the Director will
take them over and offer no evidence.   That the Marchioness Judicial Review
had been dismissed - what he did not say was that this decision had been
further appealed but he concluded that clearly the risk factor does exist.

The meeting,     on   a   recorded   vote,   decided    not    to    support     the    officers'
application.

The magistrates were supportive throughout.




     *           '
Deputy Chief Constable


copy to Chief Constable
                              ’ 90    11-01     12:02                            X    0274     7 3586 4     H Ci MM0 > 1 S U 0 D fi C D




        H am m ond Su dd ards
                                     SOLICITORS
        ALAN I ftOHOMLLY                  PFTERC METCALF                DAVID W. K. AHMITAGE      CONSULTANTS:                   EMPIRE HOUSfE
        U 1KVOHLCW IS                     CHHISTOPHER W JONES           J PATRICK MITCHELL        ROGER W SUDOARDS esc a .       10 WCCADiLiY
        M)C* IACL E. GREGSON              ANDREW R. JORDAN              CHRISTOPHER MARKS         SIR DESMOND HEAP               •RADFORD B01 3LR
        JOHN 0 . DE MAIN                  SIMON R R STELL               VICHAEI S. HENLfcY        !AK W. WHITSON
        MICHAEL L S H B tltH O            SIMON ft INMAN                ROSAMOND J MARSHALL SMITH                                miPHONB (0374) 734700
        PETER N WIIHRAHAM                 RICHARD W WADE-SMITH          P tfl P W HARLING                                        IfclHX 517201
        J R'CHARD ARCMC.R                 JOHN 0 . BtCKtTT              W UIAM N DOWNS
        BAR&AtlAW I'RANCE                                                                                                        D.X NO. ‘ 1720
                                          0   N IAN GREENFIELD          I UCCl DAMMONE
        C.   N O fl HU M ON               STFPHEN GALE                  ANDREW H. McOOUOAl L                                     FAX (0274) 7 3 7 $ 4 7
        JOHN H C HILLLR                   MARK W HILTON
        IAN R SH U ' l i t WORTH          RCHARD BURNS



        O JK K EI-
                       BN/HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                      1st November 1990
                                                           YC JR REF,                                         DATF




             Dear Nr. Hayes

             Re:       HILLSBOROUGH
i

             Following our conversation yesterday,      Superintendent Bettison
             telephoned me to say the statements you are sending over would take
             longer to collate than was first anticipated and would not be
             delivered to us today.
i
             I am therefore enclosing with this letter my note on the
             Pre-Inquest Review.
3
             Peter is absent from the office today due to illness, but I have
             spoken to him about the matters we discussed, and he will telephone
|            you tomorrow.
i

             Yours^sinyerely




             BELINDA NORCLIFPE




             BY FAX AND BY POST
    |        FAX NO. 0742 523409
    '•                                                                            *
    |        F.A.O. Mr. Peter Hayes
    !        South Yorkshire Police Headquarters
    {        Snig Hill
    j        SHEFFIELD
             South Yorkshire


    '    OFFICES ALSO A I:         BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4*5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TElEX 557202 PAX 444794/421109
                                   JO S E P H S WELL HANOVER WALK {.CC^S l C ^ - a R T P CSMDMt: W f t: r .       • • » :«
 HILLSBOROUOH

 *?QTE OF PRE-IKQPEST REVIEW - MEDICO-LEGAL CEHTRE SHEFFIELD 30TH
 OCTOBER 1990


 Th® Coroner outlined for the benefit of non-lawyers present that
 jthis   hearing was not part of the inquests.   The purpose of the
 meeting was to meet legal representatives and to deal jwith
 {procedural matters.   It was to be treated as a private meeting
^pstween the Coroner and Lawyers, but a meeting at which 4t^er
 ^interested parties were free to attend. The Coroner then requested
 :legal representatives to identify themselves.

 '.Tim King of Counsel said he represented a number of the PR's of the
 'deceased.   He was unable to give definite numbers (although he had
 jbeen instructed by 26 families to date), and he hoped that within a
 [week a definitive list of those families being represented by him
  could be available.    The maximum number was likely to be 42.! He
  said that there may be individuals who had not instructed him, but
  who may at the meeting be applying for representation.
                                                                          i
                                                                          I
 Christopher Russell of Counsel said he had been instructed                       by
 |Barlow Lloyd and Gilbert to represent Superintendent Greenwoods
 !                                                      .                 '
 IStuart Catchpole of Counsel said he had been instructed by Davies
 !Arnold Cooper (Peter Doyle of that firm also being present) to
  represent Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                              t

 IttLncent Hale,     Solicitor,     said    he    represented   Superintendent
 ^rarshall.

 jRichard Manning,     Solicitor,    said    he   represented   Superintendent
 Murray.
                                                                              I
 Paul Issacs of Counsel said he was instructed by Hepworth &
 Chadwick (Chris Coughlin of that firm also being present) to
 represent Chief superintendent Duckenfield.

 Tony Gregory of Keeble Hawsons, solicitor, said he represented the
 insurers of Sheffield City Council and was accompanied by a
 Solicitor from the council.
                                                                              I
 At this point the Coroner established that one individual in <Jourt
 was a member of the press and he asked the person to leave on the
 basis that the meeting not a public meeting and not reportable<
                                                                              !
  Belinda Norcliffe, Solicitor,    said she           represented   The   (£hief
  Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.                                 j
:Peter Jackson,    Solicitor,   said  he  represented The Football
 Supporters Association.      He stated it would be unlikely the
 Association would be unable to have a representative throughout the
IInquest because of funding problems.    He made the comment that if
Ihe could obtain undertakings regarding comments made on Liverpool
 supporters from some parties, then attendance may not be necessary
 in any event.                                                     1

 The Coroner then invited Mrs. O'Brien to speak who confirmed she
 was representing herself as the mother of the deceased John
 O'Brien.

  iThe Coroner then asked all representatives to write into him with
 jfch* names of all those who would be representing or likely to
R e p r e s e n t during the course of the hearing, as he woul<l be
p r o v i d i n g name tags to help both himself and the Transcribers
 :identify representatives.
I
ITim King indicated that on some occasions he would be lead by Ben
 Hytner or indeed that Ben Hytner would be the sole representative.

 The Coroner stated this would not present any problem at all and
 that he would be as reasonable as possible regarding changes of
 representatives so long as the party they were representing did
 have locus standi.

|The Coroner said the venue for the inquests would be the Sheffield
ICouncil chambers, this being the same venue as for the Public
;Inquiry.   He stated the venue may change depending on the numbers
•attending.

iAt this stage, Mr. Holroyd arrived     at   the meeting   and   said he
   presented the Police Federation.

    e Coroner said he had been asked whether there would be space to
 ;store papers and that there was a room in the Town Hall called the
 l^Bafe" which would be made available for this purpose.    Security
 Iwould be at the risk of the individual representatives and th# key
 jwould be in the custody of the City Council.     The room would be
 (opened for access at reasonable hours, e.g. 9 to 10 in the morning
  and 4 to 5 in the afternoon.

 The Coroner anticipated that    he would sit from 10   in the morning
 till about 12.45, would thenrecommence at 1.45 or       2 o'clock and
 rise at about 4 p.m.    There would be a short break   in the morning
 and afternoon. The reason he was not sitting longer    hours wasithat
 he had to consider the Jury who were not as            used to ;such
 proceedings as Lawyers.

 The Coroner said if points of law were raised he would deal jwith
 then as and when necessary, but as he did not wish to waste 4jury
 tine" then he would try to deal with these after 4 p.m. in the
 afternoon *
              ’ 90   11   01   12:06   2   0274   7 35 8 8 4   HOMMONC’ S U D D Q P b   0




 With regard to the scope of the inquests, the Coroner said he had
 already dealt with three questions being who, when and where and
 the remaining question to be considered was MhowM. This is what he
 will be concentrating on.   Clearly he was dealing with 95 separate
 Inquests but it would be impossible to recount the evidence 95
 tines and the evidence would therefore be taken together on all of
 them. He was aware there were differences, for instance there were
jtwo enclosures involved, but he did not think that would affect the
^validity of dealing with the evidence in that way.         Specific
 evidence, for instance in relation only to enclosure 4, would be
 dealt with appropriately.

    The Coroner said he wished to remind everyone that the Inquests
     pre not the Public Inquiry.     They should not expect therefore,

t
i
     ecause there had already been an Inquiry, that there would be a
     |repeat of all that the Taylor Inquiry had done, although there
    would be some duplication and replication.

iThe Coroner then outlined     that witnesses did have certain
^privileges especially the right not to answer incriminating
|quest ions.  if any witnesses wished to exercise their right ithey
iwould be entitled to do so.

.The Coroner said his present intention was to take evidence orally,
jbut at least one witness had died and there may be others whq for
medical or other reasons would be unable to come.          There was
jhowever a huge pool of witnesses to cover relevant points.

|Tim King at this stage rose to say he had a number of submissions
 on the nature and ambit of the evidence, in particular the starting
'points of events and the cut off point.
!
Iflb* Coroner said he took the view that the cut off point was the
" r i v a l of the first ambulance on the pitch which was about 3.15
jp.m.      This was a convenient marker, the time beyond this l^eing
 outside the scope of the Inquest.           The beginning was more
idifficult.     Clearly it would cover the events of the day and also
'previous occurrences in evaluating the situation,    in principle it
 would start on the day with events outside, would work into the
jground and more and more witnesses would be called as matters got
jcloser to the event itself.      As an example he might for instance
 want a summary of traffic conditions but would not be calling a lot
jof evidence on that point.
    t
    He said he intended calling a number of categories of witnesses,
    the first being supporters, but that he would be sympathetic if
    they refused to attend. A supporter covered relatives, friend^ and
    other contacts of the deceased and indeed anyone who could shed
    light on the events of the day.     The second category was local
    residents, the third were shopkeepers etc., the fourth were other
    independents, for example those professionally present such jas a
    media people, the fifth category were Club employees, for example
    turnstile operators and stewards and the sixth category was of
    course the Police. With regard to these there were a few [Police]
    and at least one other person whose statements were CJA Statements
    under PACE. It was his normal practice at the moment if there was
h«C e t t e n -^ }°         lt read out or Played on an audio tape.
             would do that her* and we would therefore hear those
jstatements on audio tapes*

[The Coroner then said he would not circulate a list of witnesses in
 advance because:-

1) This was an inquisitorial inquiry conducted by the Coroner. The
   books available to him indicated that it was quite proper for
   him not to circulate them and he did not intend to do it.

2) In relation to statements he certainly did not have the
   administrative capacity to deal with the circulation of the*.

    He had circulated summaries at the first hearings and felt that
II S f 7     "bounced bac*" on him as representatives were not happy
    that evidence actually given always coincided with what appeared
j   on the summaries,

jlfe was therefore not prepared to circulate statements in advance
jbut would make available names of proposed witnesses for the
{following 1 to 3 days to give representatives some idea as to what
jwas coming.    Also, witnesses would be allowed to refresh their
taenories fro* statements on the day, but he would not expect
Witnesses to take statements with them into the witness box.

Regarding Lord Justice Taylor's Report, he did not intend to admit
jthat report as part of the evidence at the Inquest.  To get it in
las evidence he would have to read it in toto and this would not
jserve any useful purpose and would cause problems.
1
Similarly, the Transcripts would not be used.    He was fully aware
           parties had and would have access to the Transcripts and
n m would fully expect parties to look at them.   He did not mind
questioning on them so long as that questioning was relevant.    He
would not however permit a witness who wanted to exercise the right
not to answer questions to have quotations put to him fro* the
jTranscript.   He wanted representatives to use their common sense
bnd they would be allowed to ask legitimate questions.    There may
be odd occasions when he would have to breach what he had said
above and the Transcript would have to be used,      but he thought
this would be a rarity.

      regard to exhibits, he wished to restrict the number of
iocuments put in as exhibits. He did not want hundreds of pages to
»e put before the Jury if they could not absorb them. What he had
Ln mind was for example the Green Guide, which could be introduced
is an exhibit but he would not expect the Jury to read it from
sover to cover.     It would however be appropriate perhaps for
representatives to make reference to certain paragraphs.
  Tim King said in relation to the "mini Inquests" he had a growing
inumber of instructions on individual cases, particularly as to
  factual matters.  He wishes to have the liberty to rectify factual
  omissions and inaccuracies from the earlier hearings, and asked if
i the Coroner would consider how best to deal with these if thev were
  listed for him in writing.

;The Coroner said that he did not intend re-opening all 95 on that
 basis, although he himself had received correspondence on a number
iof individual cases.    if the matters Mr. King was talking nbout
 could be put properly to him and if he could consider them and as a
 result felt a point was justified and legitimate and proper to deal
|with, he would consider it sympathetically.
!


JgTim King then said in relation to the cut off point, he wished to
^ H a k e a submission that that should be extended to 4 p.m. as a
 |number of those represented felt the Inquests should go into the
 |medical attention given to those crushed in relation to the
 !allegation that there was an absence of proper medical care and
   facilities which may have lead to death or indeed quicken the death
   of those who had died.

iHie Coroner said this was getting into legal submissions.  All had
jheard what he had to say and that he could not give a ruling
Ibecause he was going beyond procedural aspects.   At the moment he
 was not pursuaded that he would want to go down that particular
 road.

 Tim King said he was equally concerned at the decision not to
Icirculate the names of those the Coroner intended to call. He said
:the great advantage to having a list was that it would give an
|opportunity to ask for further witnesses to be called.

      e Coroner said he had already pre-empted this suggestion, as he

«     d written to every represented body or individual asking if they
      'had people to be considered as witnesses and had had only two or
    three replies.   The mere fact that a list was not circulated did
    not stop anyone suggesting someone should be called as a witness.

    Tim King said there were a vast number of statements available and
    he had been looking at it from the point of looking who would be
    called and seeing if there were any MomissionsM and not visa versa.

    The Coroner said he would reconsider the point, but he did not know
    if he could oblige on it.

!Tim King said that in relation to the Taylor Report there should be
 certain paragraphs as to fact which could go before the Jury which
 would help them and save time. He outlined the underlining process
 that he understood had been done for the Contribution Hearing and
 suggested that that might be appropriate.
                 ’ 90   11-'01   12! 23          S   0 2 74   735884       HAMMOND   SUDDGPD




I                                  ;
                                           -6-
I                                                                      I
The Coroner said one of the reasons why he was reluctant to do this
•was because putting a paragraph before the Jury did not mean that
it was necessarily accepted by everyone.
i

Tim King them asked whether the Taylor Transcript could be used in
icross examination.
i
iThe Coroner said that was correct within certain limits.        His
'difficulty was, that the Public Inquiry had taken place on slightly
'different premises than his hearing and he was reluctant to use it
ifor that reason.
!

jrim King then also queried whether video evidence would be used.

TO»e Coroner said it was his intention to use the Compilation Video
■and indeed one or two other videos, for example the 1988 video.
iHe also stressed he had no facilities for providing copies of any
 videos and would not distribute them.   I f that was not acceptable
jhe would rather not use videos, but he did wish to do so.

    :Stuart Catchpole stated that in relation to the Taylor Report, it
     would be beneficial     if the Jury could see certain agreed
     paragraphs.   He indicated that he would be more than willinig to
     participate in an attempt to agree certain paragraphs to go before
     the Jury.
    The Coroner said that may be an answer to the question and he would
    |leave it up to the parties. If they could all agree on some of the
    'paragraphs going before the Jury then that would be acceptable, if
     they could not agree then the Taylor Report would not go before
    :them.
    i                                  ;


         ristopher Russell queried whether the categories outlined by the

    t
    I
         roner was the order in which they would be called.

     The Coroner stated he was not           intending that beingthe case,                     that
    |the evidence would effectively          be taken chronologically.

     Christopher Russell queried whether the new matters relating to the
    |earlier hearings mentioned by Tim King would be circulated >to other
    1parties, as these were questions which should be made public.

    iThe Coroner said he would consider the point.

        Christopher Russell made the point that providing the Jury with
        selected parts of the Taylor Report was not        in his view
        satisfactory.
        The Coroner confirmed that if it could not be agreed between the
        parties then he would stick to what he had originally said.
Vincent Hale said that Mr. Jackson for The Football Supporters
Association had raised the question of undertakings and that he
would be happy to give such an undertaking but may not be able to
if other parties failed to go along with it.
i

    The Coroner then asked for authority to circulate to all parties a
    list of the legal representatives and all agreed.
i

|Paul Issacs then raised the following points:-

        1)   Whether the video evidence was for instance to be shown at the
!            beginning of the Inquest or to be shown to clarify certain


             The Coroner said he was    hoping that video could   be shown and
!            that would be it as the    purpose was to give the   Jury an
|            overview.  It was to be    used in that respect as   an aid but
j            there may be tiroes when   the video would have to   be re-examined,

 2)          If the Taylor Report could not be used at all unless certain
I            facts could be agreed by all parties, how far was it to be
             used at all*

        3)   Could the Taylor Transcripts be used for cross-examination
             purposes.
    'Paul Issacs specified that he wished to make legal submissions on
    |this point.
    i

     The Coroner did not answer the second question but in relation to
    'question 3. he said once again he knew all parties had copies of
    ^ k e Transcripts but he would not allow the Transcript to be used to
    ^ i t witnesses in a position where they would say that they would
    !not answer a question, i.e. he would not allow anyone to pursue a
    'point which would be oppressive.    In certain other cases it may be
    !easier to use the Transcript to put points to them and that he
    !wanted to be flexible and that he may indeed have to modify his
    Istance on the Transcript.
    I                                     !

    'Paul Isaacs specifically asked the question if a witness said,a, b
    {and c on giving evidence but had previously to the Taylor Inquiry
    |said x, y and z would he be able to cross-examine on that basics.

        The Coroner said it would depend entirely on what the a, b $nd c
        and x, y and z was.    He then stated that on the point he would
        clearly have to have a session on legal submissions.

        Paul Issacs then raised the question of recalling witnesses after
        they had completed their evidence.

        ;The Coroner said he may have to do this from time to time*
 Belinda Norcliffe then asked whether the Coroner would permit
-documentation sent to him to be placed before the Jury, the
 intention not being  for the Jury to read Bundles from cover to
 cover, but for documents to be available for the Jury to "dip
jinto".
1
The Coroner said he was still considering this point.

 Christopher Russell then queried what the documents were and why
|they had not been circulated to other parties.

!Belinda Norcliffe explained the documents were three volumes, the
jfirst two of which were volumes 1 and 2 of the South Yorkshire
!Police documents to the Inquiry, and that volume 3 was a selection
  f documents available at the Public Inquiry and the recent Civil

t ontribution Hearing.  There were no new documents as such.   They
  had not been sent to other parties but simply to the Coroner as it
 was his decision as to whether they were to go before the Jury or
not.
 The Coroner again said he was still considering the matter and had
 not decided whether any party could put documentation in in the
 form of Bundles or whether he wished representatives to produce
 individual documents as and when they were referred to.      In any
Ievent he said 20 copies of items would be in his view required.

!Peter Jackson said with regard to undertakings he would be happy to
jliaise with any party*

iThe Coroner said he foresaw problems in anybody giving undertakings
jand that the matter nay not be resolved.

iPeter Jackson then queried further whether the witness list would
    available three full days in advance.

|The Coroner said he was hoping to do this showing at least those
jwho had provisionally been called.

|Peter Jackson then queried whether a daily transcript would be
'available and the Coroner said he would refer to that point later.

 Mrs. O'Brien stated she was very concerned about the cut off point.
 The Coroner pointed out that she was attempting to make a legal
!submission and that would have to be reserved for later.

    The Coroner then established that no party had any other procedural
    points to raise and stated that he did intend to have Transcripts
    available on a next day basis.     He requested that any party who
    wanted   daily  transcripts   should  write   to  him   before  the
    commencement of the Inquests, but parties would of course be
    charged. He would also happily arrange for odd days to be provided
    on that basis but he would have to have sufficient notice of this
    for it be possible.
!with relation to the length of the Inquests, the Coroner said he
 was unable to specify how long they would last, but that the
 hearing would end for Christmas on the 18th or 19th December.    He
 did not think the Inquests would have finished by then and the plan
 was   to resume on the 7th January and to continue until they were
 finished.   He pointed out that illness, for instance amongst the
IJury, may lead to adjournments.
i

!with regard to witnesses, he is going to try and group them
  together and further he would be surprised if there were less
j witnesses to be called than at the Taylor Inquiry (174) and there
jcould possibly be more.
fen the 28th November, 6th December and 9th January it would not be
p o s s i b l e to use the Council's Chamber as Council meetings were
|taking place and         in relation to the 28th November, he was
 Iconsidering taking the Jury out for a further site visit to
 'Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

    |The Coroner said he did intend to call a few expert witnesses right
     at the end of the Inquests but he wished to make it clear that
     their   evidence would be restricted to what is relevant to an
    !Inquest and would not therefore be the same as evidence which would
     be given at a Civil Trial.
      He then pointed out that the press would of course be entitled to
    i be present throughout the Inquests themselves .
 !In relation to running order, he intended to ask questions first
 land the only other rule was that if any witness was the witness of
 !a particular party then they would question the witness last.
 1Apart from that the representatives should agree amongst themselves
^£^he order for questioning witnesses.

    |The Coroner said it appeared        there would be various legal
     submissions made to him and these   would have to be dealt withiat a
    !further meeting which was set for   the morning of the 19th November
    Iand he would arrange for the Jury    to attend only on the afternoon
     of that day.
     Stuart Catchpole queried whether the list for the first three days
     witnesses would be available for Monday the 19th and the Coroner
     confirmed this would be sent through to representatives.

    ITim King asked the Coroner to consider again the question of
     circulating a full witness list. The Coroner said if he decided to
     do this prior to the 19th, he would circulate it to parties, and if
     not representations should be made again on the 19th. The Coroner
     at this stage said another reason for him being reluctant to
     circulate the list was that it could be that once evidence, gets
     under way certain witnesses on the list could effectively:come
     superfluous and would be removed and he was wary of the parties
     relying on his original list as definitive.
Tin King ~said he appreciated the point the Coroner was making but
it would still be easier for all if a list was available.

The Coroner said he would give serious consideration to the point.
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P.FA.                                                                             Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Financial Officer                             Please reply to:                                     Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                               P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

O u rfb f   COM/AH/RAW                         Yourw .                                              Date:   13 November 1990
This matter is being dealt with by   Mr A Harr iSOI1                                                Telephone ext   299




     PRIVATE AMD CONFIDENTIAL
     R B Wells Esq
     Chief Constable                                                                      MMisuaf
     South Yorkshire Police                            South Yorkshire Police
     Police Headquarters                                        lix d
     Snig Hill                                               I 4 NOV 1990
     SHEFFIELD
     S3 8LY
                                                          C h i e f C c n ~ ' " ' ' ''•




     Dear
     POLICE AUTHORITY - 16 NOVEMBER 1990

     I enclose for your personal use a copy of a letter which I have circulated to
     members of the Authority only in view of the nature of the correspondence and
     the applications being made for judicial review.
     Yours sincerely




     R C Johnston
     Clerk and Financial Officer



     Enc


     WP006029
                                                                                      fisif    mt I    ©RFlDENtlAl
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                              POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, BA., I.PJFA                                                         Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Finandal Officer                           Please reply to:                    Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                          P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

OurRtf      SW/MR                        Your Rtf.                                             12 November 1990
TtiiimMttarkb   e i n g b y      Mr S Walker                                   Tth phorm ma.     520




     To: Members of the Authority




   ■ Dear Member
     APPLICATION BY POLICE OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL SUPPORT IN CONNECTION
     WITH THE INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF PEOPLE AT THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
      Further to the meeting of the Police Authority on 2 November, when it was
      resolved to reject the applications at that stage. I enclose a copy of a
      letter I have since received from the Solicitors acting for Chief
      Superintendent Duckenrield and in the light of the information in that
      letter, I have decided to reconvene the Police Authority to reconsider the
      applications.
      You will no doubt see and hear through the media in the next few days if
      this has not already been brought to your attention, that both the Police
      Federation and the Superintendents Association are to make application to
      the court for a judicial review of the Authority’s decision on the 2
      November. Copies of the correspondence I have so far received in this
      connection are also enclosed and it will be my intention to update members
      on this at the meeting on Friday.
     For members’ assistance, also enclosed is the original report of the Chief
     Constable in support of the applications.
      Yours sincerely



      R C JiWinston-^—
      Clerk and Financial Officer
So lic ito rs                T e lep h o n e
                             0532 430391
C lo t h H all C o u r t     T e lex                                                  HEPWORTH
l n f i r m a r \ S tree t   557917
Leeds                        F acsim ile                                              & CHADWICK
LSI :    jb                  0 5 3 : 456188                                           A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                             D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                                              7 November 1990



                                                                                      ouftefcitixr            L/CCC/3/mci/
                                                                                                               DUCKENFIELD

Mr R C Johnston
Clerk to the South Yorkshire Joint
Secretariat
PO 37
Regent Street
                                                                                      SYJS
Barnsley
S YORKSHIRE S70 2DX

SENT BY FAX 0226 730442 AND POST

weal Dji

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield
Hillsborough Inquests

As you are aware, we represent Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in
respect of his position in connection with his personal legal position
arising out of the Hillsborough disaster. You know that the Sheffield
Coroner is due to resume the Inquests on the 19th November 1990. It is
our view, and one shared by our Counsel, that"’Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield is at risk if not properly legally represented at the
Inquests.

We have received a note of the reasons for the decision not to provide
funding from Mr S Walker.

As you will know, both the South Yorkshire Chief Constable, Richard
Wells, and the Deputy Chief Constable, Peter Hayes, wholly supported
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's application. You are aware of the
submissions in support. There is no question that our Client was acting
other than in good faith in the performance of his public duty on the day
*• -**• •»-   •

So far as we are aware, ail the other main interested parties are likely
to be legally represented throughout the hearing.      We know that the
Hillsborough Family Support Group are funding junior Counsel, Solicitor
and, in their own words "when the need arises", leading Counsel. The'
Chief Constable will be represented by Counsel and Solicitor as will the
Club.

The Police Authority should be in no doubt as to this risk which Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield faces in the absence of adequate legal
representation.    The following are the most significant factors when
assessing the risk:-




                               C > C Ar»mtrv       D J Or»v       A K Biown              OftnPnnoiwi                       db>T>« U*
  D t I bvkc-                  It M Ponrnor        J It Hup-      I A fUefwffton                                   S o a rtt w tte condun
  i P M«rjrn<of<               PEA Wtftic’         ) M fo ae’     D M $irac*uri                       *            OfN
  i H Rn«n                     R Ctopn«r>          ; ft Cvrw      Afctoft J iumton*      Drffe} .U n d o r.
  J H Frniipn                  A U LMrhmorc        It M Amcor                            MmcM t'Nrwcauit
  P i S Ttompaor               PUP                 P A Srtiit'
                                                                                         Warrmfio*'
                               It C D»«*           ft J Hwroek*
CONTI Nl AThJN




     1•      THE DPP AND PUBLIC PROSECUTION

                 It has been made clear to us, in writing, that    notwithstanding
                 that the DPP has decided that at present there is"insufficient"
                 evidence to support a prosecution, the door remains open such that
                 any new or additional evidence which comes to light in the
                 Coroner's Inquests will be sent to the DPP for further
                 consideration of the criminal matters.

     2.      PRIVATE PROSECUTION

                 We attach extracts from the press relating to the possibility of a
                 private prosecution following in the wake of the DPP's decision.
                 It seems to us that there is every likelihood that such a private
                 prosecution say be attempted if fresh evidence* comes to light
                 during the course of the forthcoming Inquest.

     3-      POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATION1985     REGULATION 7NOTICES

                 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield is subject to five such Notices
                 and the question of disciplinary proceedingswill follow      the
                 conclusion of the Inquests.

     It seems to us that one thing is certain which may affect the above,
     that nobody can foresee what evidence mav arise out of the Inquests.   We
     have today received from the Coroner a provisional list of the witnesses
     who the Coroner may decide to call. The list exceeds 200 in number.    We
     are told that the great majority of those witnesses did not give evidence
     at the Public Inquiry. They mav not have given evidence in the DPP
     investigations. There is, therefore, quite likely to be new evidence
     which emerges and which is likely to come to the attention of the DPP.

     The risks are very real.       Your assessment of the risk to Chief
     Superintendent Duckenfield is "small", whereas, our view is that the risk
     is considerable. Without the appropriate legal representation, any risk
     cannot be adequately guarded against. You are aware that the legal
     representatives of the Chief Constable have confirmed that there exists a
     potential conflict of interest between the Chief Constable and Chief
     Superintendent Duckenfield, and that accordingly, he requires separate
     representation.

     The effect of the decision to reject the application, is that Chief
     Superintendent Duckenfield will not have the representation which he
     requires in order that his interests are protected. Our Client has been
     at risk since the tragedy and hence his private funds have been seriously
     depleted. The funds left available to him under the terms of his private
     Insurance policy with Allianz/Cornhill may provide representation on 5 or
     6 days of what is anticipated to be an Inquest which may run to 8 or 9
     weeks.

     From a practical point of view, we would have anticipated legal costs to
     represent Chief Superintendent Duckenfield at the Inquests to amount to
     something in the region of (£35,OOO^Further, it is our understanding that
     the Home Office would provide the-^Police Authority with a rebate of the
     order of 50% of the financial backing provided to our Client.
r O N T I M ATION



    In all the circumstances, therefore, we would ask you to take immediate
    steps to reconvene a meeting of the Authority to reconsider their
    decision and exercise their discretion in his favour for the reasons set
    out above. As time is of the essence, may we please hear from you within
    the next 48 hours.

    Would you please not hesitate to contact the Writer, Mr Coughlin, should
    you require any further information and should any personal
    5ePre*entation 139 considered appropriate or suitable, then the Writer, or
                         "Uuiu oe naDDV to at-


    YQ\JrJ faS


                    un&ui
    Encl.
                                                        :                                                                                   t
   Anger over Hillsborough
   'no charges’ decision
  I f MM WOODCOCK
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Is very surprising.
    BEREAVED relatives reacted with anger                                                                                                                              If 96 Sheffielders had been killed and a
    and astonishment last night after it was                                                                                                                           targe number Injured I think there would
    announced that police officer* on duty at                                                                                                                          be deep criticism In Sheffield of the DPP's
    the time of the Hillsborough disaster will                                                                                                                         conclusion.”
    not be prosecuted for manslaughter or                                                                                                                                The Deputy Chief Constable of South
    any other criminal offence.                                                                                                                                        Yorkshire, Mr Peter Hayes, said the news
      The Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr                                                                                                                          brought relief to his force.
    Allan Green, said In a statement that                                                                                                                                In a statement he said: "The uncer
   there was Insufficient evidence upon                                                                                                                                talntv until now has caused some officers
   which court charges could be brought.                                                                                                                               and their families a great deal of distress
       His decision was Immediately con­                                                                                                                              The director's decision Is not a matter for
   demned as unacceptable and a whitewash                                                                                                                             self-congratulation on the part of South
    by Merseyside MPs and families of the 95                                                                                                                                         Police, although It brines
   football fans crushed to death nt the                                                                                                                              with it a measure of relief.
   disaster.
      Mr Barry Devonslde. secretary of                                                                                                                                   " « r'efv tr*ve's In many guises and
                                                                                                                                                                      S o u th Y o rk sh ire Police h as know n
   th e H illsbo ro ug h F am ilies Support                 MR HICKS                                                                                                  — since Hillsborough — its own particu­
   Group, who lost a teenage son m the                                                                MR miCKENFIELD                     MR FLANNERY
                                                       Thoroughly disgusted                              'Very relieved'             'Conclusion surprising*          lar form of suffering "
   tragedy, said: "I am devastated —
   gutted would be the appropriate word.                                                                                                                                 PoUce refused to comment further
                                                           Labour's MP for Walton. Mr Eric great upset at this decision, although                                     pending civil action they are taking
      "I find It unacceptable that in the               Heffer, said: "This, In a sense. Is a there are a few families who wanted to let
   worst sporting disaster this country                 whitewash.                                                                                                   against Sheffield Wednesday and East­
   has ever seen, watched by 54,000 people                                                                         the matter lie.”                                  wood and Partners to seek a contribution
                                                           "The police did not do their Job                          The news will not affect cl vll compensa­       towards compensation yvhich has been
I and viewed by millions across the world               properly. Whether or not It was criminal, tion cases at present belngdrawn up but It
j on television, the DPP can suggest there              there was a failure on the part of the means that inquests can reopen and be                                 voluntarily agreed to be paid by the Sout h
 : Is Insufficient evidence."                                                                                                                                        Yorkshire force to the bereaved and
                                                        po ice to deal with It. Some Merseyside c o m p le te d In to th e d e a t h s o f th e                      injured.
j T he H illsborough Fam ily S upport                   police officers who attended the match as supporters.                                                           The secretary of the South York
. Group chairman. Mr Trevor Hicks,                      Liverpool
                                                        — - — r v " * supporters
                                                                      “ ' • r i ™ 1 ‘ v i o were amazed   at the
   pledged not to let the issue of prosecu-
                                                                                                  am                 Last night the police chief In charge at        shire branch of the Police Federa
I tlons drop.                                           way the match was handled.'                                the fateful game remained suspended               tlon, PC Paul Mlddup, said: MI have
                                                          In a brief statement, the DPP said pending Internal disciplinary measures                                 no doubt that there Is a feeling of
      Mr HIcks, who lost his two teenage                that after lengthy and detailed Investi­ but he welcomed news that he would not
| daughters In the disaster, said he was               gation he found too Uttle evidence upon face criminal charges.                                               relief In police stations, although we
   th o ro u g h ly d isg u ste d by th e DPP’s                         base a prosecution against                                                                  never expected any other outcome.**
. decision                                                                                                           Chief Supt David Duckenfield, re in e d            The leader of Sheffield City Coun
                                                                                                                  and smiling at his home In Touey,
      "Once «CTlnwe h ave had to suffer what           ball Club? Sheffield ^ H ^ C o u n c i r ° m               Sheffield, said: “I’m very relieved. This        e ll, C oun C liv e B e tts, a d d e d : "W e
   , — *i. « descrtbed ho        a s a« travesty
                                        unvcsij v i
                                                 of    licensing authority, and Eastwood and has lifted a great weight off my mlnb I                                have always believed that the council, as
  justice. It Is no good having the police             E?r^2eF i'..fl¥ lneertng consultants to cannot say anything else because there                               licensing authority, was In no way
  Investigating the police, or trying to have          Sheffield Wednesday.                                                                                         responsible for the disaster, although we
  the Crown Prosecution Service prosecut­                                                                         are still disciplinary proceedings pending        recognise that the council, along with
                                                          The tragedy happened In April. 1989. against me.
  ing the establishment ~ both of them                 when police opened an exit gate to relieve                                                                  other local authorities, have had to look
                                                                                                                          Duckenfield has been suspended on
  prefer to cop out.                                   cnishlne outside the ground, sending fullMr                     pay since the publication hut summer        carefully at any Inadequacies In their
             IJ"d It absolutely unbelievable           hundreds of Liverpool fans on to already of Lord Justice Taylor's report Into the                           procedures In line with the recom
  that the DPP can say there Is no evidence            overcrowded terraces.                                                                                       m e n d a tlo n s m ade by Lord J u s tic e
  when the whole world saw what hap­                                                                              d is a s te r accused him of " f re e z in g ”   Taylor."
                                                          Solicitors representing the bereaved at Its height. The report also said that
  pened before its own eyes.                           families said most relatives would be poor rollclng was largely to blame for the                                 Eastwood and Partners, the Shef
     "The first stage now is to take legal             ?"5T.y’ upset and disappointed at the tragedy.                                                              field-based engineering consultants to
  advice, but one thing I can say for certain          DPP s decision.                                                                                             the club, declined to comment.
  — we won’t let It drop."                                                                                           Other senior officers cleared by the DPP
                                                          Mr Blaise Smith, of the Hillsborough Include Supt Roger Marshall, the man                                    T he M erseyside c h a irm a n of th e
     The labour MP for Liverpool Broad-               steering committee, said: "This will who opened the exit gate. Assistant Chief
  g reen . Mr T e rry F ield s, said ’’My                                                                                                                          Football Supporters' Association. Mr
                                                      always be on the conscience of the Constable Walter Jackson, the most                                        Peter Jackson, a solicitor, said:" We t hink
  reaction is one of shock and disgust.               individuals responsible and people who senior officer at the ground, and Supt
     "I am sure that meetings will be                                                                                                                              Justice ought to have been seen to be done
                                                      are to " i m e will have to live with the                   B ern a rd M u rray, •- c h a rg e o f th e      and we would have liked to see the
  speedily convened among the bereaved                disas
  and others to enable steps to be taken to                                                                       police control roor           Hillsborough       criminal liability of sonic of the very
                                                           J h , . Drily of families were hoping during the FA Cup st„,                         tal.               senior officers tested in the courts ”
      'eal to a h ig h er authority This              that prosecutions                would     be  made  and
                                                               ...in                      ,11,.,                    The labour MP for Hillsborough.
                                                                                                                          Mr MoHlii Flnnnorv             i n III   Backrround        Pape 3
     Private prosecutions -
    likely as DPP rules out
     Hillsborough charges                                                            9,500 q u e stio n a ire s , 5.341
PRIVATE prosecutions are                                By ColinWright
expected to be brought by                                                            statements, 2,392 documents
many of the relatives of the 95                   ground engineers] or Sheffield     — and 71 hours of videotape
football supporters killed in                     C ity C ouncil [th e gro un d      were considered.                  .
last year's Hillsborough Sta­                     licensing authority] in connec­       Mr Hayes said last night:
dium disaster after the Direc­                    tion with the disaster.”           "The director’s decision is not j
tor of Public Prosecution ruled                      Officers of West Midlands       a m atter for self congratulation
y esterday th a t no crim inal                    Police were called in by Mr        on the part of South Yorkshire
charg es should be brought                        Peter Wright, the then chief       Police, although it brings with
a g a in s t police o r officials                 Constable of South Yorkshire,      it a measure of relief.
involved in the tragedy.                          to conduct an independent             " I am all too acutely aware of
   M r Alan Green, QC, who                        inquiry the day after the trag­    the 95 souls who lost their lives
studied thousands of s ta te ­                    edy on April 15.                   and of the distress and grief of
ments and interviews resulting                       Ninety-five Liverpool fans      their families and friends.
from the £4-5million. 16-month                    were crushed to death on the          “ Grief travels in many guises
inquiry by more than 400 offi­                    overcrowded Leppings Lane          and South Yorkshire Police
cers from W est M idlan ds                        terraces of Sheffield Wednes­      has know n, since H illsbor­
Police, said there was “ insuffi­                 day's Hillsborough ground at       ough, its own particular form
cient evidence" to merit crimi­                   the start of the FA Cup semi­      of suffering. It is now for other
nal proceedings.                                  final match with Nottingham        proceedings to determine what
   The decision has caused an                     Forest.                            were the mistakes and failings
outcry on Merseyside where                           Lord Justice Taylor, who        that gave rise to the disaster.”
many of the bereaved had been                     headed the public inquiry into        Sheffield City Council and
pressing for charges of man­                      the disaster, was highly critical  Sheffield Wednesday Football
slaughter and corporate man­                      of the actions of many South       Club, both criticised by the
slaughter to be brought against                   Yorkshire police officers in        inquiry chairman, also issued :
police officers, and club and                     planning for and dealing with      short statem ents saying they
licensing officials                               events at the game.                 were satisfied and unsurprised
   M r E ddie S p e a ritt, from                     In his interim report follow­   at the DPP's decision.
R uncorn, whose 14-year-old                        ing the seven-week bearing he        D e s p ite       y e s t e r d a y 's
 son. Adam, died at Hillsbor­                      laid the bulk of the blame for    announcem ent the Hillsbor­
 ough, said he spoke for many                      the tragedy on the police, criti­  ough affair is still far from con­
 afte r hearing of the D PP's                      cising in particular Chief Supt    cluded. Inquests into the 95
 decision                                          David Duckenfield. the ground      d e a th s w e re o p e n e d an d
   “ My reaction is one of sheer                   controller on the day, who, he     adjourned in Sheffield earlier
                                                   said “ froze" when faced with
                                                   the situation.
   ‘Shock and disgust’                                M r Duckenfield. 45, has been      Decision a ‘measure
                                                   suspended from the force on
     on Merseyside at                              full pay for more than a year              of relief’for
   inquiry ‘whitewash’                             following the publication of the       South Yorks Police
                                                   interim findings.
                                                      Several other officers who
disgust. British justice is obvi­                  held senior positions on the this year pending the decision.
ou sly so m e th in g th a t has                    day of the match have since They will now be re-opened i
ceased to exist.                                   b een tr a n s fe r re d to oth er and verdicts returned.              1
   "H o w can 95 p eo p le be                      duties outside Sheffield police       South Yorkshire Police will i
squasbed to deatb and no one                        headquarters.                     clash in the courts with three
held responsible? I wilt cer­                         Mr Duckenfield. who with other parties implicated in the
tainly be pursuing a private                        others may still face internal disaster. The force has agreed
prosecution.”                                       disciplinary action, said last to pay compensation to more
   M r Terry Fields, Labour MP                      night that the announcement than 1,000 victims of the trag­
fo r L iverpool B road green ,                      was " a great weight off my edy without accepting liability.
described the announcement                          mind."                               It is ta k in g legal action
as "an absolute scandal".                             M r P e te r H ayes, deputy against Sheffield Wednesday,
   “ My initial reaction is one of                  chief constable of South York­ Eastwood and Partners and
shock and disgust. I am sure                        shire, said he was extremely Sheffield City Council, in an
that meetings will be hastily                       glad that the DPP had reached attempt to recoup a proportion
convened among the bereaved                         his decision so quickly after of the cash.
and others to enable steps to                       being presented with evidence        The Liverpool solicitors con­
 be taken to appeal to a higher                     two w eeks ago. More than sortium representing the com­
 authority.”                                                                          pensation claimants said last
   Mr Eric Heffer, Labour MP                                                          night that the DPP's ruling
 for Walton, said the inquiry                                                         would have no effect on the
 was a whitewash.                                                                     settlements.
   “The police did not do their                                                          A spokeswoman said: "The
 job properly.                                                                        decision not to prosecute is not
   " T h e re w as n eg lect and                                                      going to have any practical
 there were mistakes made and                                                         effect on the compensation
 decisions taken that should                                                          claim s because we already
 never have been taken."                                                              have an agreement with the
    In explaining the DPP's deci­                                                     insurers of South Yorkshire
 sion a Crown Prosecution Ser­                                                        Police.
 vice s ta te m e n t said " M r                                                         "It has an emotional effect
 Green has concluded that there                                                       though and I am sure that our
 is insufficient evidence upon                                                        claimants will be both disap­
 which prosecution for man­                                                           pointed and surprised."
 slaughter or any other criminal                                                         Although criminal proceed­
 o ffen ce may be b ro u g h t                                                         ings have now been ruled out
 aga inst the South Yorkshire                                                          several police officers still face
 Police. Sheffield Wednesday                                                           internal disciplinary action
  Football             C lu b.    M essrs                                              which could include dismissal
  Ea <t \ \ o o * l a n i l Pjrtm-r*. [ l l i e           Lord Justice T;n lor         from the       iro
                         RUSSELL JONES & WALKER
                                                                                                                                                                 SOLICITORS,

                         Swinto n H o u s e 324 G rav's I nn Road L o n d o n W C l X S D H Tele ohone                                                   071 8         3     7      ,24 hour 0 71 837 0600)
                                                                                       Fax 07) 837 294} Telex ’ .*616 D X Z02




      The Solicitor to the South
      Yorkshire Police Authority                                                                                                                                                 Ref
      Joint Secretariat
      P.O. Box 37                                                                                                          m                          50               ^RefJV/NEC/
      Regent Street                                                                                                              *.•                                  / uaie 7 November 1990
      Barnsley
      SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                                                                            * C * / C» ^
                                                                                                                                                               S                       BY FAX AND POST
      S70 2DX
                                                                                                                                                                                            URGENT
                                                                                                                                                                                       Ho. 0226 730442



      Dear Sir,
      RE : HILLSBOROUGH 1NOUFST

      fSw ^ eeeliSVV 0U Kre aware-,we act for the Police Federation of England
      & Wales. We have been consulted by them on behalf of those of their
      members whose conduct will be in issue at the forthcoming inquest into the
      deaths which were occasioned by the Hillsborough tragedy.
      Our clients made an application to the Police Authority for financial
      assistance to provide them with legal representation at the forthcoming
      77 / ^ 0 $' ™ eir application was made in the light of Home Office circular,
      'v          ,^e understand that their request was denied, at a special meeting
      of the Police Authority held on the 2nd November.
      We believe that the decision of the Police Authority was unreasonable and
      we have instructions to challenge it by means of an application for
      judicial review. We intend to make that application early next week. It
      seems to us that the Home Secretary, as the author of the circular in
      question is an interested party and we shall seek a direction that notice
      of our application is served upon him.
  In order to supply the Court with the reasons which lie behind the decision
  which was made on the 2nd November, we shall be grateful if you will supply
  us with copies, of the reports and other documents which were laid before
  the committee which met, and if you will supply us with the reasons which
  the committee gave for reaching their decision. We shall be happy to meet
  your reasonable copying, and delivery charges in this connection.
                                                                                                                                                                      cont/d....




j M   Urfhbc- T D B          I J   \ V » l k c J| I   Wh .ifhf.id R J Turnf • R \ |       Abt*' 1 R          f l c u h c t (» <     Sol U N I )    O B<>fr R \     PJ <r * P J         J M P < ol mj r. R (           Unn,..- D R
      JL   R«*k - s   R,s k.r E J o     (oopeiS(<         Injurr. \   B   Hoiimd J C         ( U u c \ \ i j l , a r r >i S L    tttbf »   * R     Tu.*fPR     Mh u « * t J M     P,tt* S J N   A l l f . C < i* s n h a * i ) <   W jU f


                                                          R egulated      b\    T hf   Law      Societ'         in t h f        conduct    of Investm ent         Business

                                                          L O N D O N          I .U O S       B I R M I N G H A M                  R R | ^ ( ) |     \ I A\(     H E S T E R
                                                               PsgfNo




                                     2


You will be aware that the inquest is due to start on the 19th November and
so we should be grateful if you would treat this request as most urgent.
Yours faithfully,




RUSSELL JONES & WALKER




                                                                              • •
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P.FA.                                                             Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Financial Officer                             Please reply to:                      Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                              P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

O ur R ef   COM/AH/LAD                      Your Ref.                              O a t*   12 November 1990
This maUsr is being dealt with by   Mr A Ham'SOn                                   Telephone S S 9



     TO:      Members of the Police Authority
              cc Chief Constable
                  Press


     Dear Member
     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
     A special meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority will be held at
     10.00 am on Friday 16 November 1990 at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat,
     Regent Street, Barnsley.
     Car parking for members will be available at the rear of the building.
     Yours faithfully
            A______________________




     R C Johnston
     Clerk and Financial Officer
      A G E N D A

              Urgent Items To determine whether there are any additional items of
              business which by reason of special circumstances the Chairman is of the
              opinion should be considered at this meeting; the reason(s) for such
              urgency to be stated.
              To consider the exclusion of the public and press from the meeting before
              discussion takes place on the following item of business, on the grounds
              that in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public
              and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
              information within the meaning of the Local Government Act, 1972, as
              amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985.
              Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings.
              Clerk and Financial Officer to report.
      WP005995
(7)   k*-7            <_          ——                                      4-f               & 0'<- '— "                                        ^ °/         «-> J^"/

      w          iV '-> X 5        'T 'H -£ -       C -g v ^              ts - t                                 2 e    c - O 'M - m - j j , ! c} a t o v > -'i t



              <*,)       CK-Y'vO".^S'                 >Vc_W*«-VS                       t_*ss &ts^v> P-^                                        (g)
              \>)            (u V u » '                 S'^          Tfr-                           c^_ A-g- A- v^xve.^r.                                      ->

                         -        (CJvfSW.F— ^'■-A-'^v'-'--'JT                         ^



      U-£-P■' V i't h - v                                 ^.<-jc_^              v-^'r!                      —      '“r"           -i 'V
                                                                                                                                      '
©     fit^f:'rt’r n t^TS                            -Ss ^f'r              - ^

                                       ,0 j-vr'r^*^                                ^                    e-eren>
                              ^             o-»k x     _         —                                                  «       *     ^       *                  p ^ fp

                  .                                                                                               :f'W           '
               ‘-V

                N             Pos^j? vc^T-t                                                             eviv^^.^e ^
               ^)                                                                                           C in-                                   cU&v^-




                                                ^          ^                <           W               ^              ^         W      ^               S
             l» 0 ^ 0 ^                         <^                   -                                                      ^                  ^               iKiVmrf
             ^A.                                i=xr             w»^r~                          '*»
£>            CXK Svft-C

                                                                          __                                C^rc-          >i*r-rW.A-<_                      'vt^
                                       'p.Jr£        vfc-vPwiCA ' '-••■* '
                                                                               f f          r       .       S      T ^V -             5 '" '    ^   ^
                                        ^           K.'                  ''— U '-{ ^ 6
                                                                                                                                                    CW.!
                                          'V                                                                                                            )           Sc\-sc
                     M                     c         .-          ^ v V                          ' V               ^ - K > V : %A (                      -1
                                           vvLi—               /_.
                                                                                                        ^ fjP               “c*                                              <^-(
                                            Ov£.x/<-.           ^ r •* (V *                     ^
                                                                             A^'fJ                                „      ,-_ Tuyvf-- Un^'tO^'
                                                                     .   fowri Z ^                                *"           ^
                                           C- \ M ^ ^                          _<^ ^                               (WtjEL 'O-.VS0. fl£«_-f
                                              n                          ,<    T_>V S’r                             ^

                                                                                       J]cji-c                  Vr>ci>^,
                                                                                                                       »'—

                                                                                       £                                        A - r ^                 J            M
                     >0
                                                p          -TT t^ - Y '~ V : f
  ivAf* wjAHs&i                       "ot        fCe^v%v .. c*                       <*■ .-        h                            y H              .                       *5n-».w
                                                                                                     C l £ - / X -^ -V v.       U'i it C c, ^   p              & A -i>        J*

                                                  w ^jvt           <■* *^uj=^ £>wr^> c                                                                    ^ *»'                     ^               -ewu^p
                                          *         O T T ^-O *-          1
                                                                    V v-wfr ^ "’ ^"V ‘\                                                                        C                    t-V sj^i

                                                       [ y^y pP          ( '' l u W - ^ u f ^ t i V i » W )                                                              '>M^-, St-r>Hhrw/-*tiu4S
                                                                                WS'A-Vi^S              '’Csro COi&i«-rc£
                                                                                                          jCo^fV-'VTt**!.

Oaju* Csu,^-^                         p         \yv>fe »««iwwe^6                        .



                                                                                                    ^ujr          (WV*-.          T*                           - '.                        ~r<i

     Aswvnc^" ^\                              rtv-
                                                 S< '• £„                          __         & ^ W
                                                                                              f<ttOV?£. ?fCr^«_^Tc-e~- .
          ^                             ■K'S^v_rv~vt,*^o-”T                <!yj<                          C v-u-^-'^> ^                     'r^~*-^=/<_
           ( f / f i v ^ - ^ a T •-           fr£A<_ £ u                                      fn -v ' (     .’. w e ^ o             m      o :       v_u - <   r ^ ~ f       T&    £ * -m ^ c_er>^~ +
                                 ~                                                                                          fY^Jo-iaVCAAV                                «r^J"ev£—
              p      \f        .                         fee tV^TT»^CAjC9 / 64VW                          Swj'V.st^v-p                                      f '& lv-+i'r C\ TAmiM. dJV^.Sv-^
                                         Art,. w*r- ^ A-f^CVStlAi^w-^'rt /
                                         ^                                                                                  .            (^o^V--c^                                             ***tt^vr«L>
                                       i       ^                 **- stri_<cavort
                                       ■+. PftVK- VC                 CL^CASfs                                     .                                                      v

                                                  W V-S \    *       -£ ^ 0 (0 6 ®      +■     0<V~           C        ^                 S"' 5            ?,tC> )




     >U                    ftuSCC              \*CX*-TV*&JP.
                                                             <\UX               "T T*uS^C>'
     cuve      « *rc <          —                                                                   £ .«              c *< -«

                                                                                                                                                                                                  GA/L-W*
                                              C*w> c<— fi^r-                            'P                              £ ^ « «                         ^
                                                   ^             ( ^ Z P 'U S ,C ^ T .■v'r 'c - ^            /H ^ < r o               ^ ~ isA x             i ^ / I f v ' X t c ^ c ' o ^ -

                                      /-                     ^ «        tm         s ^ m n c o                    -                                                   o ^ r **
                                      (                                                                                                                                c*--jT A ^ O .




 •     %
                  SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY - 16 NOVEMBER 1990

                                    INDEX


   Agenda for 16.11.90



2. Letter from Bob Johnston dated 13.11.90 enclosing:

   a.   Copy, letter from Bob Johnston to members of the Authority dated
        12.ll\90;

   b.   Copy lerter from Hepworth & Chadwick (David Duckenfield1s solicitors)
        to Bob Johnston dated 7.11.90;

   c.   Extracts froni the press on 31.8.90;

   d.   Copy letter frfcwn Russell Jones & Walker        (Federation solicitors)     to
        Bob Johnston dated 7.11.90.



3. Police Authority paper    us^d   at meetings     held on      19.10.90   and   2.11.90
   including:-

   a.   applications   dated 21.9.^0 and       24.8.90    from   Chief   Superintendent
        Duckenfield    -   together with:

          (i) accompanying solicitor's\Letter dated 17.9.90;
         (ii) Finance & General PurposesVCommittee paper dated 15.9.90;
        (iii) extract from Police Authority minutes dated 8.4.88;

   b.   application dated 24.9.90 from Superintendent Marshall;

   c.   application dated 1.10.90 from Superintendent Murray;

   d.   application dated 1.10.90 from Superintendent Greenwood;

   e.   application dated 19.9.90 from Russell J < W s & Walker (Federatioi^^^fc
        solicitors) on behalf of Constables Illingworth and Smith;

        Home Office Circular 77/1987.



4. Copy of Deputy Chief Constable's address given at thW Special Police
   Authority meeting on 2.11.90 THIS WAS CIRCULATED TO COMMITTEE MEMBERS



5. Appendix showing details of expenditure (as at 1.11.90) incurred by the
   officers THIS W A S N O T CIRCULATED TO COMMITTEE MEMBERS



6. Joint Secretariat press release announcing            decision to hold a further
   Special Police Authority meeting on 16.11.90



                                         t/0
The    Police Authority               had     a lengthy and serious            debate about

what they regard as a most important issue.                           They have decided,

at    least   for     the    time        being,      that    they    cannot    support    the

officers' application for public funding.



The    threat    of    further          legal      proceedings      in respect     of    this

decision      is now reactivated,                  and that prevents          any statement

in detail about this morning's discussion.



I am naturally very disappointed that representation from the

officers'     advocates,              added to by my personal representations,

have   not met        with       the    success       I had hoped for.          The Police

Authority       has   left        a    door    ajar     of   reviewing    their    decision

once inquest proceedings have reached conclusion on the evidence

available.



Our    position was          always         that    the best evidence would emerge

for the public good - whether beneficial or otherwise to South

Yorkshire       Police       -    in     assisting       those      conclusions,    if    the

financial       backing          of     the    Police    Authority       was    immediately

assured.      That instant backing will not now be available.
*     ■*'-

                 Information from:

                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                 AUTHORITY
                 REGENT STREET, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2PQ
             *   No:                           Date:


    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY DISCUSS HILLSBOROUGH LEGAL COSTS

       A special meeting of South Yorkshire Police Authority will be
    held on Friday (November 16) to reconsider the position on meeting
    the legal costs of police officers involved in legal proceedings
    arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy.
       The meeting was called following representations made by
    solicitors acting for one of the officers involved, Superintendent
    David Duckenfield.
       The Authority stressed today (Monday, November 12) that the
    decision to call a special meeting had been taken prior to the
    news that the Superintendents’ Association intends to apply for
    leave for a High Court judicial review of,the Authority’s earlier
    decision to refuse to meet the officers’ legal costs.
       Stephen Walker, Assistant Chief Officer (Legal), for the
    Authority, said today : "It comes as no surprise       tousthat the
    Association is following this course of action ,though we have as
    yet received no official notification of proceedings. We had
    already heard from the Police Federation that they intended to
    seek a judicial review on behalf of their members, though again we
    have not received any papers.
       "As far as the proceedings themselves are concerned, the
    Authority does not wish to make further comment pending the
    outcome of Friday’s meeting."
       Six officers     applied to the Authority toexercise its
    discretion under Home Office guidelines to meet their legal costs
    arising out of the Inquests on the Hillsborough victims which are
    due to be heard in Sheffield later this month. The Authority
    decided at that stage to refuse to meet their costs.
       The specialmeeting of the Authority will take place at 10.00
    am on Friday at South Yorkshire   Joint Secretariat, RegentStreet,
    Barnsley.
                                     END




                 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
                 PBFSS AND PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICER:
                                                                       15 November 1990




           The Police Authority         reconsidered their previous       decision    not   to
      provide financial support to six police officers at the Coroner’s Inquest in
4 0 ^ the light of new information


          After receiving legal representations on behalf of Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield   and        the Superintendents Association and the Police Federation,
     the Authority reaffirmed this decision having considered the terms              of Home
     Office   advice     to    police   authorities in 1987 but are prepared to consider
     retrospective application as envisaged          in the   advice    if events    at the
     Coroners inquest showed such assistance should be granted.



••
                                               END




                                                                            Kath Finlay
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                         POLICE AUTHORITY
    R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P.FA.                                                             Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
    Clerk and Financial Officer                              Please reply to:                     Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                                   P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

    OurFtof        SW/LAD                        Your Ref.                              Date:       14 November 1990
    This matter is being dealt with by    Mr S Walker                                   Telephone ext    620


          Private & Confidential
          Mr Richard Wells
          Chief Constable
          South Yorkshire Police Headquarters
          Snig Hill
          SHEFFIELD
W         S3 SLY

          Dear
          APPLICATION BY POLICE OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL SUPPORT

          You will I hope by now have received a copy of my letter of 12 November to
          members. The decision to reconvene the Authority was based on information
          relating to witnesses contained in Hepworth & Chadwicks letter of
          7 November. This was not considered by members at the meeting on 2 November
          and I am keen to ensure they consider all available and relevant information
          upon which they can reach a decision.
          However Peter Hayes furnished me with a copy of a note of a pre inquest
          review called by the Coroner and held on 30 October. The note which is
          attached was taken by Messrs Hammond Suddards, Solicitors acting on your
          behalf. It adds significantly in my view to the available information on
          the evidence to be adduced and that which might be adduced at the inquests.
          It compliments the information contained in Hepworth & Chadwicks letter and
          therefore I have seen fit to send a copy to members for their consideration.
          Yours sincerely




          S wai Ker
          Solicitor of the Authority
          Enc
                                              £               hh   n n «l' i ' j i ' f H K f
             ’ 90   11'01   i::OZ




HILLBBQRQUQH
HOTK OF PRE-INOPEflT REVIEW - MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE 8HEFFIBLD-.3QTH
OCTOBER 1990

The Coroner outlined for the benefit of non-lawyers present that
this        hearing was not part of the Inquests. The purpose of the
meeting was to meet legal representatives and to deal with
A ^ c e d u r a l matters. It was to be treated as a private meeting
P^foeen the Coroner and Lawyers, but a meeting at which qther
 interested parties were free to attend. The Coroner then requested
 legal representatives to identify themselves.

Tim King of Counsel said he represented a number of the PR's of the
deceased.   He was unable to give definite numbers (although he had
been instructed by 26 families to date) , and he hoped that within a
week a definitive list of those families being represented by him
 could be available.   The maximum number was likely to be 42.: He
 said that there may be individuals who had not instructed him, but
who may at the meeting be applying for representation.
1                                                               1
’Christopher Russell of Counsel said he had been instructed by
 Barlow Lloyd and Gilbert to represent Superintendent Greenwood.

Stuart Catchpole of Counsel said he had been instructed by Davies
'Arnold Cooper (Peter Doyle of that firm also being present) to
represent Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

   cent   Hale,             Solicitor,     said    he    represented               Superintendent
Marshall.
Richard      Manning,         Solicitor,    said    he   represented               Superintendent
'Murray.
ipaul Issacs of Counsel said he was instructed by Hepworth    &
!Chadwick (Chris Coughlin of that firm also being present) to
^represent Chief superintendent Duckenfield.

I^ony Gregory of Keeble Hawsons, Solicitor, said he represented the
iinsurers of Sheffield City Council and was accompanied by a
 Solicitor from the Council.                                  i
 t                                            t

 ;At this point the Coroner established that one individual in <£ourt
 was a member of the press and he asked the person to leave oil the
  basis that the meeting not a public meeting and not reportable*

     Belinda Norcliffe, Solicitor,    said she               represented                       The   (Jhief
     Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.                                                        j
    Peter  Jackson,   Solicitor,   said  be  represented The Football
    Supporters Association.      He stated it would be unlikely the
    Association would be unable to have a representative throughout the
    Inquest because of funding problems.    He made the comment that if
    he could obtain undertakings regarding comments made on Liverpool
    supporters from some parties, then attendance may not be necessary
    in any event.                                                     *

    The Coroner then invited Mrs.    O'Brien to speak who confirmed she
    0*Brie*PreSent             as    the mother of the deceased John

    Iv®          then asked all representatives to write into him with
               2^4     J ? OSe    would be representing or likely to
    represent during the course of the hearing, as he would be
               nam* ta9S to help both himself and the Transcribers
    identify representatives.

    Tim King indicated that on some occasions he would be lead bv Ben
    Hytner or indeed that Ben Hytner would be the sole representative.

The Coroner stated this would not present any problem at all and
that he would be as reasonable as possible regarding changes of
representatives so long as the party they were representing did
A&V6 locus standi.

The Coroner said the venue for the Inquests would be the Sheffield
Council Chambers, this being the same venue as for the Public
attending **** 8tat*d th* V6nue *** change depending on the numbers

 At this stage, Mr. Holroyd arrived at the meeting and said he
 represented the Police Federation.                   *           ne
1
;The Coroner said he had been asked whether there would be space to
 store^papers and that there was a room in the Town Hall called the
        which would be made available for this purpose.     Securitv
                              individual representatives and tha key
jwould be in the custody of the City Council.     The room would be
srrtT s srss &
1
                                  bu hours' - * • 9 to 1 0   «-
The Coroner anticipated that he would sit from 10 in the m o m i n o
till about 12.45, would then recommence at 1.45 or 2 o'clock
H Z * £ ab°Ut 4 1 * ”1- Th*re        be a short break in tbS S n S S
k£   !!ierr oon*      reason he wa* not sitting longer hours was that
he had to consider the Jury who were not as used to such
proceedings as Lawyers.                                          8uch

The Coroner said if points of law were raised he would deal with
           k     n*c*fsary' but •• he <*i<* not wish to waste 4jury
afternooiu        W°U        t0            h the®* after 4 p ’® ‘ in th«
       regard to the scope of the Inquests, the Coroner said he had
  already dealt with three questions being who, when and where and
  the remaining question to be considered was "how". This is what he
 jWill be concentrating on.   Clearly he was dealing with 95 separate
 ;Inquests but it would be impossible to recount the evidence 95
 ‘times and the evidence would therefore be taken together on all of
 jthem. He was aware there were differences, for instance there were
 |two enclosures involved, but he did not think that would affect the
 jValidity of dealing with the evidence in that way.         Specific
 'evidence, for instance in relation only to enclosure 4, would be
 :dealt with appropriately.

  The Coroner said he wished to remind everyone that the Inquests
g | £ e not the Public Inquiry.    They should not expect therefore,
^Bfcause there had already been an Inquiry, that there would be a
  repeat of all that the Taylor Inquiry had done, although there
  would be some duplication and replication.

 {The Coroner then    outlined that witnesses did have certain
 privileges especially the right not to answer incriminating
 questions.   If any witnesses wished to exercise their right they
 would be entitled to do so.

 ,The Coroner said his present intention was to take evidence orally,
 |but at least one witness had died and there may be others whp for
  medical or other reasons would be unable to come.         There was
 {however a huge pool of witnesses to cover relevant points.

 iTim King at this stage rose to say he had a number of submissions
  on the nature and ambit of the evidence, in particular the starting
 points of events and the cut off point.

tfjOfe Coroner said he took the view that the cut off point was the
^ W i v a l of the first ambulance on the pitch which was about 3.15
  jp.m.    This was a convenient marker, the time beyond this l^eing
   outside the scope of the Inquest.         The beginning was more
  jdifficult.   Clearly it would cover the events of the day and also
   previous occurrences in evaluating the situation.   In principle it
  ;would start on the day with events outside, would work into the
  'ground and more and more witnesses would be called as matters got
  jcloser to the event itself.    As an example he might for instance
  :want a summary of traffic conditions but would not be calling a lot
  Jof evidence on that point.

 He said he intended calling a number of categories of witnesses,
 the first being supporters, but that he would be sympathetic if
 they refused to attend. A supporter covered relatives, friend# and
 other contacts of the deceased and indeed anyone who could shed
 light on the events of the day.      The second category was local
 residents, the third were shopkeepers etc., the fourth were other
 independents, for example those professionally present such jsis a
 media people, the fifth category were Club employees, for example
 turnstile operators and stewards and the sixth category was of
 course the Police.   With regard to these there were a few [Police]
 and at least one other person whose statements were CJA Statements
 under PACE.  It was his normal practice at the moment if there was
                   5° h?ve  r*ad out or played on an audio taps.
Ha said ha would do that hera and we would therefore hear those
.statements on audio tapes.

|The Coronar than said he would not circulate a list of witnesses in
,advance because:-

1) This was an inquisitorial inquiry conducted by the Coroner. The
   books available to him indicated that it was quite proper for
   him not to circulate then and he did not intend to do it.

;2) In relation to statements he certainly did not have the
I   administrative capacity to deal with the circulation of them.

           circulated summaries at the first he.arings and felt that
j   this had "bounced back" on him as representatives were not happy
    that evidence actually given always coincided with what appeared
j   on the summaries.                                          r

jHe was therefore not prepared to circulate statements in advance
but would make available names of proposed witnesses for the
{following 1 to 3 days to give representatives some idea as to iwhat
was coming.    Also, witnesses would be allowed to refresh their
memories from statements on the day, but he would not expect
witnesses to take statements with them into the witness box.

Regarding Lord Justice Taylor's Report, he did not intend to admit
jthat report as part of the evidence at the Inquest.  To get it in
jas evidence he would have to read it in toto and this would not
iserve any useful purpose and would cause problems.

Similarly, the Transcripts would not be used. He was fully aware
that all parties had and would have access to the Transcripts and
he would fully expect parties to look at them. He did not tnind
questioning on them so long as that questioning was relevant.     He
would not however permit a witness who wanted to exercise the right
jr»ot to answer questions to have quotations put to him from the
Transcript.    He wanted representatives to use their common siense
tend they would be allowed to ask legitimate questions.   There may
pe odd occasions when he would have to breach what he had said
above and the Transcript would have to be used,     but he thought
this would be a rarity.                                         *

»ith regard to exhibits, he wished to restrict the number of
locuments put in as exhibits. He did not want hundreds of pages to
»• put before the Jury if they could not absorb them. What he had
Ln mind was for example the Green Guide, which could be introduced
is an exhibit but he would not expect the Jury to read it from
cover to cover.     It would however be appropriate perhaps for
representatives to make reference to certain paragraphs.
        Tin Xing said in relation to the "mini Inquests" he had a growing
        number of instructions on individual cases, particularly as to
        factual matters.  He wishes to have the liberty to rectify factual
        omissions and inaccuracies from the earlier hearings, and asked if
        the Coroner would consider how best to deal with these if they were
        listed for him in writing.

  The Coroner said that he did not intend re-opening all 95 on that
I basis, although he himself had received correspondence on a number
;of individual cases.     If the matters Mr. King was talking about
j could be put properly to him and if he could consider them and as a
|result felt a point was justified and legitimate and proper to deal
  with, he would consider it sympathetically.
    i


         King then said in relation to the cut off point, he wished to
           a submission that that should be extended to 4 p.m. as a
    'number of those represented felt the Inquests should go into the
     medical attention given to those crushed in relation to the
     allegation that there was an absence of proper medical care and
     facilities which may have lead to death or indeed quicken the death
     of those who had died.

        The Coroner said this was getting into legal submissions. All had
        heard what he had to say and that he could not give a ruling
        because he was going beyond procedural aspects.   At the moment he
        was not pursuaded that he would want to go down that particular
        road.

         Tim King said he was equally concerned at the decision not to
         circulate the names of those the Coroner intended to call. He said
         the great advantage to having a list was that it would give an
        Iopportunity to ask for further witnesses to be called.

            Coroner said he had already pre-empted this suggestion, a6 he
m           written to every represented body or individual asking if they
        had people to be considered as witnesses and had had only two or
        three replies.   The mere fact that a list was not circulated did
        not stop anyone suggesting someone should be called as a witness.

        Tim King said there were a vast number of statements available and
        he had been looking at it from the point of looking who would be
        called and seeing if there were any "omissions" and not visa versa.

         The Coroner said he would reconsider the point, but he did not know
         if he could oblige on it.

         Tim King said that in relation to the Taylor Report there should be
         certain paragraphs as to fact which could go before the Jury which
         would help them and save time. He outlined the underlining process
         that he understood had been done for the Contribution Hearing and
         suggested that that might be appropriate.
The Coroner said one of the reasons why he was reluctant to do this
<was because putting a paragraph before the Jury did not mean that
it was necessarily accepted by everyone.
i
Tin King then asked whether the Taylor Transcript could be used in
{cross examination.
i
iThe Coroner said that was correct within certain limits.         His
'difficulty was, that the Public Inquiry had taken place on slicfhtly
’different premises than his hearing and he was reluctant to use it
'for that reason.
!
'Tin King then also queried whether video evidence would be used.

     The Coroner said it was his intention to use the Compilation Video
    land indeed one or two other videos, for example the 1988 video.
    'He also stressed he had no facilities for providing copies of any
    Ivideos and would not distribute them.   If that was not acceptable
    !he would rather not use videos, but he did wish to do so.
    I
    :Stuart Catchpole stated that in relation to the Taylor Report, it
    iwould be beneficial     if the Jury could see certain agreed
     paragraphs.   He indicated that he would be nore than willing to
    'participate in an attempt to agree certain paragraphs to go before
     the Jury.
    The Coroner said that may be an answer to the question and he would
    ileave it up to the parties. If they could all agree on some of the
    {paragraphs going before the Jury then that would be acceptable, if
     they could not agree then the Taylor Report would not go before
    |them.
    'Christopher Russell queried whether the categories outlined by the
    ICoroner was the order in which they would be called.
    i
     The Coroner stated he was not intending that being the case, that
    |the evidence would effectively be taken chronologically.

    :Christopher Russell queried whether the new matters relating to the
    Iearlier hearings mentioned by Tim King would be circulated to other
    iparties, as these were questions which should be made public.

    !The Coroner said he would consider the point.

        Christopher Russell made the point that providing the Jury with
        selected parts of the Taylor Report was not in his view
        satisfactory.
        The Coroner confirmed that if it could not be agreed between the
        parties then he would stick to what he had originally said.
t




                                          -7-

     Vincent Hale said that Mr. Jackson for The Football Supporters
     Association had raised the question of undertakings and that he
     would be happy to give such an undertaking but nay not be able to
      if other parties failed to go along with it.
     I
     |The Coroner then asked for authority to circulate to all parties a
     jlist of the legal representatives and all agreed.

     |Paul Isaacs then raised the following points:-
     I
     11) Whether the video evidence was for instance to be shown at the
     '    beginning of the Inquest or to be shown to clarify certain
          points.

              The Coroner said he was   hoping that video could    be shown and
              that would be it as the   purpose was to give the    Jury an
              overview. It was to be    used in that respect as    an aid but
     |        there nay be times when    the video would have to   be re-examined.

     2)       If the Taylor Report could not be used at all unless certain
              facts could be agreed by all parties, how far was it to be
              used at all.

      3)      Could the Taylor Transcripts be used for cross-examination
              purposes.

      Paul Issacs specified that he wished to make legal submissions on
     Ithis point.

       The Coroner did not answer the second   question but in relation to
       question 3. he said once again he knew all parties had copies of
           Transcripts but he would not allow the Transcript to be used to
    wflU* witnesses in a position where they would say that they would
       not answer a question, i.e. he would not allow anyone to pursue a
       point which would be oppressive.   In certain other cases it may be
       easier to use the Transcript to put points to them and that he
      :wanted to be flexible and that he nay indeed have to nodify his
      |stance on the Transcript.

     IPaul Isaacs specifically asked the question if a witness said a, b
     land c on giving evidence but had previously to the Taylor Inquiry
     |said x, y and z would he be able to cross-examine on that basis.
     I
      The Coroner said it would depend entirely on what the a, b and c
      and x, y and z was.    He then stated that on the point he would
      clearly have to have a session on legal submissions.

     iPaul Issacs then raised the question of recalling witnesses after
     jthey had completed their evidence.
     i                                    i
     i
         The Coroner said he may have to do this from tine to time.
         ‘^
•Belinda Norcliffe then asked whether the Coroner would permit
 documentation sent to him to be placed before the Jury, the
|intention not being  for the Jury to read Bundles from cover to
;cover, but for documents to be available for the Jury to "dip
jinto*.

;The Coroner said he was still considering this point.

'Christopher Russell then queried what the documents were and why
jthey had not been circulated to other parties.

iBelinda Norcliffe explained the documents were three volumes, the
!first two of which were volumes 1 and 2 of the South Yorkshire
!Police documents to the Inquiry, and that volume 3 was a selection
|of documents available at the Public Inquiry and the recent Civil
|Contribution Hearing.  There were no new documents as such.   They
 had not been sent to other parties but simply to the Coroner as it
 was hi6 decision as to whether they were to go before the Jury or
 not.

 The Coroner again said he was still considering the matter and had
 not decided whether any party could put documentation in in the
 form of Bundles or whether he wished representatives to produce
 individual documents as and when they were referred to.      In any
|event he said 20 copies of items would be in his view required.

!Peter Jackson said with regard to undertakings he would be happy to
|liaise with any party.

iThe Coroner said he foresaw problems in anybody giving undertakings
jand that the matter may not be resolved.

jPeter Jackson then queried further whether the witness list would
Ibe available three full days in advance.
I
|The Coroner said he was hoping to do this showing at least those
'who had provisionally been called.

Peter Jackson then queried whether a daily transcript would be
available and the Coroner said he would refer to that point later.

Mrs. O'Brien stated she was very concerned about the cut off point.
The Coroner pointed out that she was attempting to make a legal
submission and that would have to be reserved for later.

 The Coroner then established that no party had any other procedural
 points to raise and stated that he did intend to have Transcripts
 available on a next day basis.     He requested that any party who
 wanted   daily  transcripts   should  write   to  him   before  the
 commencement of the Inquests, but parties would of course be
 charged. He would also happily arrange for odd days to be provided
 on that basis but he would have to have sufficient notice of this
 for it be possible.
 With relation to the length of the Inquests, the Coroner said he
 was unable to specify how long they would last, but that the
 hearing would end for Christmas onthe 18th or 19th December.     He
jdid not think the Inquests would have finished by then and the plan
!vas to resume on the 7th January and to continue until they were
 finished.   He pointed out that illness, for instance amongst the
iJury, may lead to adjournments.
I
jWith regard to witnesses, he     is going to try and group them
.together and further he would be surprised if there were less
!witnesses to be called than at the Taylor Inquiry (174) and there
 could possibly be more.

    the 28th November, 6th December and 9th January it would not be
   ssible to use the Council's Chamber as Council meetings were
 taking place and      in relation to the 28th    November, he was
:considering taking the Jury out for a further site visit to
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
i

:The Coroner said he did intend to call a few expert witnesses right
{at the end of the Inquests but he wished to make it clear that
!their   evidence would be restricted to what is relevant to an
'Inquest and would not therefore be the same as evidence which would
 be given at a Civil Trial.

 He then pointed out that the press would of course be entitled to
jbe present throughout the Inquests themselves.

•In relation to   running order, he intended to ask questions first
!and the only other rule was that if any witness was the witness of
 a particular partythen they would question       the witness last.
 Apart from that the representatives should agree amongst themselves
 ^ e order for questioning witnesses.

    iThe Coroner said it appeared there would be various legal
     submissions made to him and these would have to be dealt with at a
    ifurther meeting which was set for the morning of the 19th November
    |and he would arrange for the Jury to attend only on the afteirnoon
    {of that day.
    i

    !Stuart Catchpole queried whether the list for the first three days
    iwitnesses would be available for Monday the 19th and the Coroner
    !confirmed this would be sent through to representatives.

    iTim King asked the Coroner to consider again the question of
     circulating a full witness list. The Coroner said if he decided to
     do this prior to the 19th, he would circulate it to parties, and if
     not representations should be made again on the 19th. The Coroner
     at this stage said another reason for him being reluctant to
     circulate the list was that it could be that once evidence gets
     under way certain witnesses on the list could effectively come
     superfluous and would be removed and he was wary of the parties
     relying on his original list as definitive.
I                                   -1 0 -
I
I

    Tim King maid he appreciated the point the Coroner was making but
    it would still be easier for all if a list was available.
i
    The Coroner said he would give serious consideration to the point.
TELEPHONE:                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                             SNIG H ILL
                                                            SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
FAX: (0742) 523243


R B WELLS QPM MA
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                      15 November 1990




      Chief Superintendent T G Hewitt
      Secretary
      The Police Superintendents' Association
        of England and Wales
      67a Reading Road
      Pangbourne
      Berkshire RG8 7JD




      "W/ v*.
       Thank you for your letter of 9 November concerning              legal
       representation and Home Office Circular 77/1987.

       You may be assured that I will do all I can to assist the officers
       concerned.   Indeed, you may already be aware that the Police
       Authority   has  called   an  extra-ordinary  meeting   on  Friday
       16 November to re-consider its decision.

       John Nesbit will, no doubt, keep you in touch with developments.


                     t.;




       Richard Wells




                           V
                                                              'A       ’
                            THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION
                                         OF ENGLAND AND WALES
                                                                                      67A Reading Road
                                                                                      Fangbourne
       “
       £ocSn2                                                                         Berkshire
                                                                                      RQ8 7JD
                                                                                      Tel: 0734 844005
                                                                                      Fax: 0734 845642
  Our Ref: TGH/TJB
  Your Ref:

      November 9, 1990

                                                             South Yorkshire Police
      Mr R.B. Wells, QPM
      Chief Constable
      South Yorkshire Police                                       I 2 NOV 1990

                      S3 8LY                                     Chlof Constable




       i)       LEGAL REPRESENTATION - HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 77/1987


      I enclose here wit h a copy of correspondence sent to the Home
      S e c r e t a r y , HMCIC and Sir Bernar d Braine our parliam ent ary
      advisor for your information.          We realise you are doing all you
      can to support y o u ^ O f f i c e r s in this matter and that you are
      bringing pressure to bear locally for the Police Authority to
      reconsider their decision.


      Yours
• •

      T.G. Hewitt
      Chief Superintendent
      Secretary


      Enc.




                          Secretary: C hief S u p e rin te n d e n t T. G. Hewitt
                      A s s is ta n t Secretary: Chief S u p e rin te n d e n t P. G. Wall
                            THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION
                                         OF ENGLAND AND WALES
                                                                                       67A Reading Road
                                                                                       Pangbourne
                                                                                       Berkshire
                                                                                       RQ8 7JD
                                                                                       Tel: 0 7 3 4 844005
                                                                                       Fax: 0 7 3 4 845642
Our Ref: T G H /T JB
Your Ref:


   November 9, 1990


   The Right Honourable David Waddington, QC, MP
   Secretary of State for the Home Department
   Home Office
   Queen Anne's Gate
   London. SW1H 9AT




           LEGAL REPRESENTATION - HOMB OFFICE CIRCULAR 77/1987

   As you are no doubt aware the Inquest into the deaths of those
   k i ll ed at the Hillsborough Stadium, is due to commence on the
   19th November at Sheffield.
                                      I’
   Six South Yorks hir e Officers are due to give evidence at the
   Inquest.    Many of the other witnesses called will be giving oral
   evidence in connection with the disaster for the first time. As
   far as we are aware all interested parties will be legally
   represented, in some cases by leading counsel.         The Police
   Federation are supporting and funding their two officers.      The
   four members of the Superintending ranks have been provided with
   legal assistance by personal insurance cover arranged by this
   Association, but the monies available from this source are now
   almost exhausted.

   The Inquest may bring new evidence to light which could have an
   e f f e c t on c i v i l / p o l i c e d i s c i p l i n e proceedings. Criminal
   proceedings cannot be ruled out until the Inquest verdict is
   known and any new evidence arising from the Inquest has been
   considered.

   As this case is one in which the Officers have acted in good
   faith in pursuance of their duties and the interests of the
   force and indeed the Police Service as a whole, are involved
   they should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure
   they have the services of a lawyer and that they should not be




                           Secretary: Chief S u p e rin te n d e n t T. G. Hewitt
                       A s s is ta n t Secretary: Chief S u p e rin te n d e n t P. G. Wall
     out of pocket.    Accordingly, application was made on theiir
     behalf by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to his Police
     Authority for legal support.   This was considered and rejected
     on Friday 2nd November.   I enclose with this letter a copy of
     the application made and of the press statement made by the
     Chief Constable.

     Despite repeated requests the Police Authority have not so far
     given their reasons for their decision.          There is no way that my
     Association can fund the potential costs of our members.           It is
     therefore likely that the Police Officers will be less well
     r e p r e s e n t e d than any other organi sat ion or person with an
     interest in the outcome of the proceedings, that can neither be
     right nor fair.            My Association has therefore been forced to
     seek leave for a Judicial Review.

     From your remarks to our members at Blackpool, we know that you
     consider Police Authorities should exercise their discretion in
     favour of providing legal support whenever possible and we
     believe this is a classic example where officers carrying out
     their duties-In good faith, are at risk and should be supported
     from Public Funds.

     The decision of the South Yorkshire Police Authority has caused
     d e e p c o n c e r n to all m e m b e r s of the P o l i c e S e r v i c e and
     undoubtedly it has affected morale.



••
     I would therefore be most grateful for your personal support to
     seek to ensure that the South Yorkshire Police Officers are not
     abandoned by those who have responsibility for them.




     T.G. Hewitt
     Chief Superintendent
     Secretary


     Enc.
                  SPEC IA I- "OLXCE A U T H ORITY M E E T I N G   - 2 NOVEMBER 1990



Introduction

This meeting   is considering an application from six■ . < * " « • «
superintendent, three superintendents and two G°nstablea) f°         I                          e st
support to provide them with legal representation at the forthoomi g
Hearing into the Hillsborough tragedy*

They have all been investigated by the West Midlands              «*° ^"iminal
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in relation t o the question of _
liability.   The Director has announced      that at this ^ t me
insufficient evidence on which to bring criminal proceedings.

All the officers continue to see themselves to be at considerable
consider independent legal representation absolutely essential
of them.

The risks arise from the following factorss-

   1.      The   possibility       at   the    Inquest      of    a   verdict   of   unlawful
           k illin g .
   2.      of additional evidence being given at the Inquest which
           may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions to further
           consider the question of criminal liability.

    3.     Recently in a similar gase where the Director of Public
            Prosecutions    decided   against    criminal   proceedings ,
            representatives of the deceased instigated a Judicial Review
            of the Director's decision.      The officers see this as
           possible in t$is casa*^--'

    4.     Private criminal prosecutions may' be brougnt.

    5.     The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings where
            dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are
            all possibilities.


 Relevant Considerations

 All the officers thus far have provided for their own legal advice. and
 representation   and the application today is concerned solely w
 likely to.be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

 To help you with your decision clear advice is                           provided    in Home Office
 Circular 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

 This Circular refers to a central principle:   this is t h a t w h e r e the Pol c
 Authority considers that an officer has acted in ,ood farth in
 of his duties    or that the interests of th. Force a. a vhol. are >involved
 (and both of    these considerations are fully satisfied in t
 officer should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure^ that h
 has the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of-pocket .
                                             -    2   -




     1 wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
     pursuance of their duties” and undoubtedly "the interests of the Force as
     a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
                                       >
     very real.
                                       >-                                   :f
     Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Representation for Individual
     Officers” particularly to occasions   when  "the Chief   officer's leg,a;l
     representative cannot reasonably be expected to represent the separate
     interests of officers",          ’

     This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers represent!!^?
     the Authority and the Chief Constable in this matter. Their advice is that
     independent legal representation is appropriate for all the officers
     concerned,

     in the Circular reference is specifically made to the Authority "wishing
     in particular to assess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
     for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
^    where any such finding might give rise to legal proceedings for which the
     Police Authority would be liable or for which financial assistance might
     be appropriate".   It will be seen therefore the advice in this Circular
     relates very precisely to our situation.


     Finance

     The circuiar makes it clear      that       expenditure   incurred   in   this regard   is
     eligible for police grant.

     When this' Committee last considered these applications questions were raised
     about the private insurance available to the chief superintendent and three
     superintendents. I can now inform you that*-                             '

        a.     Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill each
               officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
               VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

        b.     The policy does not specifically cover Inquest Hearings


••
                but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
                provide cover in this instance.

        c.     in relation to future risks the officers may need further
                legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
                have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
                private or discipline proceedings. If the Director of Public
                Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings, in the
                first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
                they so wished - fund the officers’ legal costs.    Also there
                is   no   provision   for  the   Authority   to   fund   legal
                representation at discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms
                of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
                must be borne in mind.
                                              -    3    -




     Some information is now available as to the ext                                                      to be
     airway incurred le9al costs and their estimate or _=o:>ts                                    V
     incurred through representation at, the Inquest Hearings. I                                      P
     you with the details as you wish.                                                                ; '

     in relation to the t"0
     to date have been supported from P o n c e reus*                                      is for/ Police

                                                                                ■*         * * the/ n«uest
     Hearings*


     Separate Representation
                                 v   1,4    m»voa           r>iear that       officers    should normally
     The Circular, at p«ragraph l4          Mk«,s =le.r                                   presentation.
     be given the opportunity by       the Police             Autno       y
     to them if they so wish.

     With the exception o£ Constable smith                        all tha ^ / ’’“ timated they may

     ; r ° t ros ."rciVe s s :                      ’s l *s s . £ T “                             th*lr
     representation a. to their application for financial assistance.


      Recommendation

      south YorXshira Police-officers « t              be ahl., to ,o a              h       ,            £ * £
      secure in the knowledge that         ProV^             th^      deBerving      of   and receive the
                                                                                                 «. tor
      representation whaiiStJMrts#is appropriate,             r

      I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
      Of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




)
••     Deputy Chief Constable
       2 November 1990
      It would             be    hard     to   pretend             that     I'm     not      very   .disappointed

      at        our     Police         Authority's           decision.             My     view      is        t^hat          the
                                                        1■' >                                                   I
      officers             were        performing 'public                   duty    on       the    day, of                  the
                                                      ;■'.                                                ''y‘f:        :

      Hillsborough               tragedy.         Any        acts      or    decisions         they made                    were
           tr                                            I    '                                               t j   ^        -
      therefore unequivocally                     ini   the public             domain*           My reqipBSt for
                                                      jif                                                 -f
      assistance with                   funding    djoes not              relate        to   some activity                       i®

      their private lives, but their action as public servants, acting

      in good faith under the most tfying of circumstances.                                                         I think

      it is a legitimate use of public funds to allow such officers

      adequate             legal        representation                 at     the       forthcoming                  inquest

      hearing, to ensure that the fullest and fairest body                                               o£         evidence
• •
      is        available         to    the public           advantage.             The      private          insurance

      they have is likely to be insufficient to promote that advantage^

      and           should      not,      anyway#                 be   allowed       to divert            attention                   from

      the fundamental principle of public funding.

                      .v          :            ;I •          ■                                       i;                               ■

      As        a     result      of     today’s                  decision           the     officers                       are           likelyto

      be        less       well        represented           than      other        organisations                   with         an

      interest             in    the     outcome                  of   the           proceedings. That                      cannotbe




••
 \    right.
     ibjs-t
<» d 4.



                                                          WHCASTER


                                                17th. lovember, 1990.




                   X really cannot let the week-end pass without expressing1
       to you ray regret, and I am sure I speak for the other Magistrates
       and of course          that the result of Friday*s meeting should
       have resulted as it did.
                   You were appointed to bring the Fore® into a new era
       following the disaster at Hillsborough, hut we, and you full well
       know who the we are, never envisaged that you would have to face such
       a solid block at the first fence.    On our behalf I am sure you
      will offer to your Senior Officers our sympathy and, if somewhat
       ineffectual, support.
                  The trouble of course is that the Labour Group is composed
      of those who have always been cossetted by Union and Labour Party
    0^alea,    As an ex Employer it is appreciated that one must first of
^     all back the Employee, whether right or wrong, until a resolution
      is arrived at.     Only after that time must the decision of termination
      of support be considered.    The fundamental problem is that in
      wearing two hats the Labour Group have to face the consequences of
      Finance in relation to next year's Poll Tax and the resulting votes
      from their supporters.
                   I hope the Senior Officers are successful in their
      application to the High Court.
                                                 >st sincerely,
TELEPHONE:                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                            SNIG H ILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


R B WELLS QPM MA
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                           19 November 1990


Councillor Sir John Layden
Chairman
South Yorkshire Police Authority


Rotherham




May I record my grave disappointment at the most recent decision of the
Police Authority, at their special meeting on 16 November, not to support
in respect of financial aid our officers who are at risk of legal
proceedings arising out of the Hillsborough disaster.

I quite appreciate how seriously the straitened circumstances of the
police budget are felt by your members and they do have to consider how
best to deploy those limited funds on behalf of the community charge
payer.

Nonetheless, Friday's decision will appall South Yorkshire's police
officers and civil staff alike.    The previous day, Colin Sampson as HMI
was describing to the Police Authority members who were able to attend
the luncheon which marked the end of the Inspection, just how well the
Force was performing; we are, he said, leading the table of 10 Forces
for which he has inspectoral responsibility, and he takes away many
aspects of good practice to share with other Forces.       All of this is
achieved with, in the same group of Forces, the lowest level of per capita
financing and the lowest investment in technological support.

The link between this high achievement and the low financial input is
called, simply, goodwill.    I am afraid that   the Authority'sdecision
not to support the officers at risk will make a serious inroad into that
goodwill and I for one will readily understand such damage.  I have been
restrained in my public comments but I am alarmed at the decision and
the clear implications it has for our morale.

The opportunity for the Authority to review its decision at the end of
the   inquest can provide    little  comfort  to  the   likes  of  Chief
Superintendent David Duckenfield, whose funds are, even now, almost
completely spent; he faces a further five or six weeks minimum - may
be as long as 12 weeks - at real risk.    In the light of your decision,
he must now look to defend himself, though I have - I am most sad to
report - authorised a national collection to provide him with immediate
help.
      I cannot say how the process of judicial review will work out, but it
      may well support the Police Authority, for you have clear discretion
      whether or not to award support.     'Success' for your Authority in this
      regard will not, I fear, much detract from the public feeling aroused
      by Friday's decision.    The Authority could so easily, and with ample
      justification, have decided to support the officers and could have at
      the same time, as advised by the advocates, sought to have the lawyers
      fees 'taxed' to reduce the burden falling on the taxpayer.

      I will be encouraging the Force to overcome their bitter disappointment
      but felt that you should know, more in sorrow than in anger, how very
      badly I feel about what has happened.




      Richard Wells




• •
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                         POLICE AUTHORITY
    R.C. Johnston, B.A., I.PJF.A.                                                             Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
    Clerk and Financial Officer                             Pleasereplyto:                          Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                                   P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

    Our Raf      SW/MR                           YourRef.                              DatK      30 November 1990
    This matter is being dealt with by   Mr S Walker                                   Telephone ext    620




        To:      A ll Members of the Police Authority


%

        Dear Member
        APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE BY POLICE OFFICERS

        Members will see an item on the Agenda for the meeting next Friday regarding
        the applications from officers for financial assistance to cover the
        Hillsborough inquests. Clearly, following the history of this controversial
        issue, some explanation is in order; particularly as I will not be in a
        position, until early next week, to let members have the report.
        It will be recalled that at the special meeting on 16 November when the
        applications were refused, there was talk of an application by the officers
        for judicial review. This was subsequently confirmed through the press.
        The application for leave to apply for judicial review was granted by the
        High Court on Thursday, 22 November and therefore it became necessary after
        that date to instruct Counsel to act for the Police Authority.
        Early this week the Authority’s legal adviser, Stephen Walker, met Counsel
        in conference and it became clear that the application for judicial review
        was likely to be successful and the Authority will be required to consider
        the applications afresh. Rather than take this chance and risk an award of
        substantial costs, several thousand pounds in all probability, it was
        decided in consultation with Councillor Gallimore, acting Chairman at the
        last meeting, and as many Section 41 representatives as could be mustered,
        together with a representative of the Magistrates, to consider the matter
        again at next Friday’s meeting.
2


Stephen Walker will explain the position in more detail next Friday but in
the meantime, I felt it was appropriate to forewarn members since it is
likely, yet again, to generate considerable media attention.
Wfiirs cinrprplv




k t jonnston
Clerk and Financial Officer




                                                                             ••
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 7 DECEMBER 1990


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATION
IN PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


REPORT OF THE CLERK AND FINANCIAL OFFICER

1     Matter for Consideration
1.1 The provision of financial assistance to the following police
    officers
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
      Superintendents Murray Greenwood and Marshall
      PCs Smith and Illingworth
      under the terms of Home Office Circular No 77/87.
2     Information
2.1   Members have before them a report from the Chief Constable
      which gives the background to the applications and recommends
      the Authority to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation. The recommendation is
      related to the inquests but, as can be seen from the written ^ V ,
      applications which are appended to the Chief Constable’s
      report, in certain cases the applications are much wider.     ^ I ^>0'—
                                                                         % C-



2-2   Home Office Circular No 77/87(Appendix          F   to the Chief
      Constable’s Report)
      This provides guidance to Police Authorities when considering
      applications for financial assistance to police officers.
      The central principle which should guide such consideration
      is that where a Police Authority considers that an officer
      has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties, or that
      the interests of the Force as a whole are involved, the
      officer should have the support of the Police Authority.
2.3   There is judicial authority for the proposition that this
      creates a presumption that an officer is entitled to
      reimbursement of his reasonable costs and this can only be
      rebutted if there is some relevant factor which could
      reasonably justify the refusal. This is the case of R V
      Derbyshire Police Authority exparte Wilson and Dalton. The
      transcript of the judgment in this case will be available at
      the meeting for reference purposes.
Proceedings to which the Applications relate
Civil Action
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in his application dated 21
September 1990, Appendix A to the Chief Constable’s report
referred to in paragraph 2.1, requests financial assistance
from the Authority in connection with the civil hearings due
to begin on 2 October 1990. These proceedings concern the
principle of contribution to the damages awarded or agreed in
civil claims arising out of the disaster, by Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and their engineers, Eastwood and
Partners. No civil action has been brought against Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or any other individual officers
and therefore the application for financial support in
connection with civil proceedings need not concern members at
the present time.
Criminal Proceedings
Superintendent Murray has requested financial assistance for
legal representation in connection with any criminal
proceedings which arise.        (Appendix C to the Chief
Constable’s report). There are none at present but paragraph
3 of the Home Office Circular deals with this situation. The
guidance given is that in a public prosecution the police
officer is expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he
is acquitted the Police Authority are in a position to decide
on the full facts, whether or not to make a payment to the
officer or to the Police Federation.
As there are no criminal proceedings, this particular
application could stand adjourned in accordance with the
Circular until after such proceedings have been completed.
Discipline Proceedings
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in his application makes
reference to the possibility of discipline proceedings
following the Inquests.   It is not clear whether he is
seeking financial assistance from the Authority in connection
with any such proceedings but as it is well settled principle
that the Authority should not provide assistance in these
proceedings this can be rejected.
Inquests
All of the officers make application for financial assistance
to be separately represented at the inquests which are
presently ongoing. Paragraph 13 of the Circular provides the
necessary guidance in this situation and it reads as
follows:-
     "Separate representation for individual officers whose
     interest is involved may be necessary. For example,
     there will be occasions when (a) the chief officer’s
     legal representative cannot reasonably be expected to
     represent the separate interests of such officers and
     (b) the police authority considers that such interests
     should be represented.   In such cases the authority
     should give financial assistance to the officers. In
     considering (b) above, the authority will wish in
     particular to assess whether the officers are at risk of
     being held to blame for actions in connection with the
     death to which the inquest relates and whether any such
     finding might give rise to legal proceedings for the
     costs of which the police authority would be liable
     under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964 or for which
     financial assistance might be appropriate within the
     terms of this Circular.
The question to be answered under this paragraph is whether
separate representation of the officers is necessary.
Paragraph 13 asks the Authority to consider this question in
two parts.
(a) Can the Chief Officer’s legal representative reasonably
    be expected to represent the separate interests of the
    officers and;
(b) Does the Police Authority consider that such interests
    should be represented.
The answer to (a) in this case is straightforward. The Chief
Constable’s legal adviser has already advised that he cannot
represent the separate interests of the officers.
In determining (b) the Circular asks a Police Authority to
consider the following factors:-
(i) The risk of the officers being held to blame for actions
    in connection with the deaths to which the inquests
    relate
     and
(ii) whether any such finding might give rise to legal
     proceedings for which financial assistance might be
     appropriate within the terms of the Circular.
There is little doubt that some if not all officers    run the
risk of being held to blame for their actions. It     has to be
further considered    whether there is a risk of       further
proceedings which        might be the subject of      financial
assistance under the Circular.
3.8 The Director of Public Prosecutions has already decided there
    is insufficient evidence to bring criminal proceedings
    against any of the officers but fresh evidence may come out
    at the inquests and the Coroner has already alluded to this
    fact; this might give rise to a change of mind on the part of
    the Director of Public Prosecutions. From press statements
    which have previously been made, there is obviously a risk of
    a private prosecution but in all of this it would be
    unreasonable in the view of the Authority’s legal adviser, to
    speculate.
4   Good Faith and Reasonable Judgement
4.1 A decision of the Divisional Court in the case of R v
    Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton
    clearly establishes that it is reasonable for a Police
    Authority to have regard to these two matters in deciding
    whether or not to provide financial assistance in any
    proceedings, whether covered by the Circular or not.
     In his judgment, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said:-
    "If therefore there was, on the part of an officer,
    negligence ie failure to exercise such care as was reasonably
    to be required in the circumstances of an officer of his rank
    and experience doing his job in the Force, then, in my view,
    the Police Authority is entitled to have regard to it if such
    negligence was so connected to the subject matter of the
    legal proceedings or to the causing of the legal proceedings
    to be taken that it can fairly be regarded as a substantial
    cause of the incurring of the costs. I have no doubt that a
    Police Authority, if satisfied of good faith on the part of
    the officer, would normally act, and be pleased to act, on
    the central principle stated in the Circular; but the
    discretion is given to the Authority and it is impossible, in
    my view, to hold that once good faith is established, a
    Police Authority must disregard clear evidence of negligence
    or of failure to "exercise judgement reasonably".
    So to hold would mean that a Police Authority would be
    required to disregard acts of substantial negligence such
    that it could fairly be said that, although acquitted of bad
    faith, the officer had "brought the proceedings on himself."
    The decision whether evidence of such negligence in a
    particular case justifies withholding reimbursement, wholly
    or in part, is of course entrusted to the Police Authority."
4.3 The Police Authority should, when considering the two matters
    of good faith and reasonable judgement, have regard to the
    information that is available. The only real information ^
    that is available in this connection is that contained in W
    Chapter 18 of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor which
    is appended.
4.4 It is important at this juncture to remind members that each
    officers application should be considered separately.
5     Financial Implications
5.1 Derbyshire case which has previously been mentioned in this
    report,    is also authority for the proposition that
    alternative funding should not be taken into account by the
    Authority when deciding whether or not to provide financial
    assistance. However, this particular case concerned
    reimbursement of the Police Federation.
5.2 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendents Murray,
    Greenwood and Marshall have policies of insurance which can
    and are being used to finance legal representation at
    present. In the view of the Authority’s legal adviser, a
    decision to provide financial assistance to PCs Smith and
    Illingworth must cover the full cost of legal representation,
    whereas support for the other officers could be by way of a
    contribution to the extent that the policies of insurance do
    not cover the full cost of representation.
5.3   It would also be reasonable for the Authority to determine
      the level of representation, whether it is solicitor, alone,
      solicitor and counsel, etc. However, again, in the view of
      the Authority’s legal adviser, in the event that financial
      assistance is granted, this decision should be left to the
      individuals concerned but with the condition that, failing
      agreement on the amount of the costs, they should be taxed.

6     Refusal of Application
6.1 Paragraph 15 of the Circular provides that if the Authority
    were to refuse an application for financial assistance and
    then discover in the light of events at the inquests that
    assistance shoul dhave been given, it should meet the
    reasonable costs incurred by the officer. If an application
    is refused for proper reasons the Authority would be acting
    reasonably if they made it clear to the officer(s) that this
    would not preclude a further application which would be
    considered in the light of events at the inquests.
3     Recommendation
      That the Authority consider the applications.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 7 DECEMBER 1990


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATION
IN PROCEEDINGS ARISING OPT OF THE HILLSBOROOGH DISASTER


REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


1      Matter for Consideration

1.1    The provision     of   financial   assistance     to    the   following     police
        officers:-

                  Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
                  Superintendents Murray, Greenwood and Marshall
                  Constables Smith and Illingworth

        under the terms of Home Office Circular No. 77/1987.


2      Information

2.1    Members have already received a report by the Chief Constable which
        is dated 19 October 1990/2 November 1990.

2.2    This date they also have for their consideration                  a   new   report
        prepared by the Clerk & Financial Officer.

2.3    This report should be read in conjunction with those previous papers.


3      The Risk Factor

3.1    All the officers subject of this application consider                 themselves
        at significant risk due to the following factors

        1.   The possibility at     the   Inquest   of   a    verdict   of
              unlawful killing.

        2.   Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest
              which may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions
              to further consider     the question of criminal
              liability.

        3.   Recently in a similar case where the Director
              of Public Prosecutions decided against criminal
              proceedings,   representatives of  the   deceased
              instigated a Judicial Review of the Director's
              decision.   The officers see this as possible in
              this case.

        4.   Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.
5.   The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings
     where dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction
     in rank are all possibilities.

The officer at greatest risk and therefore most      in need of   your
support is Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

In the case of Mr Duckenfield his financial provision has already
proved   insufficient   to   provide   proper  and   adequate   legal
representation for himself at the on-going Inquest proceedings.
Often he is to be seen sitting unrepresented at the Inquest,
conserving the scant resources he does have for those times when
personal representation is absolutely necessary.    From every point
of view this is totally unsatisfactory and, in my view, undesirable.


Legal Representation

Counsel representing the Force is, of course, responding to the
evidence given at the Inquest as appropriate to ensure that the
interests of the Force and the Police Authority are properly
represented and to a small degree he is, at the same time,
representing the interests of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
This is not sufficient to allow for evidence to emerge to best public
advantage.

The other officers who are represented, and who are funded through
private insurance, have already made significant in-roads into that
provision.  The Inquest is proceeding slowly and so their financial
problems will become greater over time.


Good Faith and Reasonable Judgment

In the case R. -v- Derbyshire Police Authority ex-parte Wilson and
Dalton (an extract of this is contained in the Clerk & Financial
Officer's paper) it was said "...a Police Authority if satisfied
of good faith on the part of the officer(s) would normally act and
be pleased to act on the central principle stated in the Circular..."
- (HOC 77/87).    It was held in that case that this "...meant that
there is a presumption that if an officer is shown to have acted
■in good faith in pursuance of his duties (this has already been
accepted to be the case by this Authority at their meeting on
16 November 1990), he should be entitled to reimbursement of his
reasonable   costs   and  that  a refusal    to  reimburse   in  such
circumstances must be a bad decision unless there is some relevant
factor which could reasonably justify the refusal.      Without such
justification the Police Authority must be taken to have failed
to have had proper regard for the central principle."

The Clerk & Financial Officer advises that a Police Authority
satisfied the officers acted in good faith may consider further
the extent to which those concerned in an application for such
assistance are subject to evidence of negligence possibly substantial
negligence or of any failure to exercise judgment reasonably.
                                    -   3 -



5.3    The Chief Constable advances the view that there is no doubt all
        the officers on the day were acting in pursuance of their duties
        and in good faith.

5.4    These officers were faced, in terms of what occurred and the
        difficulties which    emerged,  with  a situation which in their
        experience, and probably everyone else's was unique.

5.5    There was real concern at one point in time for the lives of
        spectators, including many children and young people, outside the
        turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough football
        ground.

5.6    The decisions which were made and which have been and are still
        the subject of protracted enquiry, were made to save life and for
        no other reason.

5.7    The enormous management, logistical problems and experienced stress
       which was present at the relevant time needs to be taken into
       account.

5.8    It may be said that the worst decision would,               at that time,     have
        been to make no decision.

5.9    All the officers, including Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, were
        acting in accordance with their duties, in good faith, and, despite
        what occurred, were exercising their judgment to the best of their
        abilities in the circumstances.

5.10   The Clerk & Financial Officer          has   drawn   your    attention   to    the
        question of reasonable judgment.

5.11   If the issue of negligence or the exercise of judgment is a relevant
        consideration in your deliberations there must be clear evidence
        of negligence, possibly substantial negligence.      Your attention
        has been drawn to the    report of Lord Justice Taylor.  It must be
        remembered that Lord Justice Taylor was acting as the chairman of
        a Public Inquiry which is not a judicial hearing and that the
        witnesses were not giving evidence in the strict sense that applies
        in normal legal proceedings.

5.12   The Director of Public Prosecutions when considering the question
        of criminal liability against all or any of the officers concerned
        in this application of course could do so only on the basis of clear
        evidence.   He utilised the services of the West Midlands Police
        to investigate and compile a report which was based on the evidence
        available.   His conclusion was, after considering the West Midlands
        Police report, there was insufficient evidence to justify proceedings
        against anyone.

5.13   It may be concluded that what this means is that there was
        insufficient evidence of negligence or failure to exercise judgment
        reasonably, on the part of any police officers, which would amount
        to criminal culpability.
                                   - 4 -


5.14   The on-going Inquest is again concerned with evidence concerning
       these same issues.    It would probably be imprudent of the Police
       Authority to come to judgmental conclusions on the questions of
       negligence or reasonable judgment in advance of the Inquest findings.


6      Finance

6.1    The Circular makes it clear that expenditure incurred in this regard
       is eligible for police grant.

6.2    When this Committee last considered these applications questions
       were raised about the private insurance available to the chief
       superintendent and three superintendents. The position is:-

       a.   Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill
            each officer has a financial limitation of £50,000
            which after VAT is taken into account amounts
            in fact to £42,500 each.

       b.   The policy does not specifically cover Inquest
            Hearings but it is understood that the insurers
            are prepared to provide cover in this instance.

       c.   In relation to future risks the officers may need
            further   legal advice and representation after
            the Inquest Hearings have been concluded,         for
            example,   in relation    to criminal,    private or
            discipline proceedings.    If the Director of Public
            Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings,
            in the first instance the Police Authority could
            not - even if they so wished - fund the officers'
            legal   costs.    There  is no provision for the
            Authority    to    fund  legal   representation    at
            discipline hearings.     Therefore, in terms of the
            insurance     provision,    such   possible    future
            requirements must be borne in mind.

6.3    In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance
       but to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their
       application,   as   with   the   chief   superintendent   and   three
       superintendents, is for Police Authority funding in relation to
       legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest Hearing only.

6.4    The Clerk & Financial Officer in his latest paper has drawn attention
       to the fact that the Derbyshire case is authority for the proposition
       that, when deciding whether or not to provide financial assistance,
       alternative funding should not be taken into account.      Certainly,
       the continuing needs of the officers as described above must be
       considered.

6.5    Whilst it is difficult to assess the amount of money involved in
       these applications, the position in respect of each officer at the
                                        - 5 -


            time of the 2 November meeting, was made available       to   the   Clerk
            & Financial Officer and may be helpful in this regard.

     6.6    A third decision by the Authority not to support any or all of the
            officers will have a significant detrimental impact on Force morale.
            South   Yorkshire Police   officers  go about   their  daily duties
            performing difficult and often dangerous tasks in the sincere belief
            that they have the full support of the Police Authority who as part
            of their function strive to provide such support and not the
            converse.


     Conclusion

     If funding for legal assistance is denied to any of the officers, the best
     needs of natural justice will be neglected, allowing the real risk of less
     evidence emerging in the public interest - whether to the credit or detriment
••   of the Force.




     R B WELLS
     CHIEF CONSTABLE
 IN THE SUPREME COURT j OR *JUBl€ATORE;8                      "*
 DIVISIONAL COURT

                                                        Royal Courts of Justice
                                                                             July, 1989

                                        Before:
                            LORD JUSTICE RALPH GIBSON
                              and MR. JUSTICE NOLAN



                  R.   V.    DERBYSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY,

                            EX PARTE WILSON AND DALTON



                                       JUDGMENT


LORD JUSTICE      RALPH       GIBSON:           This is       an     application    for

judicial review        of     the    decision     of    the        Derbyshire    Police

Authority of 26th July              1988 not to    pay any part of            the legal

expenses incurred on behalf of the applicants.                        The applicants

are Inspector     Wilson        and Sergeant       Dalton      of the        Derbyshire

Constabulary.      They claim an order of               certiorari to quash the

decision of the Authority not to meet                  the expenditure incurred

by the applicants           in the costs       of legal representation at            an

Auditor s Inquiry into allegations of illegal                       expenditure upon

various matters, and           in particular       upon the refurbishment            of

the office of the then Chief Constable at Police Headquarters.


      The decisions of          the District Auditor           were given in        his

report dated 26th June 1967.               He held that no police officer,

whose actions     had been investigated,               had been       shown to     have

been guilty of     wilful misconduct            although the expenditure            on

the refurbishment had been shown to have                   been unauthorised and

was   therefore    illegal.              The      amount      was     some    £28,000.
  Inspector Wilson        and    Sergeant       Dalton     had    been    represented

  throughout the     15 days of         the District        Auditor's inquiry          by

  counsel upon the instructions of a solicitor.                       The total cost

  of their representation was in               the region of £17,000.           Other

 parties interested        had also          been     represented, including       the

 County council.          The    services of          solicitor and counsel        had
 been made available for Inspector Wilson and Sergeant Dalton by

 the Police Federation without any stipulation                     that they should

 be personally liable to repay the Federation.                     when the result

 of the inquiry      was known the           Police Federation, on          behalf of

 the applicants, applied to            the Police Authority for             the costs

 to be paid,      or for a      payment of a          contribution towards them.

 It is common ground that the Authority had                  legal power to make

 payment out of police funds.                The Authority decided to make no
payment.


        That decision is        attacked on         three main     grounds.       The

first ground      was called         by Mr.     Underhill    the "rubber       stamp

submission".         It    was       said     that the    Police     Authority,       a

committee of which the full membership was 24, did not make the

decision but wrongly left the making of the decision to a panel

of 5 members appointed by            the Authority to do no -ore             than to

hear submissions and         to report.             The second ground,        called

"the inadequate report submission",                 was that if     the Authority

made the decision      themselves, they did              so upon an      incomplete

report from the panel.           In particular, the panel, appointed to

receive the representations of the officers                 seeking payment of

their    costs,   failed        to    tell      the    Authority     what     their
     costs incurred by police officers and of the purposes for which

     that power was     given, it      was submitted        that W M M H M r             to



     Police Authority.         In addition, it was said that the Authority

     took into account various         matters to which it should             have had
     no regard.


          It is necessary first to describe the nature and powers of

^    the Police    Authority     and     of    the   Secretary    of     State      with
     reference to these matters.


     The Police Authority


          The Police Act 1964 by section 2 provides               that the Police

    Authority for a        police area       consisting of a     non-Metropolitan

    county shallbe     a     committee of      the    Council of       the      County

    constituted in accordance with             the provisions of       this section

    to be known     as the     Police Committee.           The Police        Committee

    consists of such number of persons as may              be determined by the

    Council of the County and, of that number, two thirds are to be

    members of the County Council appointed by that Council and one

    third shall     be appointed from         among the    magistrates for          the
    County by those magistrates.


         By section 4(1) of the          1964 Act "it shall be the            duty of

    the Police     Authority    ...    to     secure the    maintenance        of   an

    adequate and      efficient       police force    for the    area,       and    to

    exercise for      that purpose       the powers conferred      on a        Police
    Authority by this Act".


                                 - 3     -
        Section 8       deals     with       financial        provisions:           n...     all

receipts of the          Police Authority             ... shall        be paid into          the

Police fund and          all expenditure of                any such Police          Authority

shall be paid out of that                fund. "          Then by sub-section             (3) of
section 8:        "    ...    an account to be known             as the police account

shall be kept          of all    expenditure          and     receipts of the             Police

Authority                and by     sub-section (4) "No sum shall                     be paid

out of the Police Fund .. . without the                       approval of the Council

of the County ...”            except in certain cases irrelevant                      to this
case.


        Part    II     of the    Act          deals with         central      supervision,

direction and          facilities.By          section            28    the Secretary          of

State "shall exercise his powers under this Act                             in such manner

and to such extent as             appears to him to be best                 calculated to
promote the efficiency of the                     police".       By section 31:             "The

Secretary of          State     may make          grants     in respect      of      expenses

incurred for police purposes                  ... (a)        by any     Police Authority

..." and       ...     "grants    under this              section     shall be       of     such

amounts,       ...     and    subject        to     such    conditions        ...     as     the

Secretary of State            may with        the approval          of the Treasury          by

order determine          ..."          The        court    has     been told        that,     in

substance, under the regulations 51 per cent of the expenditure

of a     Police       Authority    is        provided       from      central       funds    as

directed by          the Secretary       of State          and     49 per    cent by        the

County Council out of rates.


The Home Office Circular


        Home Office Circular           No. 77/87, dated               4th December 1987,

is the foundation of the               case for the applicants.                   Section 4
 of the 1964 Act,       cited above, defines            the duty of the        Police

 Authority and the        purposes for        which     the Authority may spend

 the money    provided, namely             to secure     the    maintenance of an

 adequate and efficient        police force.             The circular       provides

 guidance to police        authorities with reference             to one form      of

 expenditure.       The     first two paragraphs           must be       set out   in
 full:

       1.    There is statutory authority in section 48 of the
      Police Act 1964 for payments     to be madefrom the police fund
      to meet expenditure incurred     by police officers in defending
      proceedings in tort.      Also, acting in pursuance of its
      general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and efficient
      police force for its area, 4* ---- *-*-----— — -— *--- -----


                                                           RPI
         .,                 The purpose of this circular is to give
      guidance to police authorities to help them in considering
      T h ^ eStS Jn beh?lt of officers for financial assistance.
      This guidance has been discussed and agreed with local
      authority and with the police staff associations.

                                         which should   guide consideration
      —    J^that: an              has

                                                     of t h e ^ l i c e
        i?°w y    ensure that he has the services of a lawyer and
     that he ^should^^BrtMB*****^pocket.             The following
     paragraphs provide general guidance to the different classes
     © proceedings.    Payments made to officers in accordance with
     this guidance will be elegible for police grant".


     The remaining five pages of the circular, to some passages

in which    detailed      attention       will    be    given    later    in   this

judgment, contain       passages      under      the    headings:        "Criminal

Proceedings, Prosecution by           the Crown Prosecution Service             and

Private    Procecutions;        Civil       Proceedings:         Civil     Actions

against the     Chief   Officer for         Wrongful     Acts of     Constables,

Civil Actions against Individual Police Officers, Civil Actions

under the Data    Protection Act           1984, Police Officers          bringing

Civil Actions for Defamation;              Inquests, Public       Inquiries and
  Tribunals:      Legal     Representation for         Chief Officers, and         for
  Individual Officers;         Applications          for    Financial Assistance;
  and Assistance from Police Federation Funds".


          No issue has been raised as to the lawful authority of the
 Secretary of State to         issue guidance to police            authorities in

 the form and in         the terms of the       circular.        The    circular is
 n°t a regulation and does not            have the force of statutory law.

 The circular clearly assures authorities that use                     of the money

 supplied     m    the    police      grant    for     purposes    within        those

 envisaged by      the    circular      will   not     be    questioned     by    the
 Secretary of      State.          It   is also       common    ground that       the

circular contains guidance            with reference 'to        a power to       make
payments and did not create a specific duty to make payments.


      The Court was referred to B r i s t o l         Council v . C la rk [1975]
1 W.L.R, 1443 (Lord Denning MR, Lawton and                   Seaman LJJ.) where
the appeal concerned the validity of .a notice                  to quit given by
the Council to        a tenant of a       council house.           Reference was

there made to two joint circulars emanating from the Department
° f the    Environment and      the     Department of         Health and     Social

Security:     Circulars      74/72 and, 18/74.              Seaman' LJ. at    page
1450H said this:

     "It is'Clear from ... two circulars 7 4 /7 2 and 18/74 that local
     authorities exercising functions under the Housing Act are now
     invited by the central government to have regard to the
     problems of homelessness, the alternatives to eviction and the
     various statutory weapons available to their relief such as
     I t          Services le9islation and the Attachment of Earnings
     Act 1971.     I do not think it possible to rely on those
     circulars as imposing any direct statutory duty upon a housing
     authority; but I think they are a good indication as to the
     purposes to be served by the Housing Acts and as to what are
     relevant matters within the language of Lord Greene MR in
     ftednesbuxy case [1948] 1 K.B. 2 2 3 , 233, to be taken into
      account by a local authority            serving a notice to quit          upon a
      council tenant in arrears of           rent."


It was, as I understood it, common ground in                            this case, and in

my view it is correct, that the court can properly approach the

Home Office Circular No. 77/87 upon the same basis.                                    That is

not   to      say        that,       in considering              an     application        for

reimbursement of              costs by an       officer, a        Police Authority          is

necessarily limited to                factors listed           in the    Circular.          in

this case, however, it has not been suggested that any relevant
matters arose           for    consideration          outside     the     ambit       of   the
Circular.


The Police Federation.


      It is       necessary          to return        to     the Act    of     1964 for     an

understanding          of     the     role      and        functions    of      the     Police

Federation.            Part    III of the       Act by section 44             provides for

the continuance of             a Police Federation             for England and           Wales

... "for      the purposeof representing                      members        of the     police

forces in England andWales ... in all                         matters affecting their

welfare and        efficiency,          other        than questions       of        discipline

affecting individuals, except as provided by sub-section Cl)(A)

below,     and     questions         of promotion affecting             individuals".

Sub-Section         (1)<A),         inserted     by    the      Police        and    Criminal

Evidence Act 1984,             permits representation of                a member of        the

police force at           any disciplinary proceedings                  or on       an appeal

from any such proceedings.


      The Secretary of State by section 44(3) may by regulations

prescribe        the    constitution           and    proceedings        of    the     Police

Federation and, in particular, may make                        provision with respect
      the    raising     of    funds      by    the     Federation        by     voluntary

 subscription and the use             and management of funds derived                   from

 such subscriptions.           The court was informed               that the funds of

 the Police Federation          derive only from             private gifts and           the
 subscriptions of policemen.


      The       Police   Federation       regulations         1969     No.      1787,    as
 amended, were put before the court.                   it    is necessary to refer
 only to Regulation 19:          Use of Federation Funds.                    it is there
 provided that Federation funds                shall not, without            the consent

 °f the     Secrefcary of      State,            used otherwise           than for      the
 purposes       mentioned       in      paragraphs           (3)     to        (7 )   and,

notwithstanding anything in those paragraphs, shall not be used

 ... (c)    m    connection     with the defence of a member                   or former

member of       the   Federation        against       whom    civil#      criminal       or

disciplinary proceedings are             brought except            as authorised         by

paragraphs (4)(h),       (5)    or (7).The construction of Regulation

19   is not, in my view, free of               difficulty. The submission               for

the applicants, who are supported by the Police Federation, was

that the decision of the             Federation to pay the legal                costs of

the applicants incurred in the auditor's inquiry was made under

paragraph 3(3) of Regulation 19 which provides as follows:

     "Federations funds may be used to defray expenses lawfully
     incurred for the purpose specified in section 4.4C11 of the
     Police Act 1964, namely for the purpose of representing
     members of the police forces and police cadetsin England and
     Wales in a11 matters affecting their welfare and efficiency
     other than, subject to paragraph (7) questions of discipline
     and promotion affecting individuals".

J t was not suggested on behalf of the police authority that the

Federation s decision had been made without proper authority.
        we are conscious that no direction was made in this case,
   w en leave to apply „as g r a n t e d , fQr notice ^ ^ ^ ^

   Secretary of    state       for    the     h „„.     „
                                              Home      Department     who    made     the
   regulations and      whose circular has             been under examination              in

        case.       consideration            was   g iven by     the   court to        the
  desirability of the         giving of surh ^           •
                           9    mg   ofsuch notice upon theapplication
  coming before this           courtbut it was    deride
     ,                                      c was decided, not  without
   esitation, that it was not necessary so to do.


       we shall proceed in this case upon the assumption that the

  expenditure by the Police           Federation of Federation               funds upon
  therepresentation      of     the    two
                                         °     appllCants       was properly      made
 within the regulation,


 The Inquiry by the Auditor


      The inquiry arose out                of an   investigationby.the          County
 Treasurer into the police accounts.                    Disciplinary proceeding

 were taken against       the chief Constable,               „r. A.S. Parrish        but

 they did not     proceed to         a hearing        because of the     retirement
 upon grounds of ill health of Mr. Parrish on 5th


          Police Committee, which is another name for the Police

Authority,   (see section       2 of        the ,964     Act), resolved on        4th

December 1985 that the accounts and other documents                     be sent to

the auditor for consideration by him.                   The auditor was invited

to hold his inquiry in public.                The Clerk        of the Council was

instructed to retain counsel to represent                    the Police Authority
before the auditor.


     The nature    of    the proceedings              thus   initiated, and      the

powers which the auditor could use, if the facts justified such
                               ~ 9     -
action, are sufficiently described by reference to                sections 19

and 20 of the Local      Government Finance Act 1982.              By section

19, where   it    appears to      the    auditor ...       that   any item   of

account is contrary      to law     he may      apply to     the court for    a

declaration.       On his application the court may make or refuse

to make the declaration asked for and, where the declaration is

made, then the court may also order that any person responsible

for incurring or authorising any           expenditure declared unlawful

shall repay it in whole or         in part.       Such an order      is not to

be made if the     court is satisfied that the             person responsible

for   incurring    or   authorising       any    such      expenditure    acted

reasonably or in the belief that the expenditure was authorised

by law.     So far      as concerns section        19, the inquiry by        the

auditor was thus preliminary            to other proceedings       which might

be taken.        By section    20, however, where          it appears to     the

auditor that a loss       has been incurred or deficiency            caused by

the wilful misconduct of any person, he shall                certify that the

loss or deficiency is due         from that person and, subject            to an

appeal, that sum may be recovered            from the person responsible.

A right of appeal       is provided to       the court which may         confirm

vary or quash the decision.




the auditor's      inquiry.




payment towards the -c u m .
      The inquiry extended            over 15     days between 11th        November

 1986 and 10th March       1987.          There was a mass          of documentary

evidence introduced before and                during the hearing.          The main

issue was the     refurbishment of the             Chief Constables's office.

There were in     issue other          small amounts          of money which      were

mainly the     concern of       the Chief        Constable      only.      From     an

examination of     the     documents and          the    results of      interviews

conducted by officers assisting the auditor, it appeared to him

that, in     addition to       Mr. Parrish, the          Chief Constable,        four

other persons were                       of     the auditor's special        powers

under sections 19 and          20 of the 1982          Act.     They    were Police

Chief Superintendent Wendy Stock, Chief                  Administrative Officer

F. Yates and the two applicants, Inspector                    Wilson and Sergeant

Dalton.          During        the     course     of      the    inquiry    Police

Superintendent Keeton          also came        into that category.             Chief

Superintendent Stock was             represented by      separate counsel         and

Mr. Keeton was legally represented on two days of the hearing.


     The     following    is    a     summary     of    the     findings   of     the
Inspector:


     <i)        In and before the year 1982 consideration had been

     given by    senior officers          at Police       Headquarters to         the

     making of    changes in          the arrangement         and allocation      of

    offices on the executive corridor.                    Chief Superintendent
      Wendy stock proposed to Mr. Parrish, then chief Constable,

      that the   Chief Constable's        lounge should      be changed      so

   that it might be used as a conference room, and that                 a new

  desk be provided for            the Chief Constable's office. „r .

  Parrish agreed.          The    work involved the     installation of a
  movable soundproof partition.


  U i>       The money was, it was said by them,             thought   to be

  available "by way of virement".             That means an authorised

  change in the purpose           for which sums have     been allocated

  in approved annual estimates.              The authority's financial

 regulations permitted transfers from one estimate                 head to

 another with the      approval of the          Treasurer.     There    was
 never in fact any such approval.


  ’"')      The money was        spent on the    refurbishment without
 authorisation by the        Police Committee       and was     therefore
 contrary to law.       The amount was £28,022.

 (iv)       Hr. Parrish said that         he was unaware of       the lack

 of proper approval.             Miss   Stock said that she     believed

 that Mr. Yates, the Chief Administration Officer, had told

her, by an oral message conveyed to her by Mr. Wilson (one

of the applicants),         that he     would arrange     for virement.

Mr. Yates denied      sending the        message.     Mr. Wilson       was

uncertain and confused as           to the message he gave       to Miss




<V|        Mr'   Keeton'    Police      Superintendent,      identified
amounts totaling £16,808 in the 1982/83 accounts which had

been underspent on     certain estimates.            Mr. Dalton     (the
other applicant) prepared a list of four firms and amounts
totaling £16,807            with order       numbers.             In March        1983

orders were placed with those four firms for the supply of
goods to the value            of £16,747.              No goods were       supplied

before 31st       March 1983         but invoices          were requested          and

obtained from the firms.                  Mr. Dalton certified             that the
goods had     been received           and the          prices verified.             He

passed them to the police administrative                        department where

Mr. Wilson       certified         them     as    authorised       for     payment.

Payment was then made without further check                        by the County

Treasurer's Department.


(vi)      One set of invoices contained three items totaling

£2,396 (part         of     the £16,747)         for    which the        individual

amounts did      not correspond             with any      actual        item to     be

supplied.        By this      means, the total paid was                 brought to

the amount due for all the goods, delivered                        over a period

up to    August 1983         but supplied under            the invoices           sent

before 31st March 1983;                and the full            amount underspent

before    1983        was    made      available         for      the    payments.

Further, Mr. Dalton in the certification                       slip attached to

the invoices wrote the              code symbol for         expenditure heads

appropriate to the heads of the unexpended amounts and not

to the heads appropriate for the goods supplied.


(vii)    Further          orders     were    placed       between       April     and

September 1983.             Mr.     Dalton certified related              invoices

with a   code        inserted      relating to          "house-furniture          and

fittings" and not to the purpose for which                       the goods were

supplied.       No    application had been made for                 virement in
'   •
         1983/84 to alter the purpose for which the                  money had been

        allocated.       Miss Stock said that Mr. Keeton told her that

        the spending was in the revenue budget.                     Mr. Keeton said

        that he had not said that to Miss Stock.


         (viii)     No one had       made any personal          monetary gain       from

        any of the transactions relating to the refurbishment.


        (ix       The auditor        considered        whether the     unauthorised

        expenditure had been          caused by        the wilful misconduct          of

        any person.       He     referred to section 161 of               the 1972 Act
#•      and section     20(1)(b)        of      the 1982   Act.




        see Horabin v. B.O.A.C. [1952] 2 All E.R. 1016, 1022;                       and

        Lloyd v. McMahon [1987] 2 W.L.R. 821, 841 per Lawton LJ.


        (x)       None of the        persons concerned, said          the auditor,

        was an    accountant.              if   the accounting      irregularities

        which occurred     were       undertaken in        the    belief that       the

        refurbishment had        been       properly    authorised        then    their

        wrongfulness was        less serious.           There     was n o ■ evidence

        that Mr. Dalton, Mr. Wilson or Mr. Keeton knew at the time

        that the refurbishment had not been approved.


        (xi)      Miss Stock, Mr. Keeton, Mr. Wilson                and Mr. Dalton

        said that they thought it was correct                to code expenditure

        to the expenditure head             which had been underspent.              The

        practices     adopted        may     well   have     been    an     innocent

        misunderstanding on          the     part   of the    particular         police


                                 -   14 -
officers, although it          did have    the effect of       concealing

 the expenditure on        refurbishment from        any one who      might
review actual expenditure with estimates.


 (xii)     In the view       of the auditor      none of the    officers

had been shown to        have been guilty        of wilful misconduct.

It was the auditor's opinion that the parties acted in the

belief that their actions         were authorised by law         for the

reasons explained in         the report so       that it would not      be

proper to seek an order for repayment.


(xiii)     As to Mr. Wilson, he was aware on his own evidence

°f the improper       certification by      Mr. Dalton on       invoices

that goods not yet       received had been        received.      He    was
aware that the purpose was to secure the              payment of those

invoices before the end of March 1983 and the debit of the

expenditure to the 1982/83 accounts.              Since   he was aware

of those     irregularities      it was    his    duty to     refuse    to
certify the invoices and         to prevent the purpose         of those
acts being     achieved.        But   Mr. Wilson      did certify      the

invoices and     he    did    not report    the    irregularities       to

anyone.       It seemed, however, likely that he acted in the

belief that approval for         the expenditure had been          or was

in the    process of     being obtained.           It probably      never

occurred to him that he was doing anything wrong.


Cxiv)     As to Mr.    Dalton, who was        a police sergeant,       he

said that all his      actions were in consequence          of general

or specific    instructions to        hint by Miss    Stock, a     Chief

Superintendent, or Mr. Keeton, a Superintendent.                 He had

discussions with suppliers and obtained invoices               which he
           certified, including        the irregular       invoices.        He    said
           that he questioned      the propriety of         his actions but        was
           reassured by Miss Stock.           Miss Stock denied that she had

           reassured him.        Mr.     Dalton acted      wrongly in      obtaining

           irregular invoices      and     in certifying      them    as to'"goods

          received when goods had not been received;                 and it was no

          answer to say that he was acting under              instructions.         He
          had, however, only       been in the      department ror two           years
          and there was no evidence that he knew the expenditure had
          n°t been     properly approved.           His    evidence was         honest
§•        sounding and convincing.


          (x   y)    Additional costs      incurred by      the County      Council

          over        question    of unauthorised payments including              the

          disciplinary       proceedings    were,     at    the    time    of     the

          auditor's inquiry, already in excess of £200,000.


          (xvi)     Even if it were to be decided that             there had been

          wilful misconduct it could not logically be                said that any

          loss had been incurred         by the charging of        expenditure to

          the wrong year nor did it seem that             it could logically be

          said that    the    irregular . submission of        invoices      caused
          loss.


     The Process of the Decision of 26th July 1988

          By letter    of    26th February     1988     the Police     Federation

     requested the Police Authority         to meet in full,        or contribute

     to, the legal costs of the applicants.               Reference was made to

     the circular    No. 77/87    and to     those aspects        of the   inquiry

     which justified and required legal representation.


                                  - 16 -
                      12th April 1968               the application was considered                    by the
             Police Authority.                At this polnt             the pouers       Qf ^

             Authority    must        be     described           as     to    delegation         of    their

             functions.      By section 107 of the Local Government Act 1972 it

             is provided that         sections 101,              ,02, 103 and        106 of that           Act

             shall apply to a Police Authority (such as that for Derbyshire)

         as they apply           to a       local authority.                 This Police        Authority

         therefore could lawfully                   arrange for the            discharge of any              of

         its functions        by       a     committee,           or    a    sub-committee,           or     an
         officer.


                 On this occasion there was before the                          Authority, of which

         the full membership was, as I have said,                             24, a report prepared

         by the then        Clerk to the             Authority.              The report     (page 130)

         showed     that,     in           addition        to     the       application     of        these

         applicants,        chief          Superintendent          stock       and      Superintendent

         Keeton had       also      applied          for    reimbursement          of     their       costs
        incurred at the inquiry.                    The report continued:

                N0PP77/78i °2h hhd b**”           SUb" ittK i in accordance with c irc u la r
                               ^   9ave           9eneral S uidanc only and was not
                 S                                         =adressed to t L e . i t S t l S
i M l           i z f 4-k    offlcers were m a position where they "should
                have the support of the Police Authority"       in T L        !
         '      the District a.dit hearing, it Wasm n t M o u t Z t tL T o life
                Z - Z lt¥          h&d r6ferred th« matter to the District
                th    r S0       ifc was' in effect, the complainant and in
                   ®   circumstances it was inappropriate for the Police
                Authority to m t       the expense claims in whole or in part.”


        It was     acknowledged by             Mr. Newman             for    the Police     Authority

        before     this     court           that    the         last    sentence     contained             a

        misdirection as          to         the     meaning        of the      circular     and        the

        position of the Police               Authority in discharging                   its functions




                                                   17 -
 under the terms of it.                It will be necessary to return to that
 point later in this judgment.


         The Pollce Authority              did not delegate,           as it might       have

 done, the function          of deciding            the applications but             resolved

 thafc    "a   panel        •••      fae    appointed          ...     (to)     ...      hear

 representations from Miss Stock and/or her                          representatives and

 report back to this committee;                 and that an opportunity to make
 oral rePresentations to the panel also be offered                            to the other
 applicants and/or their representatives".


      • The panel      was duly        established.            It     consisted of        the

 Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Police                      Authority, Councillor

 Barnes and     Councillor           Dentith,       respectively,         together      with
Councillor      D.M.      Bookbinder,           the    Leader        of   the    Council,

Councillor Mellors, and Mr. John JP, a magistrate.


         °n 8th July 1988 submissions were made to the panel.                            The

submissions made for            these applicants             were presented by          Miss

Blackburn a solicitor.                There is at page 34 a full account of

her submission.           In      very brief summary            she relied upon          the

following matters:             (i)    the applicants had              provided full co­

operation in     the      investigation             at all    stages;         (ii)       the
inquiry posed       the     risk      of    grave consequences            for    the     two
officers concerned;            (iii). they had both been acting under the
orders of senior        officers;            (iv)     the    nature of the           inquiry

gave rise to problems of evidence and the handling of a mass of

documents and       legal      representation          was therefore          necessary;

(v)      both had been totally cleared of misconduct;                         (vi)     their

claim to reimbursement or contribution fell                         clearly within the

main principle      of the        circular;         (vii)      it     would serve       the
 Derbyshire Police Force ill if the costs of officers, placed in

 SUCh a      position       at    an     inquiry,        and who        had     in    substance




         Mr. Million, Deputy Head of Legal                     Services for Derbyshire

 County Council, was present at the meeting of                            the panel and by

 his second affidavit (page 55) described what happened:

         T-il’1Jhe<.?ane^ discuss®d the matter in private session.     My
          ecollection is that the discussion lasted approximately 20
          inu es.     During the course of the discussion I recall that I
         ?hVe«afV1Ce °n thre®      issues and set        out the options        open to

       (a) leg a lly the P o lice Committee were able to pay th e costs-
      I V a t l T f o ^ i 0n, t0WardS th6m but whether or n o H o S o s r ^
              i •           d is c re tio n of the Committee; (b)           in making
      ah® decif lon the             Committee       (and       the panel     in      its
      c irc u la r 77/87            I** p a rtic u la r re 9ard to th e advice in
                      K K ?* drew                      a tte n tio n to  th e c e n tra l
      cases- and fC^ should 9uide con sid eratio n of                     in d iv id u a l
      M o iw ’ k          *• in r e s P°nse to a question from C oun cillo r
     ^      ,    h* “ »'iraed that the terns of th.             circular were ,id.
     enough to cover a D i s t r i c t A u d ito r's h earing ."

     Mr. Million continued:

                                     d!Cided to      « « » “ end that th.       police
     Committee not to provide fin a n c ia l a ssista n c e e it h e r in whole
     sL i               anl th * aPPlic a n ts .   The Panel had not been
     s p e c ific a lly asked by the    Police Committee to             make a
                                     heir     0,6 " * " * • » “ « « »    «nd    report
     back.      Although th e po int was not ra ise d or d iscu ssed the
          • Pf ° ceeded on the bas i s th a t making a recommendation was
     w ithin the rem it and formed p a rt of rep o rtin g back."


     Finally Mr. Million               said that         he did     not know which            of

many possible factors caused each of the                        individual members of

the Panel       to    reach      the conclusion          he     did.           However       the

following were among             those mentioned or             discussed:           (a)     the

report     of   the    auditor         with     particular          reference         to     the

conclusions he        reached       relating        to    the      applicants         and    to
      unlawful      expenditure          and        wilful         misconduct;                (b)          the
      provisions        of     circular        77/87,-            (c)         the     fact     that        the

      application had been              made after the             event and that there                    had

      been     no   approach          made     to      the    Police           Authority           earlier,

      P     ticularly    on     the          level     and    scale            of     representation;

      (d)    the assistance provided by the Federation;                                 (e)        the fact

      that the      ratepayers         who     had     originally             complained            to     the

     District       Auditor      had     not        asked     for        or    been      given           legal
     assistance.


             It will be        necessary to refer                 later in this judgment                    to

     the evidence of           members of           the Panel as          to the grounds                 upon
     which each formed his conclusion.


             A report was        prepared by the              Panel and submitted to                      the

               Authority.              it is        at page       46 and        consisted of              two

     sheets of typescript.               It     was a joint report by the                      clerk to

     the Police      Authority,         Hr.      Reg Race          and        the Head        of     Legal

     Services, Mr. David Tysoe.                 The purpose of                the report was "to

A   r6POrt th6       “ "siderations            of     the Panel           established           by       the
    Committee to hear representations ..."                              under "Information and

    Analysis" it referred to the setting up of the Panel and to its

    meeting on 8th July to hear representations on                                  behalf of chief

    Superintendent           Stock,     on     behalf        of    these        applicants,              and

    written representations made by Superintendent Keeton.                                         it was

    said that the applications                 were considered in                   accordance with

    the circular;       that consideration was given to the principle of

    making payment in full, or contribution and not                                 to the details

    of any payment;           that     detailed submissions                   were made by            the

    respective parties;          and         that the Panel took into                  account the


                                             20 -
     findings of the Auditor and the fact that the Auditor concluded

     that no one       involved in        the matter       of the refurbishment             was

     guilty of wilful misconduct albeit the expenditure was declared
     to be contrary to law.


             There was then reference to the               central principle pointed

     out in     the    circular,       which     should       guide    consideration         of

     individual       cases,     namely        that    where     a    Police        Authority

     considered that an          officer had          acted in    good faith'...,           the

     officer should          have the support of the             Police Authority           and


9»
     should not       be     out of pocket.             There then         followed      this

     statement:       "Members considered carefully all                    of the arguments

     which had been put forward             ... by the applicants but               were not

     persuaded that the circumstances of any of the                         cases were such

     as to    justify        the Police Authority          paying      the costs       or    a

     contribution towards them".


          Next, under the heading "Personnel Considerations", it was

     noted that Chief Superintendent Stock and Superintendent Keeton

     had incurred          their own   costs.           The     Police Federation           had

     exercised its discretion to represent the applicants, Inspector

     Wilson and       Sergeant Dalton,         and "any        reimbursement of        costs

     would in effect be a reimbursement to the                    Police Federation of

     its costs".


          Under "financial considerations"                    it was noted      that Chief

     Superintendent         Stock's    costs                                  the     Police

     Federation's costs         amounted to H R H F                  and    Superintendent

     Keeton's costs amounted t(




                                       - 21 -
        Under "legal        considerations"              it was said        that "if     the

Police Authority were             so minded the           costs, or a        contribution

towards them, could legally be paid.                           However, whether or not

to do     so is    a matter        for the        discretion of          the Committee".

That was followed by           "Panel's unanimous recommendation:                       that

the Police Authority           do not       provide any financial              assistance

... for the applicants".


        It is necessary to comment at this point upon this report.

On first looking at these papers it                      seemed clear to me that the

authors of the report, the Clerk tothe                     Authority and        the Head

of Legal     Services, neither            of whom         had been       present at      the

meeting of the        Panel, were unaware                 of or in       a state of     some

confusion     as     to    what     the     Panel        had      been    instructed      or

authorised to do.             It was set up to hear                the representations

and to report.            It has not been argued that                the Panel was not

entitled to add a recommendation as                      to its own view.             For my

part I think that it was so entitled.                           All those on the Panel

were, of course, members of                the Authority;           but, if it        was to

do what it had been           instructed to do, it                was, in my judgment,

essential to report fairly the substance of the representations

which it     had heard.             It is,        for that        purpose, useless        to

recite that '’all the arguments have been carefully considered".

That is not a        "report" in the meaning                   of that word as        it was

used in the        resolution of the             Police Authority in setting              up

the Panel.         The apparent explanation for what occurred appears

to be     that the        five Panel      members        were led        to believe,      or

believed     without        advice,       that     the     Police     Authority        could

properly act simply on their view of                      the representations which

had been made.            It is clear that there was                no intention        that
        should       be any    further report         or    explanation of          their

  recommendation upon submission              of their      report to the          Police

   uthority nor was anything of            that nature done.              That seemed

  to me to    be a mistaken          belief and one        which they should          not

  have been advised        or prepared to        entertain.         The      applicants

  seemed to    me    to be     entitled       to have      their    representations

  considered by the        Police Authority itself.                 Some of the           19
 other members might have seen more force in                     the arguments than

 the members     of the       Panel could      see.        Hr.     Newman, for        the

 respondents, has, however,            contended that        that view is          wrong

 and that the Police Authority was entitled to act as it did.


      Little remains to be told as to the process                      of the making

    the decision.           The "report"       was considered by the            Police

 Authority on 26th July ,988 and the Authority decided to refuse

 the applications.          The minute is at page 138.              It recites the

 fact that    the    Panel     had     carefully      considered       all    of     the

arguments     put    forward     for    the    applicants        but    unanimously

recommended that no payment            be made.         The resolution not            to

provide financial assistance was recorded.                   Twenty one members

of the Police Authority were            present at the meeting.                it was

one only of     a substantial number           of other items          of business.

It is common ground         that there was       no discussion and that              no

explanation of the representations made for                  the applicants was
given to the Police Authority.


     On 29th July 1988 notice            of the decision was sent : to the

applicants.     No    reasons were given.               On 2nd September           1988

the applicants by         their solicitors asked           for the reasons . for

the decision-        0n    23rd September 1988          Mr. Reg Race,         County
       Director,    replied, as Clerk to the         Police Authority      (page 41).

       The following passage should be noted:

               Your letter consistently refers to your clients but ... the
              Federation undertook to meet those costs        and therefore
              Sergeant Dalton and Inspector Wilson are not personally liable
              to meet them".


      Mr. Race then dealt        with the allegation put forward            on behalf

                 applicants                                                  by

      Chairman of      the Police Authority,

                                                                                  ms

                                          indicate that the decision           of the
      Committee was         . irrational".




      The Proceedings for Judicial Review


              Application for leave      to apply was        made on 26th    October

      and leave was granted        by Mr. Justice Webster on         16th December

      1988.     The affidavit in support was provided            by Mr. Webber, a

      partner of applicants' solicitors.              It included    reference to

* •   the public comments made by Mr. Albert Barnes,              Chairman of the

      Police Authority, to       which reference has         been made above,     in

      support of the      contention that the        decision had been made       by

      the Panel and not by       the Police Authority, and that            in making

      the decision the      Panel had    had regard to        irrelevant matters.

      Mr. Webber     referred to     a   report in     the    edition of     "Police

      Review" for 19th August 1988.           There is       now before the court

      a copy of a     press release, upon which         that article was based,

      issued by Mr.     Barnes after     the final     decision of the       Police

      Committee on 26th July 1988 in         response, as Mr. Barnes put it,


                                    - 24 -
      to p u b l i c c o m m e n t s m a d e b y t h e P o l i c e F e d e r a t i o n " .         it i s at

     page 169 of the bundle and contains the following:

                                b6en Said that the two officers were
            *         3     !uinquiry' ifc should ^ borne in mind that the
                     V n *         refurbishment of the Chief Constable’s
           Zai           ^        have been incurred without authority and
           carefulirary        j*     The Police Authority’s members Panel
                     considered all the facts available before making its
           decision.    I am surprised that the Police Federation, who act
           in a similar role to a trade union, has chosen to unfairly
           criticise the Authority through the media.       In exceptional
           o f f i ^ fi"nCeS.theKar h°rity h3S the discretionary power to pay
           2 S 5 S S f               8fter Careful consideration the PaSel
           decided not to make an award.          The decision of the Panel
           which comprises both elected members and            a magistrates
          recommendaf 6'        ™™ous,      was in agreem^nt with the
          lit                    professionals who served the Panel, and
          Although      S v   a?P^°Ved by the ful1 Police Committee,
          me^r?              Federation have said publicly that their
                 n ?         Pay these costs, I think it is unfair to
          expect Derbyshire ratepayers to meet them.        One of the
          benefits of membership is that costs of legal action such as
          T*            C3n ^ "et from the Police Federation's funds.
          tL        ^    remembered that the two ratepayers who brought
           he ®atter to the attention of the District Auditor did not
          askDerbyshire      ratepayers to   pay the    cost of   legal
          risk"S6ntatl0n nS1*her did others am°n9 those stated                          to be at



          The applicants complained that, if the Police Authority is

to be           treated as        having made             the decision          by accepting           the

decision or recommendation of                            the Panel, the decision                   was bad

because the             Panel had         taken into           account irrelevant                  matters

namely,           (i)    the ratepayers who had brought                         the matter to the

attention of             the Auditor           had not        sought the           costs of         legal

representation;                   (ii)           the      refurbishment            of        the    Chief

Constable's office                 was found          by the       District         Auditor to         be

contrary to law;                  (iii)      Mr.     Wilson’s and Mr. Dalton's                      costs

had been met by the Police Federation;                               and (added by amendment

at     the       hearing)            (iv)          Mr.     Wilson's          and     Mr.      Dalton's

application for reimbursement                        was a       "late” application,                 made

only after the              costs had         been incurred,             and that the              Police
     Authority had had no prlor opportunity of considering the scale
     and level of representation.


           It was common         ground before this           court that some of          the

     matters, to which reference               was made by members         of the Panel

  were indeed        irrelevant but            it was     contended    for the      Policl

  Authority that such matters                  had formed no real       or substantial
  part of the basis of decision.



                                                           lority under     the statute
  in the COntext         °f th«       guidance given by         the circular
  think,                                                 It       iflBVb

 which^rts           must    perform in          .fl^ng        w h , g | ^ ^ ^ —     ^

 W       ant should- despite his success,
                                         •                                         costs,
 or all     Of his       costs.            The validity       of the   exercise of         a

 C°U r t 'S diSCretl°" ln SUCh                     1-     been frequently examined,
               if it was going to make                  a decision,

                                 tevant to      the exercise of its         discretion
 and the point at which guidance was most                     required was when the

 grounds of application had                been put forward and        the Authority
was required        to     make its        decision      with reference      to     those
grounds.       It    is, I think, clear                                              the



these matter        were    put       forward     by the      applicants    i^

grounds.       I w i n mention             those matters first before         dealing

with the points on which the applicants have relied.


       Firstly, at       the very       outset the        application was         placed

before th. police Authority with a report prepared by the Clerk

to the Authority.            I    have set out          the relevant part of        the

report above to the effect that since the                     Police Authority had

                                  -   26   -
      been in    effect the       complainant in       the audit      inquiry it       was

      inappropriate for the Authority to make any payment towards the

      costs.     As I have said, Mr. Newman            has acknowledged that this

      was in error.          it   is necessary to       explain why it           was error

      and, in my        view, a   serious error.             The expectation of        the

      applicants to be paid         their costs, if they were              fairly within

      the central principle stated            in the circular,        cannot sensibly

      be affected by       the fact that       the Police Authority, which             has

      the task     of    considering     their      claim,    was,    to    an     extent,

      responsible for causing          the inquiry,      in which the        applicants

# »   had been put at risk, to be set up and carried out.                         The role

      of the Police Authority          as complainant, in the sense               that the

      County Council,       of which     the Police      Authority is        in form     a

      committee,    had      suffered      the       "loss"     which       was     being

      investigated, was, on the contrary, a fact in                  respect of which

      the Police Authority was required, in my judgment, to call upon

      its powers of objective detachment so that,                in considering the

      applications for reimbursement of             costs, it would         have regard

      only to    matters     relevant to      the    conduct of      the     individual

      applicants, in the light         of the guidance         in the terms of        the

      circular, and       not to any    sense of      general indignation           based

      upon its view of the         "loss" suffered by the County             Council as

      contributor to the police         funds.         There is nothing to           show

      that the members of         the Police Authority were later             told that

      that first advice from        their Clerk was misconceived but,                as I

      have said, the point has not been relied upon;                  if it had been

      there might have been further           evidence directed to it;              and I
      therefore put it on one side.




                                     - 27 -
        Secondly, it is necessary           to refer to Mr.          Barnes's press

release.         It    contained     the statement          that "in    exceptional

circumstances the Authority has the discretionary                      power to pay

officers costs".           it is to be hoped that it is exceptional, in

the work of       a Police Authority,            that consideration has to            be

given to an application of this nature.                      If an application is

made, however, and if the applicant's circumstances fall fairly

within the       guiding       principle    of    the   circular,       no     further

question of       "exceptional circumstances"               then    arises and




                      liven.       This point also          forms no part of         the

case for the applicants and I lay it on one side also.                         I will

return to the         question whether the          Panel had regard         to other

irrelevant matters after dealing with the applicants' main case

which was       that the       Police Authority       did     not consider       their

applications.


The Applicants' first two Submissions


        The first two of Mr. Underhill's main                 submissions can, as

he said, be taken together:            they are the "rubber stamping" and

the "inadequate report"           submissions.          The     force of the         two

submissions is         that    there was     no     proper decision       upon       the

application for reimbursement of costs by the Police Authority.

The Panel was not        given authority to          decide the applications,

although the Police Authority had full power                   to have delegated

the decision to        the Panel if        it had    wished to do        so.         The

Panel took upon itself           to make a decision on             the applications

as to    what    the    Panel     would    do     and to     report     that    as     a
      recommendation.            In reporting back to the Police Authority, as

      it had been        instructed to           do, the Panel         did recite the        main

      factors according to which                 their recommendation was made.                 I

      accept Mr. Newman's submission that the report was not a "bare"

      recommendation as Mr.              Underhill called it.              The report        made

      reference to the           fact that there            was under consideration           the

      principle of making              any payment       and not the       question of        how

      much payment might be made;                 to the      central finding that there

      had been no       wilful misconduct              but with       the comment that        the

      expenditure had          been held         contrary to      law;      to the      central

# •   principle      stated       in      the     circular;           to   the   fact        that

      reimbursement would              amount     to   reimbursement        of   the    Police

      Federation;       and to the fact that there was full legal power to

      make payment.         But




                                                                                   The report

      was placed        before     the     Police      Authority.            There     was     no

      discussion.        The      decision was made.              If it was the        duty of

      the   Police      Authority         to      consider      the    substance       of     the
m
      submissions       made       for     the     applicants         in   deciding         their

      application then it is clear that as to 16 of the 21 members of

      the Police Authority, who                 were present on that         occasion, they

      failed to do so because they did not know what they were.


            Mr. Underhill submitted that                    the nature of the      powers of

      the Police Authority, and                of the decision required to             be made

      upon the application,             was in     each case such          that it was       the

      duty of     the    Police        Authority       to    consider      the   applicants'

      submissions.        He     referred to the discussion                of discretionary

                                          - 29 -
Power in Professor wade's Administrative Law. 6th Edition, ,988

pages 357-367 and to the cases there cited.                                                                                  m       particular he

relied upon the                         passage in                        the opinion of                               Viscount Dilhorne,

91V1"9 the                3Ud9ment                 of the                     ^ivy                   Council in                  Jeffs              v.   We„

^              D3irr ^                         1,9671 1                           = • = = ’ at 568-569.                                  Having held
that the           Board had                     under               the relevant                                statute              no power            to

delegate to               a        committee                       the              task of                     hearing              evidence            and
submissions Viscount Dilhorne continued:


       ^        ^      “ o L itte e ^ o h“ d t i . d“                                   ^   n 0 tk aP P ear th * t       018 > » « •
       t h e c o m m it t e e  any      M rt                                                «    h * a r in 9 "                    to
       p r o v is io n s o f t £    ao^    L . L                                                             S“ b J « t    to    th e
       b o a rd c a n r e g u la t e i t s   n rn rQ j                                  r e g u la tio n s    th e re u n d e r, th e
       f it    (196.          S         ‘                                                                              * *       U
       in te r e s te d       p a r tie s      o r a llv           nr     t™                   ^     f           b o a rd    h e a rd      th e
       fro m    th e .    is ,     as       H a m ilt o n      LJ.                                                           i ‘ “    e*® n ts
       Board, Ex narte                                                                                           Local Government
      w    o u ld ^ e ^ n                                           ”     “       e r    ° f       p ro c e d u re .   E q u a l l y it

      a p p o in te d     a    p e rs o n      o r^        s   L          L        K rO C ,M lS *           “      «>*       b o a rd     had
      s u b m is s io n s         fro m        int£es^                        ^         “ ^              0^ 1 ^          e V ld “    “    * ” 'J
      informing the board of         .,           the Purpose of
      Osgood v. Nelson and Rex v L<^1           .S^ ^ si°ns (see
      Arlidoe )      tMc ^     J*      Government Board, Ex parte
      credibility of w i t n e s L r X ^ n o t ’T    5* .convenient whe« the
      followed in this           fJ              involved, and if it had been



     interested parties and had a£ ? L      .      1,3(5 not heard the
     natural justice       it S ? J   ^ contrary to the principles of
     the board t o h a v e leflrl                           suffic« f°r
     summary of the r e l ^ n ^      .»         consider an accurate
     summarj a d e ^ L i r ^ s S L r l S 06       SU^ issio n s i f the
     the board.                           evidence and submissions to


    Tho Ufvi°m?4-Tately n° SUCh procedure was followed in this case
    £ v \ h ! T i ! \ WaS n0t apP°inted ^ the board, nor was it a“ ked
                 ^   to receive evidence for transmission t o i t  Sf
    ^ d        r S ’h J eP? r f d n0t State what the evidence was and S e
    5 S ^ T 5 dttit^ S S S ! "                                     UithOUt " " —                           “ t*-            - and        in

          The board thus failed to hear the interested oarties                                                                            <«•
    w as u n d e r a n        o b lija t io n         to       do       in        o rd e r         to    d is c h a ^ s .    its      d u ty

    a p p lic a t io n s /^ 1 0 1 3                   in           th e                                                ° f       J 5 %          .




                                                   - 30 -
       Mr. Newman did       not contend that        the Police Authority          on

the facts heard or considered the applicants' submissions.                        He

argued that in considering            these appeals the        Police Authority

was    exercising     a    purely     administrative        function      and    was

entitled to delegate responsibility for hearing submissions and

then to act upon the recommendation of                its sub-committee which

did hear those submissions.              Next, he said,       the report of the

Panel was     a "reasoned         recommendation".          in the    case of     an

administrative discretion it             is usually     sufficient, and         here

was   sufficient,           to     act    upon a    "bare     recommendation".

Reference was made         to Goddard v.      Ministry o f Health [1958]            1

W.L.R. 1151;     to       the judgment      ofWoolf J., as he then        was, in

R’    v'   Chester    Borough       Council, ex     parte     Quietlynn     Ltd.,

unreported, 14th October            1983;    and to     R. v. Race     Relations

Board, ex     parte Selvarajan,          [1976] 1     All   E.R. 12;      and     to

Macinnes v. Onslow Fane, Megarry VC [1978] 1 W.L.R. 1520.


      I am unable to accept          this submission.         It is    true that

Jeffs case was concerned           with an authority which had          no power

to delegate     the   making of          the decision in      question.           In

Selvarajan's case,         Lord    Denning distinguished       Jeffs on         that

ground:    see page 20h.           Lord Denning at page 20e said:

      "The most troublelsome point is that several members of the
      board did not have all the papers.   Four of them had only the
      summary of a "clearly predictable case" of one and a half
      pages and a recommendation that the committee should form the
      opinion of no unlawful discrimination.   It may reasonably be
      inferred that these four were not in a position to form an
      opinion of their own.   They must have gone by the opinion of
      the other three members who had received all the papers and
      had read them.

         If this had been a judicial body, I do not think this would
      be right.   Every member of a judicial body must have access
      to all the evidence and papers in the case, he must have heard
      all the arguments, and he must come to his own conclusion.
      The maxim delegatus non potest delegare applies strictly to
      judicial functions.   But it is different with a body which is
                  £ S ^ i^ S S S n,lS5ila?‘'or “hichis ■-“»» -
                  when it is     a numerous bodv pr*ijmi"ary enquiries, especially
                  members.       The Employment Commit*      Relations Board has 12
                  impossible     to suppose that all o^>h«»S S®^en.merabers•  It is
                  matter nor     that all of thnca *    !? "e    Slt to determine a
                  paper, or heard all                     “ V ? 0?1* haVe         rMd 111 ‘he
                  three at any rate               ha« d ™ so                           t"° °r
                  of, say, three,         i should   think a    ‘          there is a   quorum
                  That is the ordinarv acrlt^ l ^ . f °r“ must h,ve * * » “ •
                  It should be applied here lit..“       carrying on business.


               The passage from the judgment of Lawton LJ. should also be
          noted: page 22h:


               not delegate1 to” its* "sta f f ^ h 3* JU Why th* Board should
Q   m          information.  it       k!        the function of    collecting
              Board themselves to make invest!*^?*1 £°r th* meiBbers o£ the
              what Parliament has entrusted it to       H°W the Board does
              courts to decide as it act*     i   j ?S "°  3 matter £or the
              for the Board, not the courts t o ^ ! ^                   P "5 faith-     11
              each of its members should ha' to decide                  how much information
              case.         *s            ,s S                                  • Particular
              committees, has enough informant °l °ne. ,°f its constituent
              assessment of thecase til ,1 ^ to *"able it to make a fair
              it gets the              T s t T ^ l , ] ”0t                «~
              to decide.     He aav decide •        chairman and his advisers
              member of the Board n- tk      ln a Particular case that each
              the whole m e        J °      00- * tt“ . '""“M have a cop, of
              case can be adequately                    ” y          ““ l "»
              the tile and r e S “ s to^hf            . "lth if °“ "■*“ >“
              case three members of the * °thers what is in it.       m this
              the complete file.          .
                                          e.g1°yi,en.
                                                    t c°"-ittee had a copy of
              to deal with the applicant's case fairly.'


              In that       case       the       Board, with        a   power to    delegate      as

        described in        the       passages read,         dealt       with a    complaint     in

        accordance with procedures adopted and operated In the ordinary

        conduct of its           business.           There     was, it      was there held,       a

        decision by the Board,               with sufficient information                upon which

        to deal fairly with the case.                      The Board was not          acting as a

        judicial body in the              sense that would have attracted                any need

        for the     Board        as   a    whole      by   individual        members     to    have

        considered the particular case and submissions made.



                                             - 32 -
        In   this       case    the       Police    Authority      had,     as     I    have

 explained, full power to                 delegate;     but    it did not choose             to

 use that power.           it was, I agree, exercising an administrative

 discretion;       but it was not such as to be described properly as

  purely administrative", whatever that may mean.                          The power to

 consider, and if thought                 fit, to award reimbursement            of costs

 arose under       the    general         administrative        powers     given       under

 statute;     but, once         a particular claim by            an officer is made,

 it seems t o m e that,             in dealing with it, the           Police Authority

 is    deciding     a    claim       to    financial        redress     based     upon       a

 reasonable expectation              of having       the     claim to     reimbursement

 considered in      accordance with the               principles set       out in        the

Home Office circular.                it may raise, as it did here, questions

as to    the conduct           of    the applicant.            That     nature of       the

decision required the body, to which was entrusted                         the task of

making it, to       hear properly the               case made for       the applicant.

I do not say that an oral hearing was necessary                         but it was, in

this case, clearly appropriate                 as the Police          Authority itself

recognised.        The Police Authority in this case decided that it

would retain to          itself the        decision upon        these applications.

That    is   not        surprising:          they      had     arisen     out    of      an

investigation of the conduct                of senior police officers              in the

handling of public          money which        had, inevitably           and properly,

received much publicity.                  Having made that decision,             and not

having altered it, the members of the                      Police Authority present

were required, in         my judgment, to            decide the applications            by

their own decisions.                We    do not have       to consider whether          a

retrospective delegation is possible.                      There was no attempt to

effect such    delegation.                  There     was, also,       no attempt       to
describe the submissions made              for the applicants.          There was

not even a summary of them.            I have well in mind the fact that

the five members of         the Panel were       present, and the        16 other

members of      the Police       Authority present       knew      that the       five

Panel members could, if asked, have reported upon what had been

said.     The Police      Authority was plainly content to              rely upon

the judgment of the five.             That is, in my        view, no answer to

the point.       I am content to rest my          decision upon this ground

of failure by      the Police Authority          to consider and to           decide

the applications but, since the argument was made,                    I would add

that this is not, in my view, a merely technical point of legal

analysis.       The 16 members did not know          upon what matters they

might usefully         ask for     further information       unless they          were

given the substance of the submissions made for the applicants.

In particular, they         might have asked       whether the Auditor             had

held that the applicants            had acted in good faith,          and whether

there     was     any      ground      of     distinction       between        Chief

Superintendent Stock         and     Superintendent      Keeton, on         the    one

hand, and       Inspector    Wilson     and Sergeant      Dalton,      as     junior

officers, or either of them, on the other hand.


        I would, therefore, hold            that the decision of        the Police

Authority must be quashed and the applications                     remitted to the

Police Authority to be considered in the light                     of the judgment

of this court.


The Wednesbury Submission


        It is    now    necessary     to     consider the     third     ground      of

 application:      the Wednesbury          submission.      Both     sides invited

 the court, if the applicants should succeed upon                    the first two
     grounds, to deal with the third ground also so that the opinion

     of this court upon the issues raised would                         be available to the

     parties    when,    as      is      now   necessary,         the       Police         Authority

     considers the applications again.


          For this      purpose, it            is necessary        to        refer to        further

     parts of the       evidence filed            for the      respondents.                  It        has

     been, as I have said,            conunon     ground t              h        a           t           ,



                                                The main         issue has been              whether

     and to     what    extent        findings of        the     Auditor amounted                 to     a

     "complete exoneration" of the applicants and whether there was,
//   in his     findings, any         basis upon         which     the Police              Authority

     could reasonably         conclude         that     no     reimbursement           should           be

     provided for the applicants.                     The next issue was              whether, if

     there was     such a      basis for          decision, the             decision made              was

     nevertheless vitiated by the taking into                      account of irrelevant

     matters.


          Mr.     Allsop      is       the     Committee         Administrator              of         the

     Derbyshire County Council.                    He attended          the meeting of                 the

     Panel on 8th July and took notes.                       There was (page 141) "never

     an intention to         reproduce the            notes but     simply to prepare                    a

     report     for    the    full       Police       Committee     giving           the     Panel's

     recommendation".          From his notes he was able to summarise what

     he called "the main points of the Panel's                      consideration of the

     submissions made" and they were:                   (a) comparisons          with a court

     hearing were not fair:               the Auditor's hearing               was preliminary

     to a court hearing;           (b)       if the County Council were not giving

     financial assistance to              the ratepayers          who made the             original


                                         - 35 -
      complaint then no financial               assistance should be given                      to the
     Other parties:             Hr.    Milllon (Deputy ^                q£        ^

                out     that         there    was      a    distinction               between         the

     complainants and the other                individuals who were                   personally at

              (c)      the    fact that the           expenditure had been                    incurred

     contrary to law was not              a verdict of exoneration;                     ,d)     while

     there    had     been    no     positive       actions           amounting          to    wilful
     misconduct, the officer-c'                •
                   e officers                actions were not           a proper observance

             t was required.            In     particular, the signing of                      "goods

     received" when they had            not been received was                    not responsible
 for     any    eoraon        storekeeper,          let    alone       a        law     enforcement

 officer;       (e )       the plea that         the officers represented by                      the

 Federation were carrying out                   instructions was some mitigation;

 <f>     condition (b) in paragraph 13 of the Circular had not been

 satisfied:            (i.e .      "the      Police       Authority             considers        that

 individual          officers,       whose     interest          is    involved,required
 separate representation").


         Hr. Newman for the Police Authority                      submitted that, while

 a     number    of    separate        points       were    taken          into       account     by
different members of               the Pan»i               - jj
                                       Fanel, the          evidence showed that                  the
decision of          the     Panel     itself,       as opposed            to     the    separate

decisions of          the members,           was based      upon the            fact that        the

Auditor's report             did   not exonerate           the    applicants and                that

ground was set out in the report to the Police Authority which,

in brief, referred to the conclusion of the                            Auditor that there



                                                           0n the evidence, I accept
that each       of     the    five     members       of    the        Panel       included       in

recognisable form the "no exoneration" point as                                 the matter, or
                                     - 36 -
 as one of the matters, which "weighed most heavily" with him in

 deciding as he did.        Their evidence    can be summarised thus.

 Mr. Barnes, the Chairman, and Mr. Mellors each        gave that point

 as the one   factor which weighed most      heavily with him.       Mr.

Dentith gave that point, and the fact that the applicants costs

had been in fact paid by the Police Federation.             Mr. John and

Mr. Bookbinder each gave as the first fact,         which weighed most

heavily with him, the     fact that the application was        "late" so

that the Police Authority     had not had opportunity       to consider

the scale and level     of representation, but they each       gave the

 no full exoneration" point as the second factor.




                                                                   that




     Mr. Underhill next submitted that the       evidence shows that

the members of the Panel did not correctly       understand what the

central principle was.       The   report, said Mr. Underhill,      did

establish that   the applicants    had   acted in    good    faith and,

moreover, it wholly exonerated them of       wilful misconduct which

was the only issue     with which, as regards the     applicants, the
Auditor was    concerned.        The    accounting irregularities            were

committed, on the      Auditor's findings, in          the belief that        the

methods used     represented the       proper way      to    proceed.          In

particular Sergeant        Dalton had been     expressly so        told:      see

paragraph 57 of the report.


     Mr. Newman firstly attacked this           submission on the facts:

the report clearly established, he said, lack of                 good faith on

the part of the applicants in addition to a                 failure to act "in

pursuance of their duties".            He added that the         report showed

them to have     told lies.      I have      no hesitation in        rejecting

this submission on the facts.          The Auditor      at paragraph 66 of

his report said this:

     "It is my opinion that the parties acted in the belief that
     their actions were authorised by law for the reasons given in
     this (report) ..."


In my judgment      that was   a finding      that these applicants          had

acted in good faith.        We do not have to       consider in this case

whether the Police        Authority would have      been entitled to         act

upon other material       with reference      to the    good faith of        the

applicants.      For my    part I think that they could           properly do

so but, if they were going to do so, I have             no doubt that they

would, and should from the requirements of procedural fairness,

have told the applicants of the substance of                such material and

given them an opportunity of dealing with it.                  But nothing of

this nature arose.        The Panel claimed to decide and did decide

on the   findings    of    the Auditor.         Those findings,         in    my

judgment, exclude both bad faith and lying.


     But Mr. Newman's next submission was more formidable.                    He

argued that, accepting, as he says for          this argument the Panel
     did, that the      applicants had          been acting           in good faith,            the

     members of the Panel were entitled within the guidance provided

     by the                to

                                                                       •     For          reasons

     which follow, J | would           |^£>t 4 l i       part        of the        respondent's

     case.     The Circular is not drafted as a set of regulations and

     it does    not have        the force      of law     of regulations.                      After

     statement of the central principle in paragraph 2 it continues:


     "The following      paragraphs           provide    general           guidance       to     the

     different classes          of    proceedings".                 Paragraph        1    of     the
•»   Circular     had   pointed        out     that     "the        Police    Authority          has

     discretion to      meet         expenditure incurred             by     officers in         all

     kinds of     legal proceedings where               the officers           have acted         in

     good faith     in pursuance          of their      duties".              No    one of       the

      following    paragraphs           was     specifically           directed           to     the

     particular sort       of        proceedings      under consideration                 in    this

      case, namely an investigation by an                 Auditor.




it
                                                                               the       existence

      of good faith, a failure to exercise

      plainly provide a ground            for not awarding             reimbursement under

     ^hg^^x^i^traljgrinciple.             Next, under          p^                   beneath the

      heading "Civil     Actions         against      individual Police              Officers",

      there is a similar reference:              "in considering              whether to give

      financial assistance            the Authority       will wish           to consider         in

      particular whether the            officer concerned             acted in good            faith

                                        - 39 -
                                                        sly".           Where the       Police
     ^ufchority_is        required     to    consider            an     application

                                                  i.^proceedings           not separately
     or specifically)considered under                 any of the paragraphs             in the

     Circular I see       no reason     why the         Police Authority should             be

     regarded as     required     to exclude           from     its consideration          the

     question whether^the police            officer           "exercised his          judgment

     reasonably” , ^ t f ,     therefore,        there was, on          the part of        the

    officer, negligence, i.e. failure to exercise such                           care as was

    reasonably to be required in the circumstances of an officer of

    his rank and experience, doing               his job in the force,                then, in

    my view, the Police Authority is entitled to                       have regard to it

    if such negligence        was so connected           to the subject              matter of

    the   legal    proceedings,       or    to    the         causing     of     the     legal

    proceedings to be taken,          that it can         fairly be regarded as              a

    substantial cause of the          incurring of the             costs.        I    have no

    doubt that a     Police Authority, if              satisfied of good faith             on

    the part of the officer, would normally act,                       and be pleased to

    act, on the central principle stated in the                       Circular;       but the

*   discretion is given to        the Authority and it is                 impossible, in

    my view, to hold that, once good faith is established, a Police

    Authority must     disregard       clear evidence            of    negligence or        a

    failure to "exercise judgment reasonably",                         So to hold would

    mean that     a Police Authority        would be          S q u i r e d to    disregard

    acts of substantial        negligence, such that              it could fairly          be

    said that,     although acquitted of              bad faith,       the officer        had

    "brought the proceedings          on himselfu .            The decision           whether

    evidence of    such      negligence in        a    particular case           justifies




                                  - 40 -
 withholding reimbursement, wholly                   or in        part,     is, of course,
 entrusted to the Police Authority.


         I have      set out          extensively the findings            of the     Auditor

 earlier       in    this       judgment.            Those    findings         provide        a

 sufficient basis for the view of each member                        of the Panel that

 there had been in              this case actions         which were "not           a proper

 observance of what              was required":        see    the affidavit          of Mr.

 Allsop reporting the main points                   considered:       page 141.          The

 five Panel members have expressed the point                        in different terms

but the     point         was     the same.          As     members ofthe          Police

Authority they were, in my judgment, entitled to act upon their

own knowledge            of     the    working of    the     police force          and   the

standards of judgment reasonably required                         from officers in it.

For my     part I        would not, therefore,             have held       that, if      the

decision had been otherwise valid, it was rendered                           void on the

ground that, because              there had been        a finding of         good faith,

the findings of           the Auditor provided            no basis upon which            the

Police Authority,              acting     reasonably,      could refuse        to     grant
reimbursement.


        Before leaving the point I would add only                     this.         Because

the submissions made for these applicants to the Panel were not

summarised m         the Panel's report to the Police Authority, there

was no need for those who drafted the report to deal with those

submissions         or    to     mention    any     distinction           between    these

applicants and the              other two applicants,         Chief Superintendent

Stock    and    Superintendent            Keeton.           The     question       whether

irregularities in             the accounting        procedures constituted            such

negligence as justified refusing to reimburse                        costs, wholly or
   in Part,     despite        a        finding of       good       faith,        was one          to    be

   answered with reference                to each        individual applicant and                       the

  position of the junior officers, acting on                                 the instructions of

              fficers, might             reasonably be regarded as                    sufficiently

                 to     justify          consideration             of    making       a     different

  response to the applications of the junior officers.                                           whether

  it does, of course, is a matter for the                           judgment of the Police
  Authority.


           turn        then        to     the         remaining         matters       of         alleged

       irection.         The first              is the    submission that the                     Police

 Authority could not properly                    have regard to the fact                    that the

 ratepayers, who had brought the matter to the                                 attention of the

             had not sought the cost of legal representation.                                       Mr

 Underhill submitted            that there was                no evidence         that the          two

 ratepayers had incurred costs because they were not represented
 at the inquiry.              They had          attended and ha(J >t              ^

 the   expense       of so      attending.                    In   any       evcnt,        sald     Mr

 Underhill,      the     fact       that        those    ratepayers             did        not     seek

reimbursement, assuming there                     to be some            power in the         County

Council to pay if a request had been made, cannot reasonably be

a ground for not granting an application for reimbursement made

by a   police      officer.                Mr. Newman,             as    I    understood           his

submission, conceded that                 this would           have been an           irrelevant

factor, if it had         been relied upon,                   but he contended              that it

was not relied upon.               i think he was right so to concede:                             the

absence of     any      claim       from        the     two    ratepayers          is,       in    „y

judgment, clearly irrelevant to the merits of the                                 claim by the

applicants.        As to whether            reliance was placed                  upon it, Mr.

Barnes, the chairman of the Police Authority, acknowledged that

                                    - "42 -
       he had indeed referred         to the matter       in his press          release of

      which the text       has been set out        above.           He has said in        his

      affidavit that it was not             "a factor foremost in his           mind when
      agreeing to the recommendation            of the Panel".

                                                                                       for

                                                                                      ase.




      played, however, no part in the decisions of                    the other members

      according to their       affidavits.         when the matter          was raised.

&    Hr. Million,        the Deputy    Head of Legal        Services, pointed          out

     that there was a distinction between the                  complainants and the

     other individuals       who were       personally at risk.             As to     the

     effect of this       point on     the validity of         the decision of        the

     Panel, had it been otherwise sustainable, I will return to that

     when the     other    matters     of    alleged     misdirection       have     been
     considered.


          The next matter       was the       reference to          the fact that     the
    costs of Mr. Wilson and           Mr. Dalton had been met by            the Police

    Federation.          rt is not     in issue that      this factor was           taken

    into account     by the     Panel generally.               rt    appeared in     the

    report   of    the    Panel's      decision:         see    page     47 :       "Any

    reimbursement of costs          would in effect       be a reimbursement          to

    the Police Federation of its costs".                 Mr. Underhill submitted

    that this     was wholly    irrelevant:        the      fact      that these     two

    officers had been supported by the Federation did not affect in

    any relevant    way the     merits of       their    applications, and,           if

    their applications       were good, so       that they          were entitled     to

    reimbursement in whole or in part, they should be allowed.                       It

                                 - 43 -
   is. Of course, a          commonplace of the exercise of                     discretion as

    o costs ln our courts            that, in general, no attention                       is paid

   to the fact that a plaintiff or defendant is entitled, in right

   of his membership         of a     trade union, to                legal representation.

    is rl9ht to an order for           costs depends, in the ordinary case,

  upon the merits       of his       claim thereto.                       The fact that       his

  union supports him is as            irrelevant as             the fact, ifit should

   e the case, that he borrowed the money                       forhis costs frOT his

  parents on terms       that he       would not be expected                   to       repay it.
  Mr. Newman aroued fhaf fL.i.               . . .
                                           principle has no application in the
  context of the statutory            power of the Police Authority                       and of

  the guidance       given    in     the    Circular;                and     that   a     Police

         y is entitled to            refuse to reimburse the costs on the
 ground that the o f f i c e         <*
                    ficer            is not personally liable for those
 costs.       ror my    part, r       have no     doubt that Mr.                Underhill's

 primary submission is          correct and that,               having regard to            the
 terms of the Circular, the            mere fact that an officer                    has been

 Provided     with    legal    representation          by        the         rederation      is

 irrelevant    to      the    question       whether            an        application       for
 reimbursement should be            granted.      it is          elear that in             some

cases the question whether reimbursement should                             be granted can

    y effectively be         decided by the       Police Authority when                    the

result of the proceedings is known.                 prior application by the

Officer to the       Police Authority          is „ot in             every case made         a

condition of reimbursement.                  It seems clear                to me that      the
Home Office, in glvlng the guidance, and                    ^         ^

association and the  police staff
                     P o n c e staff           associations, with whom the
terms of the Circular were a o r o ^           „
                                9    '         as is recited in paragraph 1
       contemplated thaf     in
                  a that,     m some           cases, the             Federation aight
agree to provide representation in the first place and that the

individual officer would be free to seek reimbursement when the

result is known.        That conclusion does not           mean that a Police

Authority could in no case whatever have regard to                   whether the

Federation had provided the legal representation                or whether it

had been paid for by        the officer personally.            An application

might be   very finely balanced,            having regard     to the     various

factors requiring to be weighed.              If, in     a particular case, a

Police Authority was minded to take into account, in support of

a plea based     upon severe financial          hardship, that an        officer

was personally     liable      for    the    costs, I     consider     that   the

Authority would be      entitled to         have such regard     to it as      it

would think    proper     in    the circumstances.             In this     case,

however, it is clear on the evidence that                the Panel, viewed as

a whole, did take       into account the fact that           reimbursement in

respect of these applications would "in fact be a reimbursement

to the Police Federation of its             costs".      It was, accordingly,

in my judgment thus      taking into account            an irrelevant matter.

One last point should be mentioned.               A Police Authority is not

bound to make reimbursement according to the scale                   and cost of

representation incurred by an officer, or by                the Federation on

his behalf, in    a case where           the Police Authority        judges that

reimbursement is proper.             A    Police Authority may decide         to

authorise reimbursement to           the extent       that was, in     its view,

having obtained proper         advice and     information, reasonable         in

the circumstances.


     The final point was         that added by amendment,        namely that

it was a misdirection       on the part of the          Panel to have regard

to the   fact that the      application for        reimbursement by       these
  applicants was       "late";               that is to        say made           only after        the

  costs had been incurred,                   so that the Police Authority                    had had

  no prior    opportunity of                 considering the              scale    and level            of

  representation.          Mr. Newman conceded,                    and rightly in my view,

  that this    was     a    "bad"        point        but he        argued        that,      on     the

 evidence, only Mr. John and Mr. Bookbinder had had regard to it

 although, with        them, it          was       given as         the     first factor           and

 before that of negligence and breach of duty.                                    The point was

 bad, 1 think,        because it did               not matter that the                 application

 was in that     sense and to                that extent "late".                  In    the first

 place it     could    not     effectively              have been           made       before      the

 inquiry was concluded because the Police Authority did not know

 what the outcome would be and any decision                               on their part would

 have had to     have included provisions                      preserving the right                 of

 ultimate decision quite unfettered;                        and,      secondly, the Police

 Authority    had,     as    explained               above,        full     power       in    their

 discretion    to     reject        a        claim     if     it      should       appear         that

representation was unnecessary,                      or that, if           necessary at all,

at a    much reduced        level.                it could,        in such        a case,       make

reimbursement only of such costs as should reasonably have been
incurred.


       What, then,     should be the                 result having           regard to          such

attention as was paid to matter which were                            conceded to be, and

Which I have held to be, irrelevant, assuming that the decision

was Otherwise valid?                The position              can be        summarised thus.

Mr. Barnes, the       Chairman, took into                   account, and referred                  in

his press release          to, the irrelevant                 fact that the            reporting

ratepayers had       not    claimed their               costs.             Next, the         Panel

generally took into account the fact,                         irrelevant in this case,

                                -       46    -
        that any reimbursement would         be for the benefit of             the Police

        Federation although it was for         all the members of the             Panel a

       subordinate reason.          Finally,     two out      of five members          took

       into    account     the    irrelevant      fact     that     the       applicants'

       application was      "late".          Mr. Newman       submitted that          these

       irrelevancies     should     be    ignored:       there    was     a    good    and

       sufficient ground for the          decision, which was foremost             in the

       minds of all members of          the Panel, and the decision            should on

       that ground be upheld.           No authority     on this particular point

       was cited to us.          it must, in my judgment, in each              case be a

0 0    matter of degree     depending upon all         the circumstances of            the

       case,   including    the    nature      and   apparent      weight        of    the

       irrelevant factors, and the proportion to              the whole membership

      of the    deciding body      of    those who     paid    attention to        those

      factors, and the probable weight and influence                of the decision

      of those members.           if the attention       paid to the          irrelevant

      factors is shown      in probability to        have played a        significant

      part in the making of the decision then, in                my judgment, it is

      sufficient to render the decision          bad.      On the facts         of this

^     case I   would have    held, if       the decision      had been        otherwise

      valid, that it was rendered void on this ground also.




      MR. JUSTICE NOLAN:         i also agree.




                                   - 47 -
