                                                                                                                                                                      Empire H ouse
                                                                                                                                                                      to Piccadilly
  H am m ond S uddards                                                                                                                                                Bradford B D i 3LR
                                                                                                                                                                      Telephone (0274) 734700
                                  SOLICITORS                                                                                                                          Telex y17201 D.X. N o. 11720
                                                                                                                                                                      Fax (0274) 737547



Alan I. Bottomley                                  Ian R. Shuttleworth                                        Mark W. Hilton               Lucd Dammone               O ffices a lso at:
D. Trevor Lewis                                    Peter C. Metcalf                                           Richard Bums                 Andrew H. McDougall        W inchester House
Michael E. Gregson                                 Christopher W. Jones                                       David W. K. Armitage         Peter F. Kunzlik           77 London W all, London EC2N iBE.
John D. de Main                                    Andrew R. Jordan                                           J. Patrick Mitchell          David Goodman              Telephone (071) 628 4767. Fax (071) 628 6161.
Michael L. Shepherd                                Simon R. B. Stell                                          Christopher J. Amheim        David J. Williams          2 Park Lane, Leeds LS3 tES.
Peter N. W ilbraham                                Simon R. Inman                                             Christopher Marks            Helen F. Kavanagh          Telephone (0532) 3435'oo
J. Richard Archer                                  Richard W. Wade-Smith                                      Michael S. Henley                                       Telex £57202. Fax (0532) 343600.
Barbara W. France                                  John G. Beckett                                            Rosamond J. Marshall Smith   Consultants:               Avenue des Arts 41,1040 Brussels.
C. Noel Hutton                                     G. N. Ian Greenfield                                       Philip W. Harling            Roger W. Suddards CBE DL   Telephone (010) 32 2 5111620
]ohn H. G. Heller                                  Stephen Gale                                               William N. Downs             Ian W. W hitson            Fax <010) 32 2 511 5626.




Our Ref:                                                                                                          Your Ref;                                      Date:
 PCM/PAB                                                                                                          DCC^                                           19 February 1992



 Dear Peter
 Hillsborough
 Further to our discussion of 14th February in connection with the
 provision of information to relatives, I understand that you will
 be approaching insurers direct in relation to questions of the
 overall level of payout and, if appropriate, the level of
 individual settlements.

 I promised to set out in writing the position in relation to the
 contribution of other parties and the extent to which information
 about such contributions can be disseminated.

 I should say at the outset that a large number of claims remain
 outstanding, so that the total settlement outlay is not yet known.
 I believe, however, that payments made to date, together with
 reserves against future payments, amount to something of the order
 of £12 million: the exact figure could be obtained from insurers.

So far as the contribution hearing is concerned, I should emphasise
that this did not proceed to a conclusion, so that the Court did
not make any finding of liability. What happened was that shortly
before the hearing began, the Engineers made a cash offer of £1.5
million to cover the whole of their potential liability and shortly
after the hearing began, the Club indicated their willingness to

                                                                                                                                                                                       contd....

 PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL

 P Hayes Esq
 Deputy Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Snig Hill
 SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


T h is f ir m is re g u la te d b y th e Law S o c ie ty in t h e c o n d u c t o f i n v e s tm e n t b u sin e s s .
H am m o nd Suddards
    SOLICITORS                                               Page 2




match that sum.   We were not immediately inclined to accept those
proposals but, after the first few days of the hearing, it was
clear that the Judge was not kindly disposed towards our case and
it was decided to accept the sums offered, rather than risk the
possibility of losing outright.
Consequently, sums of £1.5 million were accepted from the Club and
from the Club's Consulting Engineers, Messrs.        Eastwood and
Partners.   Subsequently, it was agreed that a further sum of £1
million (I believe that is the correct figure) would be paid
towards settlement by insurers on behalf of Sheffield City Council
in consideration of the possible claim against them.
Thus a total sum of £4 million was contributed by other parties to
a total liability now estimated at £12 million. If the estimate is
correct then the South Yorkshire Police have taken two thirds of
the liability with the other parties taking one third - 12.5% each
for the Club and the Engineers and 8.3% for the City Council.
At the time of the contribution hearing, the perceived public view
of the total value of the potential claims, as cited in the press,
was well in excess of £20 million: indeed, a figure of £30 million
was quoted in one newspaper.      We were concerned that, in the
context of such publicity, the publication of the precise sum
accepted from the Club and from Eastwoods would not have been
helpful from the point of view of the South Yorkshire Police. The
sum would no doubt have been described as derisory in relation to
the potential total value of all claims and it would have been said
that the Police had accepted full responsibility. We, therefore,
proposed that the settlement amounts should be treated as
confidential, a proposal which the other parties readily accepted.
So far as I am aware, that confidence has been respected on all
sides to the extent that it is not generally known that a lump sum
rather than a percentage settlement was accepted.

Whilst you are obviously entitled to full information about the
position, you will appreciate that if there is to be any
communication to a third party, even if expressed          to be in
confidence, giving details of the settlement      thenthe consent of
the Football Club and the Engineers will be required.   It is by no
means certain that that consent will be forthcoming as, although
the original proposal came from ourselves, the two other parties
may well have had their own motives for acceptance.          I will,
however, write to the Solicitors concerned if you wish.
All of the foregoing puts me in some difficulty in trying to draft
a letter which would be suitable and appropriate for despatch to
the bereaved on the above matters.

With minor adaptations, the paragraphs of this letter describing
the position reached would themselves be suitable, provided that
the necessary consent were to be obtained.

                                                          contd....
 H am m o nd Suddards
        SOLICITORS                                           Page 3




If that consent is not available then it is really difficult to see
how anything could be drafted which the bereaved would be likely to
find satisfactory.

I hope this is helpful and perhaps you will let me know if you
would like me to do anything further when you have had a chance to
discuss the position with Richard.

Ypurs   fii np.arol \y




PETER METCALF
