                  Sheffield Archives Ref: Pol                                                  M IR .15

                                                                                                                                '8
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and time raised         ^                        Number



 itle
Title            J& d &                                                  M y H 5 Qu *(jl£& u v S&Cu^t*-r           ■


(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action —
   ------------------                                -^esfNo         ^     o Islr .            Qudx&foJi
                                                                                                                           Receiver
                          & {yn ^ ty C v                                       C ^ b M ju j)     a W J m iasL
                    4n) H         VM&       ^          ,4-e*^ a>ug( ^                                                     STSOi
                                                                                                                             Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated        p y -p n ^                            j   D

No(s) of actions raised      \          ^
                                                                                                                       Statem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                           ions >^J02A—
                                                                                                                       gStrb
                                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                  31/8
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                  O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                         Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                1
Adam J. Pemberton, LL.B
Jonathan R. Brayshaw, LL.B
Richard H. Grimes, LL.B M.A
                                    Watson Esam & Co.                                                                 16 Paradise Square,
                                                                                                                        Sheffield SI 1TY
                                                                                                                    Telephone (0742) 753350
       Consultant
                                                                Solicitors                                                MDX 10551
David R. Brayshaw, LL.B                                                                                               FAX No. (0742) 768277



r                                                                        “1
                                                                                          O ur R ef.
    Geoffrey Dear, Esq,,                                                                                  AJP/BJ
                                                                                          Y our R ef.
    Chief Constable,
    West Midlands Constabulary,                                                           D ate.           18th April, 1989.
    c/o Sheffield Police Headquarters
    Snig Hill,                                                                                            PERSONAL
    Sheffield, S3.
                                                                         J

    Dear Mr. Dear,

                                                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                         POLICING OUTSIDE LEPPINGS LANE
                                           AT APPROXIMATELY 2.45 P.M.


    I am aged 48 years, Senior Partner of this firm and went to the Football
    Match with my two friends from Liverpool, one of whom is retired and one of
    whom is a BA 747 Pilot.

    We planned to arrive at Gate "A" of Leppings Lane entrance at 2.30 p.m. to
    meet a friend there.   We had a ticket for him. We had £14.00 ickets for the
    North Stand.    We approached the Ground from Penistone Road having parked a
    long distance away.     When we got to the Penis tone Road side of the Ground
    just before 2.30p.m. we were told that we would have to walk right round the
    Ground to gain entrance at the Leppings Lane end.    However we were not able
    to go along any of the small roads from Penistone Road to Leppings Lane i.e.
    Vere Road, Fielding Road or Bickerton Road but were told we had to go right
    to the roundabout at Herries Road where we should turn left.    This we did.
    This delayed us. I did not expect to have to make such a detour.

     I would estimate we arrived outside the Leppings Lane entrance at about 2.40
     p.m.   We would have been there earlier had we not had to make such a long
     detour.

     When we got there, there were many people in a great mass outside the Gates.
     There seemed to be no queues for the entrances.

     We were unable to see out friend in the crowd.     Because we were already in
     the crush moving towards the three Gates "A" we were unable to stop and wait
     for him but were pushed forward towards the Gates.

     So far as I can recall there were a number of Policemen outside the big blue
     Gates, some of whom were on horseback.    They seemed to be doing nothing at
     all to control the crowds.

     I    saw no ill humour or drunkeness of any sort outside the Ground.                                                        There


          no anger until I was pushed right up against the brick cabin holding
     the turnstiles.      Because we were all being crushed from behind we were
     getting frightened and angry. People were shouting back over their shoulders
     asking those behind not to push.

                              Also at: 1 Bridge Street, Killamarsh. Telephone Sheffield (0742) 487172
                                This Firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investm ent business
People were shouting at the Police Officers by the side of the turnstiles
demanding that they ask their superiors to take action.

I would estimate that I was in the crushed outside the three Gates   marked
"A" for the North Stand between about 2.40 p.m. and 2.55 p.m.

I was eventually crushed up against the brickwall of the turnstile.     By
this time I was separated from my companions, both of whom are about 6ft
tall.    Immediately in front of me at one time was a woman in a white
annorak.    She was being crushed against the wall and became hysterical.
She could not move towards the turnstile because of the weight of numbers.
Somehow or other those of us around her managed to push back from the wall
sufficient for her to get through the turnstile.

At this time there was a young male Police Officer and and young woman
Police Officer immediately in front of me.   I had been pushed over towards
the right, away from the three Gates marked "A".     I think that the woman
Police Officer was manning the Gate at the right.      As I got near to them
the crowd around me demanded that the male Police Officer do something and
he tried to climb the brickwall of the Cabin housing the turnstile.   He was
not able to do this but I believe eventually got through the turnstile to
the inside of the ground.     The woman Police Officer remained in front of
me.    She became more and more alarmed as she was being crushed against the
brickwall.    She did not seem to say anything at all but looked completely
terrified. I think she got into theground just before me.

I eventually got tothe righthand of the turnstiles marked "A" when the
crowd swayed again tothe left.       The person immediately in front of me
seemed to have only half a ticket and the person on the turnstilesaid
something to him, to which he replied that he had lost the other half in the
crowd approaching the turnstile and could not bend down to pick it up.    He
was allowed entrance to the ground.          I followed him in through the
turnstile and would estimate that I was on the inside of Gate "A" at
approximately 2.55 p.m. because I just got to my seat on row ”H" of the of
the North Stand just as the game started.

Having got through the turnstile, along with many other people I immediately
turned to my left where there were a number of Police Officers - I would
estimate between 10 and 20 standing about.     People were screaming at them
and shouting with great anger to take control of the situation outside the
gates.    A black Police Officer shouted something back to me, I am not sure
what he said.



Many people walking from the turnstile to their seats were angry and
incredulous at the scenes that we had just been through outside the gate.
When I arrived at my seat my 51 year old male friend was white faced.  He
said he had been supporting Liverpool for a very long time and had never
seen such ineffective crowd control outside a ground.

I was very shaken.


                     AFTER THE INCIDENT INSIDE THE GROUND
Very soon after the incident a man in the row behind showed me the whole of
his ticket.    He had not had to part with any part of this in gaining
entrance to the ground.     I remember other people nearby saying that they
had not been asked for their ticket.

From my seat I had a clear view of the Leppings Lane enclosure behind the
goal.    Along with many other people it took me a long time to realise that
something serious had occurred when the game was stopped.      I think that
there w©*e_ very sad failures to deal with the situation.         Among the
failures that occurred after the game was stopped, I would list the
following:-

1.     For a very long time no medical help was given to people   who   were
      obviously injured and lying on the pitch.

2.     For a very long time, most of the Police on the pitch stood about
      doing nothing, even when spectators were carrying their injured and
      dead friends on advertising hoardings towards the far end of the
      ground. Sometimes the Police and the spectators helped to carry those
      that were injured or dead.

3.      It seemed a very very long time before any Ambulances       arrived
      anywhere near the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

4.     The tannoy loudspeaker system was hardly used at all either to direct
      the crowd or to inform the crowd.    I heard no demand for a Doctor or
      other medical services up until the time Ileft at about3.55 p.m. I
      heard only one request early on for thespectators to clear         the
      pitch.

     I heard one request that spectators clear the Leppings Lane enclosure
     which also was a long time after the incident.

5.    No use was made of anyone in authority including the two Managers to
     give either encouragement, information or direction.        This was
     particularly unfortunate as for a long time much of the crowd were
     unaware of the seriousness of what had occurred and there were


      occasional dangers of confrontation, particularly when one Liverpool
      fan ran towards the Nottingham Forrest end of the ground.

6.    No use was made of the Electronic Notice Board up until the time I
     left the ground.       People around me were particularly angered when
     it became clear that people who were dead were being carried past us
     and the Electronic Notice Board continued to give out advertisements.

On walking away from the ground with my friends I saw many people who were
very distressed and extremely angry with the Police.      I saw many many
people shouting at the Police.

Whilst I have no knowledge of the immediate cause of the crush in the
Leppings Lane enclosure that caused people to die, I am in no doubt that the
lack of effective crovnd(control outside the Leppings Lane entrance between
approximately 2.30 p.m.      and 3.p.m. caused a very serious hazard and risk to
life.

I hope you can acknowledge receipt of this letter.

Yours in very great sorrow.




     Solicitor.


P.S.   This Statement was dictated by me at my Office at about 6 a.m. Sunday
morning, 16.4.1989.

I went to my Office to record my thoughts on tape as I could not sleep._____

_______ 3__1 « i
               __ |_J___I
                        ____ i «1____




                                                                                   5
                                                                                      M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised
                                                                      5 fS | S3                  Number



Title
(Include source and any document number I f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Ye*/No
                                                                                                              Receiver



                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                              IC34^f
                                                                                                          Statem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                     O/M         SIO




                                                                                                                Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                     6
»■*

      Adtm'j, Pemberton,LL.B
      Jonathan fe Braydww, LL.B
      Rkhw) H.Grime*,LL.BM A
                                         Watson Esam & Co.                                                                 16 Paradise Square,
                                                                                                                             Sheffield SI 1TY
                                                                                                                         Telephone (0742) 753350
             OmajlltM                                                     Solicitors
                                                                                                                                 MDX 10551
      David R. Br*ysh»w,LL.B                                                                                                 FAX No. (0742) 768277



      r
                                                                                                         OkirRgf
          Geoffrey Dear, Esq,,                                                                                    AJP/BJ
          relief Constable,                                                                             Your Ref.
          West Midlands Constabulary,                                                                   Date.     18th April, 1989.
          c/o Sheff ield Pol ice Ileadqitariei'S
          anig Hili,                                                                                               y m o m
          Sheffield, S3.                                                                »
      L


           Dear Mr. Dear,

                                                         HTllfiHCHOUGH P TSASTKR

                                                POLICING OUTSIDE LEPP1NUS LANE
                                                  AT APPROXIMATKLV 2,45 P.M..


           I am aged 48 years, Senior Partner of this firm and went to the Football
           Match with my two friends from Liverpool, one of whom .is retired arid one of
           wheat is a BA 747 Pilot.

           We planned to arrive at Gate "A" of lappings lane entrance at 2.30 p.m. to
           meet a friend there.       We had a ticket for him. We bad £14.00 ickcts for the
           North Stand,       We apprr>a«;hed the Ground from Penistone Road having purUed a
           long fti.ai.anec away.      Wh«n we got to the Pen intone Road side of the Ground
           just      fore 2.30p.m. we were told that we would have to walk right round the
           Ground to gain cnlrarice at the lappings I<ane end * However we were not able
           to go along any of the small roads from'Penlatone Road to Leppings Lane i.e.
           Vere Road, Fielding Road or Bickerton Road but were told we had to go right
           to the roundabout at Herri.cs Road where we should turn left.       This we did.
           T h i s delayed us.  T did not oxi>eet to have to make such a detour.

            I would estimate we arrived outside the Loppings Lane »4*itranee at about 2.40
            p.m.    We would have been there earlier had we not had to make such a long
            detour.
            When we got there, there were many j>eople in a gi'eat mass outride the Gates.
            There seemed to be no queues for the *»ntranees.

            We were unable to see out friend in the crowd.     B^-ause we were already in
            the crush moving towards the three Gates "A" we were unable to stop and wait
            for him but were pushed forward towards the Gates.

            So far as I can recall there were a number of Policemen outside the big b3ue
            Gates, some of whom were on horseback.    They seemed to be doing nothing at
            all to control the crowds.

             I   saw no ill humour or drunkeness of any sor trouts ide the Ground,                                                      .There.


                  no anger until I was pushed right up against the brick cabin holding
             the turns I.lies.    Because we were all being crashed frun behind' we were
             getting frightened and angry. People were shouting tack over their shoulders
             asking those behind not to push.     ■                          ,
                                      A lso i t ; f Bridge Street, Killamarsh, Telephone Sheffield (0742) 48717J                                          ^
                                         TiiJt in » if r.irnfii^ri hw th* 7 >w Viririv in fhr rftnrfiift nf
zo rl 11 n ‘ ON K V ' . V l       R f t ‘ c ; n ' 7:n                                qc;QRCCT7 n               :"n i                           c n -v q t-n ^ M
       People were shouting at the Police Officers by the side of the turnstiles
       demanding that they ask their superiors to t-uk* action.

       I would estimate that I was in the crush** outwide the three Oates      marked
       "A” for the North Stand between about 2.40 p.m, and 2.55 p.m.

       I was eventually crushed up against the briekwall of Uve turnstile.     By
       this time I was separated from my companions, both of whom are about 6ft
       f-all.   Jturnedlately in front of me at one time was a woman in a whit«
       annorak.     She was being crushed against the wall and became hysterical.
       She could not move towards the turnaiile because of the weight of numVxirs.
       Somehow or other those of us around her managed to push back from the wa) I
       sufficient for her to get thro'igh the turnstile.

        At this time there whs a young male Police Officer and and young woman
        Police Officer immediately in front of me.    1 had been pushed over towards
        the right, away from the three Gates marked "A”. I think that the woman
        Police Officer was manning the Gate at the right.       As I got near to thorn
        the crowd around mo demanded that the male Police Officer do something arid
        he tried to climb the brickwall of the Cabin housing the turnstile,    He was
        not able to do this but I believe eventually got through the turnstile to
        the inside of the ground.      The woman Police Officer remained in front of
        me.     She became more and more alarmed as she     being crushed against the
        briokwall..    She did not seem to say anything at all but looked completely
        terrified. I think she got into the ground just before me.

        I evert!.(jally got to the right-hand of the turnstiles marked "A" when the
        crowd swayed again to the left*       The person immediately in front of me
        seemed to have only half a ticket and the person on the turnstile km id
        something to him, to which he replied that he hnd lost the other half in the
        crowd approaching the turnstile and could not bend doi'/n to pick it up*     He
        was allowed entrance to the ground.          I followed him in through^ the
        turnstile and would estimate that I was on the inside of Gate            A ’ at
        approximately 2.55 p.m. because I just got to my seat on row "H* of the of
        the North Stand just as the game started.

         Having got through the turnstile, along with many other people I immediately
         turned to ray left where there were a number of Police Officers - I would
         estimate between 10 arid 20 standing about.    People were screaming at them
         and shouting with great anger to take control of the situation outside the
         gates.    A black Police Officer shouted something back to me, I am not sure
         what he said.



         Many   people walking from the turnstile to their seats were angiy and
         incredulous  at the scenesthat we had just b o m through outside the gate.
         When 1 arrived at rny seat my 51 year old male friend was white faced.   He
         saidhe had teen supporting Liverpool for a     very long time and had never
         seen such ineffective crowdcontrol outside a ground.                                                   v.     .




          I was very shaken.

                                                                                          •• : '       •    -
                                      AFTER THE INCIDENT INSIDE THE                                .   v
                                                                                        :v;
                                                                                                           V . ' : '



?<y H T i n * ON f i P : 9 1   6 8 * <^n* ?S\                         :131                S113HD3N
Very soon after the incident a utart in the row behind shower.! me the whole of
his ticket.    He had not had to part with any part of this in gaining
entrance to the ground.     I remember other people nearby saying that they
had not been asked for their ticket.

From my seat I had a clear view of the Loppings I^ne enclosure behind the
goal.     Along with many oilier people it took me a long time to realise-that
  will ing serious bad occurred when Ihe i?f«ne was stupf>ed.    I think that
there        very sad failures to deal with the situation*          Among the
failures that occurred after the game vets stopped, I- wou.ld list the
following

1.      For a very long time no medical help was given to people      who   were
       obviously injured and lying on the p.itr-h.

2.      For a very long time, most of the Police on the pitch stood about
       doing nothing, even when spectators were carrying their injured and
       dead friends on advertising hoardings towards the far end of Hie
       ground. Sometimes the Police and the spectators helped to carry those
       that were injured or dead.

3.        It seemed a very very long time before any Ambulances         arrived
        anywhere near the Loppings I^rne end of the ground.

4.       The tannoy loudspeaker system was hardly us<*d at all either to direct
        the crowd or to inform the crowd.    1 heard no demand' for a Donlor or
        Other medical services up until the time I left at. al>out 3.55 p.m. I
        heard only one request early on for the sj>ectators to clear the
        pitch.

       I heard one request that spectator# clear the Leppings Lane-enclosure
       which 81so was a long time after the incident.

 5.     No use was    nvvie of anyone in authority including the two Managers to
       give either     encouragement, information or direction,        This was
       particularly    unfortunate as for a long time much of the >1rov-fd were
       unaware of     the seriousness of what had occurred arid there were


       <.>C(?asional dangers of confrontation, particularly when one Liverpool
       fan ran towards the Nottingham Forrest end of the ground,

 6.     No use was made of the Electronic Notice Board up until the time I
       left the ground.       People around me were particularly angered when
       it became clear that people who were dead were b^ing carried.past us
       and the Electronic Notice Board continued to give out advertisements*

 On walking away from the ground with my friends I saw many people who were
 very distressed and extremely angry with the Police.      I saw many many
 people shouting at the Police.

 Whilst I have no knowledge of the immediate cause of the crush jn the
 Leppings Lane enclosure that caused people to die, I am in no doubt that the
 lack of effective crot«(cantrol outride the Lcppingw Lane entrance between


TT0'°N 6£:£T    6 8 ‘S O ‘SO             S£i96S£TS0 :131
approximately 2.30 p.m.   and 3.p.m. caused a very serious hHW-jrd and risk to
life.

I hope you can acknowledge rccei.pt of this letter.

Yours in very great sorrow,_________




    Solicitor.                          -


P.S.   This Statement was dictated by me at my Office at about 6 a.m. Sunday
morningf 16.4.1989.

I went t.o my Office to record my thoughts on tape as I could not sleep.   ___
