                                                                                       MIR.15

                               «*« ■*'-
                                                                                                Num ber
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                         ^_     Date and tim e raised



T itle
(Include source and any document number\r if relevant)                                 fl
                                                                                                 1-
                                            Y ^N
Receiver's instructions - - urgent action — Y      o     ^                            '° ^                    Receiver

                             r*
                            ll                                             ''TouL/ffri o /f £
                                                                                                              S?\( ^
                                    co                                                                         Indexer
Do cu m ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                          S tatem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions
                                                                                                              S '7 ^
                                                                                                                naexer

 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                         SIO
 Examined • fu rth e r action to be taken


                                                                                                11        <0
 F urther action No(s)
            Sporting Events
        (Control of Alcohol etc.)
               Act 1985
                              CHAPTER       57

              ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
   1.     Offences in connection with alcohol on coaches and trains.
  2.      Offences in connection with alcohol, containers etc. at sports
            grounds.
   3.     Licensing hours within sports grounds.
  4.      Supplementary provisions about orders under section 3.
  5.      Appeals.
  6.      Closure of bars.
  7.      Powers of enforcement.
  8.      Penalties for offences.
   9.     Interpretation.
 10 .     Amendment of Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980.
 11.      Short title and extent.
          S c h e d u le : Procedure.




                                        A
                           ELIZA BETH U                      c. 57




        Sporting Events
    (Control of Alcohol etc.)
           Act 1985
                          1985 CHAPTER 57
An Act to make provision for punishing those who cause
 or permit intoxicating liquor to be carried on public
 service vehicles and railway passenger vehicles carrying
 passengers to or from designated sporting events or
 who possess intoxicating liquor on such vehicles and
 those who possess intoxicating liquor or certain articles
 capable of causing injury at designated sports grounds
 during the period of designated sporting events, for
 punishing drunkenness on such vehicles and, during
 the period of designated sporting events, at such
 grounds and, where licensed premises or premises in
 respect of which a club is registered (for the purposes
 o f the Licensing Act 1964) are within designated
 sports grounds, to make provision for regulating the
 sale or supply of intoxicating liquor and for the closure
 of bars.                                [25th July 1985]
                  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and
     e it e n a c t e d


B     with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
      Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—

  1.—(1) This section applies to a vehicle which—                Offences in
    (a) is a public service vehicle or railway passenger vehicle, “ ™ection
          an<^                                                   alcohol on
    (b) is being used for the principal purpose of carrying pass- coaches and
         engers for the whole or part of a journey to or from trains-
         a designated sporting event.
                                A2
2                c. 57   Sporting Events {Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985


                    (2) A person who knowingly causes or permits intoxicating
                 liquor to be carried on a vehicle to which this section applies
                 is guilty of an offence—
                       (a) if the vehicle is a public service vehicle and he is the
                             operator of the vehicle or the servant or agent of the
                             operator, or
                       (b) if the vehicle is a hired vehicle and he is the person to
                             whom it is hired or the servant or agent of that person.
                    (3) A person who has intoxicating liquor in his possession
                 while on a vehicle to which this section applies is guilty of an
                 offence.
                   (4) A person who is drunk on a vehicle to which this section
                 applies is guilty of an offence.
                   (5) In this section “ public service vehicle ” and “ operator ”
1981 c. 14.      have the same meaning as in the Public Passenger Vehicles Act
                 1981.


Offences in         2.—(1) A person who has intoxicating liquor or an article to
connection       which this section applies in his possession—
with alcohol,
containers            (a) a t any time during the period of a designated sporting
etc. at sports              event when he is in any area of a designated sports
grounds.                    ground from which the event may be directly viewed, or
                      (b) while entering or trying to enter a designated sports
                            ground at any time during the period of a designated
                            sporting event at that ground,
                 is guilty of an offence.
                   (2) A person who is drunk in a designated sports ground at
                 any time during the period of a designated sporting event at that
                 ground or is drunk while entering or trying to enter such a
                 ground at any time during the period of a designated sporting
                 event at that ground is guilty of an offence.
                    (3) This section applies to any article capable of causing injury
                 to a person struck by it, being—
                       (a) a bottle, can or other portable container (including such
                            an article when crushed or broken) which—
                                  (i) is for holding any drink, and
                                  (ii) is of a kind which, when empty, is normally
                               discarded or returned to, or left to be recovered by,
                               the supplier, or
                       (b) part of an article falling within paragraph (a) above ;
                 but does not apply to anything that is for holding any medicinal
1968 c. 67.      product (within the meaning of the Medicines Act 1968).
        Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985      c. 57


  3 .—( 1) Where licensed premises or registered club premises Licensing
are situated within the area of a designated sports ground—        sports
     (a) the permitted hours in those premises for the purposes grounds.
          of Part III of the Licensing Act 1964 (hours during 1964 c. 26.
          which intoxicating liquor may be sold or supplied in
          the premises or consumed in or taken from the premi­
          ses) shall not, subject to the provisions of any order
          under this section in respect of the premises, include
          any part of the period of any designated sporting event
          at the designated sports ground, and
     (b) section 63(2)(b) of that Act (intoxicating liquor ordered
          for consumption off the premises) shall not apply dur­
          ing any part of that period.

  (2) Where licensed premises or registered club premises are
so situated, a magistrates’ court may by an order under this
section provide—
     (a) that the permitted hours in the premises or any part of
           them shall, during so much of the period of any desig­
           nated sporting event at the designated sports ground as
           would (apart from this section) be included in the per­
           mitted hours, include such period as may be determined
           under the order, and
      (b) that during the period so determined such conditions as
           may be specified in the order (including conditions
           modifying or excluding any existing conditions of the
           justices’ licence or, as the case may be, the registration
           certificate) shall apply in respect of the sale or supply of
           intoxicating liquor in the premises;
and the justices’ licence or, as the case may be, registration
certificate shall have effect accordingly.

  (3) An order under this section shall not apply to any part
of the premises from which designated sporting events at the
designated sports ground may be directly viewed.

  (4) It shall be a condition of any order under this section
that there shall be in attendance at the designated sports ground
throughout the period of any designated sporting event a
person—
     (a) who is responsible for securing compliance with this
          section, being the holder of the justices’ licence or a
          person designated by him or, in the case of registered
          club premises, a person designated by the club, and
     (b) written notice of whose name and current address has
          been given to the chief officer of police.
c. 57   Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985


   (5) A magistrates’ court may—
       (a) vary an order under this section, either generally or in
            respect of a particular designated sporting event and,
            in the latter case, may in particular provide that the
            order shall not have effect in respect of that event, or
       (b) revoke the order.
   (6 ) A magistrates’ court shall not in respect of any sports
ground make an order under this section in any terms, or vary
the terms of such an order (otherwise than by providing for it
not to have effect in respect of a particular event), unless satis­
fied that, having regard in particular to the arrangements made
for the admission of spectators and for regulating their conduct,
an order in the terms proposed is not likely to be detrimental
to the orderly conduct or safety of spectators.
   (7) Where an order under this section is in force in respect
of any sports ground and a police officer of rank not less than
inspector is of the opinion—
       (a) that the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor in pur­
            suance of the order during the period of a particular
            designated sporting event is likely to be detrimental to
            the orderly conduct or safety of spectators at that event,
            and
       (b) that it is impracticable for an application to be made to
            a magistrates’ court for the variation of the order in
            respect of that event,
he may give written notice to the, person whose name has been
given to the chief officer of police in accordance with subsection
(4) above.
   (8) A notice is to be treated as given to a person under sub­
section (7) above if it is left at—
       (a) the licensed premises or, as the case may be, the regis­
            tered club premises, or
       (b) the address notified under subsection (4){b) above.
   (9) A notice under subsection (7) above may state that, with
effect from the time when the notice is given, the order under
this section shall, in respect of the sporting event concerned—
       (a) cease to have effect, or
       (b) have effect subject to such modifications as may be
            specified in the order;
and the order shall apply accordingly.
   (10) A person who sells or supplies or authorises the sale or
supply of intoxicating liquor at any time that is excluded from
the permitted hours by virtue of this section or in contravention
of conditions imposed under this section is not guilty of an
       Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985     c. 57               5


offence under section 59(l)(a) of the Licensing Act 1964 (pro- 1964 c. 26.
hibition of sale etc. outside permitted hours) but shall be guilty
of an offence under this subsection if—
      {a) he is the holder of the justices’ licence or, as the case
           may be, an officer of the club, or
      (b) he knows or has reasonable cause to believe the sale or
           supply to be such a contravention.
  (11)A person is not guilty of an offence under section 59(l)(fe)
of that Act (prohibition of consumption etc. outside permitted
hours) in respect of any time which by virtue of a notice under
subsection (7 ) above is not part of the permitted hours unless he
knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the time is not
part of those hours.


  4__ (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an order under      emen'
section 3 of this Act in respect of any premises shall (unless provisions
sooner revoked) cease to have effect—                               about orders
     (a) on the coming into effect of a further order under that under section
          section in respect of those premises, or
     (b) on the expiration of the period of five months beginning
          with the day on which it comes into effect,
whichever is the sooner.
   (2) An order under that section in respect of licensed premises
shall cease to have effect on the transfer of the justices’ licence
or on the premises ceasing to be licensed premises.
   (3) An order under that section in respect of registered club
premises shall cease to have effect if the club ceases to be regis­
tered.
  (4) Where an order under that section is in force in respect of
any premises and application is made not less than twenty-eight
days before the order is due to expire for renewal of the order or
for a further order in respect of the premises, the first-mentioned
order shall not cease to have effect by virtue of subsection ( 1)(6 )
above until the application is disposed of by the magistrates’
court.
   (5) Applications for or relating to orders under that section
shall be made to the magistrates’ court acting for the petty ses­
sions area in which the premises are situated.
   (6) There may be charged by justices’ clerks—
      (a) in respect of the making (including the renewal) of an
           order under that section, a fee of £12.50, and
6              c. 57   Sporting Events {Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985


                    (b) in respect of the variation of such an order where appli­
                         cation for the variation is made by the holder of the
                         justices’ licence or, as the case may be, the club, a fee
                         of £4,
1980 c. 43.    notwithstanding anything in section 137(1) of the Magistrates’
               Courts Act 1980 (Fees).
1964 c. 26.      (7) An order under section 29 of the Licensing Act 1964 (fees
               chargeable in licensing matters) may provide that subsection (6 )
               above shall have effect as if, for either or both of the amounts
               mentioned in that subsection, there were substituted such other
               amount or amounts as may be specified in the order.
                  (8 ) Section 197 of the Licensing Act 1964 (Service of notices)
               applies for the purposes of this Act as it applies for the purposes
               of that Act.
                 (9) The Schedule to this Act shall have effect, but subject to
               any provision that may be made by rules of court.

Appeals.         5.—(1) Any party to the proceedings who is aggrieved by a
               decision of a magistrates’ court on an application for or in respect
               of an order under section 3 of this Act, other than an application
               in respect of a particular designated sporting event or particular
               designated sporting events, may appeal to the Crown Court on
               such grounds as may be specified in his notice of appeal.
                 (2) In the event of such an appeal, any other party to the
               proceedings shall be party to the appeal.
                 (3) The judgment of the Crown Court on any such appeal shall
               be final.

Closure of        6.—(1) If at any time during the period of a designated sport­
bars.          ing event at any designated sports ground it appears to a con­
               stable in uniform that the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor
               at any bar within the ground is detrimental to the orderly con­
               duct or safety of spectators at that event, he may require any
               person having control of the bar to close it and keep it closed
               until the end of that period.
                  (2)    A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed
               under subsection (1) above is guilty of an offence, unless he shows
               that he took all reasonable steps to comply with it.

Powers of        7— (1) A constable may, at any time during the period of a
enforcement.   designated sporting event at any designated sports ground, enter
               any part of the ground for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
               of this Act.
       Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985    c. 57              7


   (2) A constable may search a person he has reasonable grounds
to suspect is committing or has committed an offence under this
Act, and may arrest such a person.
  (3) A constable may stop a public service vehicle (within the
meaning of section 1 of this Act) and may search such a vehicle
or a railway passenger vehicle if he has reasonable grounds to
suspect that an offence under that section is being or has been
committed in respect of the vehicle.


  8.     A person guilty of an offence under this Act shall be liable Penalties for
on summary conviction—                                                offences.
     (a) in the case of an offence under section 1 (2 ), to a fine
           not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale,
     (b) in the case of an offence under section 1(3), 2(1), 3(10) or
           6(2), to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard
           scale or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
           three months or both, and
     (c) in the case of an offence under section 1(4) or 2(2), to a
           fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.



   9.—(1) The following provisions shall have effect for the Interpretation,
interpretation of this Act.
   (2) “ Designated sports ground ” means any place—
      (a) used (wholly or partly) for sporting events where accom­
           modation is provided for spectators, and
      (b) for the time being designated, or of a class designated,
           by order made by the Secretary of S tate;
and an order under this subsection may include provision for
determining for the purposes of this Act the outer limit of any
designated sports ground.
  (3) “ Designated sporting event ”—
     (a) means a sporting event or proposed sporting event for
           the time being designated, or of a class designated, by
          order made by the Secretary of State, and
     (b) includes a designated sporting event within the meaning
           of Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 ; 1980 c. 62.
and an order under this subsection may apply to events or pro­
posed events outside Great Britain as well as those in England
and Wales.
  (4) The period of a designated sporting event is the period
beginning two hours before the start of the event or (if earlier)
8             c. 57     Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985


              two hours before the time at which it is advertised to start and
              ending one hour after the end of the event, but—
                   (a) where an event advertised to start at a particular time
                        on a particular day is postponed to a later day, the
                        period includes the period in the day on which it
                        is advertised to take place beginning two hours before
                        and ending one hour after that time, and
                  (b) where an event advertised to start at a particular time
                       on a particular day does not take place, the period is
                        the period referred to in paragraph (a) above.
                (5) “ Registered club premises ” means premises in respect of
              which a club is registered.
                (6 ) This Act does not apply to any sporting event or proposed
              sporting event—
                    (a) where all competitors are to take part otherwise than
                         for reward, and
                    (b) to which all spectators are to be admitted free of charge.
1964 c. 26.      (7) Expressions used in this Act and in the Licensing Act 1964
              have the same meaning as in that Act, and section 58(2) of that
              Act (meaning of chief officer of police) applies for the purposes
              of this Act as it applies for the purposes of Part II of that Act.
                (8) Any power to make an order under this section shall be
              exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pur­
              suance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.


Amendment        10.    Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 shall
of Criminal    be amended as follows—
Justice
(Scotland) Act     (a) in section 6 8 ( 1), after paragraph (b) there shall be
1980.                   inserted—
1980 c. 62.                  “ (c) a sporting event, or a class of sporting event,
                               taking place outside Great B ritain: ” ;
                      (b) in section 69, after the words “ public service vehicle ”
                            there shall be inserted the words “ or railway passenger
                            vehicle ” and after the word “ passengers ” there shall
                            be inserted the words “ for the whole or part of a
                            journey ” ;
                      (c) in section 77, at the end of the definition of “ designated ”
                            there shall be added the words “ and ‘ designated sport­
                            ing event’ includes a sporting event designated, or
                            of a class designated, under section 9(3)(a) of the
                            Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985 ” ;
                            and
       Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985   c. 57


    (d) in section 77, after the definition of “ public service
         vehicle” there shall be inserted the following defi­
         nition—
              “ ‘ railway passenger vehicle ’ has the same mean­
            ing as in the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 ”.       1976 c. 66.

  11.— (1) This Act may be cited as the Sporting Events (Control Short title-
of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985.                                       ment and
                                                                     extent.
  (2) Sections 1 to 9 of and the Schedule to this Act extend to
England and Wales only.
  (3) This Act does not extend to Northern Ireland.
10            c. 57   Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985


Section 4.                             SCHEDULE
                                          PROCEDURE
                 1- A n application for o r in respect of an order under section 3 of
              this A ct shall be m ade by com plaint to a justice of the peace acting
              for the petty sessions area for which the m agistrates’ court having
              jurisdiction in the m atter acts.

                2.— (1) A com plaint fo r the m aking or variation of such an
              order m ay be m ade—
                  (a) in respect of licensed premises, by the holder of the justices’
                       licence, and
                  (b) in respect of registered club premises, by the chairm an
                       o r secretary of the club.
                (2) The justice of the peace to whom the com plaint is so m ade
              shall issue—
                   (a) a sum m ons directed to the chief officer of police, and
                   (b) a sum m ons directed to the local authority,
              and each sum m ons shall require th e person to whom it is directed
              to appear before the m agistrates’ court to show why the order should
              not be m ade or, as the case m ay be, varied.
                (3) A sum m ons directed to a local authority under this paragraph
              shall not have effect (and accordingly the local authority shall not be
              party to the proceedings) unless there is in force in respect o f the
1975 c. 52.   sports ground concerned a certificate under the Safety of Sports
              Grounds A ct 1975.
                (4) A copy o f any order m ade on a com plaint m ade by any of the
              persons m entioned in sub-paragraph (1) above shall be sent to the
              chief officer of police and (where die local authority are party to the
              proceedings) to the local authority.

                3.— (1) A com plaint for the variation or revocation of such an
              order m ay be m ade—
                  (a) by the chief officer of police, or
                  (b) w here such a certificate is in force in respect of the sports
                       ground concerned, by the local authority.
                 (2) The justice of the peace to whom the com plaint is so m ade
              shall issue a summons directed to the holder of the justices’ licence
              or, in the case of registered club prem ises, to the chairm an or secre­
              tary of the club requiring him to appear before the m agistrates’ court
              to show cause why the order should not be varied o r revoked.
                 (3) A copy of any order m ade on a com plaint m ade by any of the
              persons m entioned in sub-paragraph (1) above shall be sent to the
              holder of the justices’ licence or, as the case m ay be, to the chairm an
              o r secretary of the club.

                4. W here a com plaint is m ade for a new order under section 3
              of this A ct—
                   (a) there shall be delivered to the justice of the peace a t the
                        tim e the com plaint is m ade a plan of the sports ground
        Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985                       c. 57                 11


        showing the premises within that ground where intoxicating
        liquor would be sold or supplied in pursuance of the pro­
        posed order, and
    (b) the hearing shall not take place before the end of the period
         of 28 days beginning with the day on which the complaint
        is made.

  5. On any complaint made to a magistrates’ court for or in
respect of an order under section 3 of this Act, or appeal to the
Crown Court in respect of such a complaint, to which a club is a
party, the club, if not represented by counsel or a solicitor, shall be
heard by the chairman or secretary, by any member of the com­
mittee having the general management of the affairs of the club or
by any officer of the dub duly authorised.
  6 . In this Schedule, “ local authority ” has the same m eaning as in
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.                                                    1975 c. 52.


                   PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY W. J. SHARP, CB
         Controller and Chief Executive of H er Majesty’s Stationery Office and
                        Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament
c. 57      Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc) Act 1985




           LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
(545754)
                                 £2-30 net
                            ISBN 0 10 545785 X
