                                          Q j? © /

                                         ? A C ^ e   of-
                                                             Afr/t(r$C
STATET3NT OF Martin John HZ1IINGWAY, Police Sergeant 2425:



I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, currently
Stationed at Goldthorpe Police Station.

On Saturday, 15th of April 1989, I was stationed at Hammerton Hoad
Police Station as a Police Sergeant on *D * Group from that Station.
On that date, I was deputed to work at the Hillsborough Football
Ground, Sheffield, together with ten Constables from ’D ’ Group
as Serial 2, under the command of ravseli and Police Sergeant 2358
COX.

At 9.30 am on that date, I attended briefing with the other serials
working in connection with the P.A.Cup Semi Pinal at Hillsborough.
The briefing was conducted mainly by Chief Superintendent Duckinfield
and Superintendent Hurray.

At briefing, the emergency evacuation procedures were discussed,
background information in relation to both teams was given and
Officers were instructed in the style of Policing required, i.e.
"Firs but Fair".

After the general briefing, ?3 2358 Cox and I attended the Sergeants
and Inspectors briefing where specific details of Serial duties
were discussed, making reference to the printed copies of the
Hatch Order which had been circulated to all Supervisors before the
match.  Serial 2 was ordered to patrol the South Stand, Lower Deck
with Constables detailed to specific duties in relation to the
supervision of turnstiles and gangways for three phases of the
match.

After this briefing, P3 Cox and I gathered Serial 2 in the North
Stand where the procedures we had agreed with reference to the
Hatch Order were outlined. These were as follows:

Phase One (Pre-Hatch'.

Constables to work as "Teams" of two as below. PS Cox in overall
command and to reply to radio messages for Serial 2.

P3 Cox to supervise Constables at the "Spion Kop" end of the South
Stand. I was to supervise constables at the "West Stand" end of
the South Stand and those Officers patrolling gangways ana the
Snack Bars.

Constables deplo3red as follows:

Team 1    PC 2051 Jackson and PC 192 Simpson. Supervise Turnstiles
          33 - 36 from inside the ground.

Team 2    PC 1302 Pitt and PC 3154 A.Roberts. Supervise Turnstiles
          33 - 36 from inside the ground.

Team 3    PC 1926 McGuiness and PC 495 Pursley. Supervise Gangways
          and Snack Bars in South Stand Lower Deck.
STATEL'EKT OP PS 2425 Martin John Hemingway:   Serial 2
                                           \Vv&£ 'TWO     Of


Team 4               PC 448 Turner ■
                     19 and 20*from
Team 5               PC 157 West an
                     21 and 22 from



leans 1 and 2 formed the half Serial under PS Cox.   Teams 3,4 and 5
formed the half Serial under myself.

I then equipped myself with a Personal Radio tuned to Channell 25
together with an earpiece. On testing this -equipment, I found it
to be in working order.

Serial 2 then deployed to the South Stand at 11.15 am. An initial
search of the lower deck of the Stand was made for suspicious
articles. None were found.

The Officers then went to their points as outlined above. I remained
with PS Cox until aproximately 12.30 pm. I then joined the Officers
from Teams 3,4 and 5.

During the period from 11.15 am until aproximately 1.00 pm, virtually
no supporters entered the South Stand, and the Officers were almost
inactive on their points.

Prom 1.00 pm, supporters began to enter the South Stand in increasing
    r***’•)£.-vie*
 v /.U i



The position of the turnstiles at the "West Stand End" of the South
Stand is such that X had no view of the inside of the other parts
of the ground during this 'period. Radio traffic during this time
r:as intermittent, but of good quality and easily understood.

At aproximately 2.00 pm, the South Stand Lower Deck was about half
full when both Football Teams went out to inspect the pitch.

I then took PC 495 Parsley and PC 1926 McGuiness to the front of the
South Stand Lower Deck to ensure that nc supporters tried to get
onto the playing area. I noted that the South Stand was about half
full at this time. The Spion Kop appeared to be almost full.
However, the West Stand Upper Deck was les.: than one third full and
The West Stand lower Deck was almost empty in the two outer pens
whilst the centre pen was almost half full.

At 2.15 pm, the players left the pitch. There had been no public
order problems in the South Stand Lower Deck during this period.
I returned to Tu msi l e s 19 to 22 in order to supervise Teams 4


I remained in this area between 2.15 pm and 2.40 pm and had no
view cf the remainder of the ground.

At aproximately 2.30 pm, radio traffic became almost unreadable due
to interference. I therefore climed the steps to the Police
Control Box, which was directly behind where 1 was working and
told Superintendent Murray of this. He stated that he was aware of
                                                           §■!)({ “f V


STATHuENT 0? Martin John Hemingway, PS 2425:      Serial 2.
                                               ^PtfsBTuea? ch-^            iut»;
the problem and steps were being taken to rectify it.         I returned
to the Turnstiles 1 9 - 22 .

Adjacent to these turnstiles is a tall fence and a gate which                   •
together sepparate the South Stand from the West Stand. This was                ;
manned by two Sheffield Wednesday f.c. Stewards. I do not know                  :
the names of these t-vo men, but deocribe them as white males;
one in his early twenties with very long straight shoulder length               ;
hair tied back, the other in his forties with short grey hair.                  ,
Both were casually dressed, but wearing the Official Club Steward
fluorescent tabards.

During the period of 2.30 pm to 2.4 2 pm, several persons approached
the stewards asking to be let into the West Stand from the South
Stand in order to be with their fellow supporters» The Stewards
asked me if this was permissible, I replied in the negative and no
persons were permitted to pass through thegste in either direction.

At 2.40 pm, I went to the head of 'rangway nearest to the West Stand
in the South Stand Lower Deck. I caw PC 3034 Nicol and a male
Officer climbing into the South Stand Lower Deck from the pitch.
I ran to them and they tcld me that they had seen supporters
climbing from the West Stand Lower Deck into the South Stand Lower
Deck. The fans had gained access from the ou&er pen which           .-if
is seppatated from the South Stand by a high fence.                    J

I immediately deployed Serial 2 Team 5, PCs 157 West and 2417
Botchell to the South Stand side of this fence with instructions to
stop such access to the South Stand. At this time, I noted that
the outer pen nearest to the South Stand was not full and there was
                    iber of 'oersons inside.

At 2.45 pm I returned to the area of Turnstiles 19 - 22 to assist
Team 4 in supervising these turnstiles.

During the period 2.45 pm to 3.00 pm, I saw several Liverpool
supporters attempt to climb from the West Stand into the South Stand
over the turnstile boxes in front of me. i was on^y              a.o pr-j/^nu
this bv climbing the steps to the Police Control Box and shouting uo
these fans in the strongest possible terms that they would be ejected
from the ground if they entered the Souan 3~ana.           abandonee tneir
efforts. ~As far as I could see, none of these persons_made any
attep’rt to e^ter the outer "oen of a.ie *7est otand, ”i— i.i -lS adjacent
to the area where thev were trying to c—m o onto the turnsuile boxeso

At aproximatelv 2.50 Dm, I could hear what appeared to be urgent
radio traffic/ The quality appeared to be very_poor and I had to
concentrate very hard to hear what was being said. Unfortunately,
this neccessitated putting both hands over my ears and several
Nottingham supprotres clearly found this amusing. They were very
good-humoured in their approach, but their intervention preventea
me from making anv sense of the messages being passed by radio.

Th"’s was the last radio traffic I recieved, as X lost my radio
earpiece at an early stage in the events that follow.
                                                       i)o If 441
Statement of P3 2435 I.Iartin John Hemingway, PS 2425: Serial 2.

                                                                   Ufcl—
At 3«00 pm, as the game kicked off, I went to the top of the
gangway sepparating seating areas nearest to the West Stand in the
South Stand Lower Deck. My intention was to verify that all was
in order in the South Stand before deploying Officers to thair Phase
Two (During-Match) duties, which were the supervision of the
gangways.

I immediately saw that several Officers were on the periiniter track
at Grate 3 of the West Stand lower Deck. I could not see what was
happening, so I went to the front of the South Stand at pitch level.
As I was attempting to make out what was happening, I turned and
saw Superintendent Murray, PC 3235 G.Roberts and PC 448Turner
at the head of the gangway, coming down towards me.

Together with those Officers, I ran roung the perimiter track to
Gate 3® On arriving there, I saw that there were a large number of
people in the centre pen crammed. against the front fence sepparating
them from the pitch. These people were clearly in great distress.

I forced my way through a group of Officers and found myself directly
in front of G^te 3«

I saw four people   trying to get out of this gate onto the pitch.
Three men were at   the front. One was almost out of the Gate, but
his right leg was   bent back inside the centre pen at an unnatural
angle and trapped   by the people behind him. This man was screaming.

A second man was lying half out of the pen on the perimiter track.
His legs were pinned by the people behind him.

Behind these two men was a woman whose -rrn= were at her sides. She
was clearly having trouble breathing. A third man was beside her,
arms outstretched above his head.

All of these people were pinned dovrci, angled towards the pitch by the
entire crowd in the centre pen behind them who, whilst appearing
upright, were leaning forward at an angle towards the pitch.

Together with PC 2980 Wright from S     Division of the South Yorkshire
Police, I tried in turn to pull each of the four people described
above out through Gate 3.

Other Officers assisted us, notabley PS 2916, South Yorkshire and
PS 1855 of the Nottinghamshire Police.

After trying for aproximately five minutes to the limit of my
                                                            . streni
                                                               ' O ’
       apparent that we could not move the people at the front at all.

I saw that the woman described above was begininng to turn blue,
a n ’ dii not respond to our shouts of encouragement.

During this time, several persons climbed out from the centre pen
above me as I bent down to pull. I clearly remember one burly man
in his thirties wearing a brown, leather jacket running down from
the rear of the centre pen on the heads and shouders of those
trapped below. Tills man escaped via Gate 3*
3TAT2K3NT OP   Martin John Hemingway, PS 2425; Serial 2.
                                                     fwe    of     ^
                                                                       TEB*-


Our efforts at the Gate proving futile, I said to PC 2980 Wright
that we should try to climb into the crowd to pull people from
the back to ease the crush at the front. He immediately agreed.

Together with PC Wright, I climbed in through Gate 3 over the heads
of people below. I had to step on their should re =5 an3 liead3, which
at the time, caused my great goncern that I was injuring them.

I managed to climb down to the ground and found myslef     near to a
broken barrier. I turned and saw that the people over      whom I had
climbed were falling to the floor as the crush eased.      All appeared
to be dead. My impression was that there were as many      as fify people
between myslf and the fence.

I found a tall fat man lying in front cf as on the terrace. His skin
was hi i:= lis eyes glassy and lifeless
             I could not detect any heartbeat or Dreaming, so j.
commenced J2.A.R and cardiac massage. It was apparent that as I
breathed into him, his chest hardly expanded, but his abdomen moved.

After several minutes trying to revive this man without success, I
heard a man shouting, "H3’S ALIYS" repeatedly.

I turned and saw two men standing near to a man lying on the terrace.
Believing that the man I was trying to revive was dead, I left him
and went to the two men above. As I did so, several Liverpool
supporters begged my to try to continue on the tall fat man. I told
them that he was dead, and they became alsomst hysterical. I saw
other Liverpool Supporters trying to calm them down.

On reaching the second casualty, I saw that he was clearly in great
distress but was breathing intermittently. Assisted by two male
supporters, PC Wright and PS 1855 of the Nottinghamshire Police
(who was wearing a yellow anorak) I carried this man towards the
Gate 3* I saw that several other Officers were by now in the
CentEe pen and that Inspector Woodward was trying to restore order
at the Gate 3°

I called out to Inspector Woodward that the man we were carrying was
alive, and the Inspector cleared a path to Gate 3« We carried the
injured man out onto the pitch. One of the Liverpool supporters
began E.A.R and I started external cardiac massage. I was relieved
by a man who identified himself as a Psychaitric nurse. I then
returned to Gate 3*
By this time, Superintendent Greenwood had arrived and had a megaphone
He was ordering the activity at the gate and had formed the Police
Officers into a chain to pass injured and dead persons from the
centre pen onto the pitch where they were being carried away on
makeshift stretchers.

I also saw Inspectors Darling and Beresfora who were also trying to
bring order to the situation.

After several minutes in the chain, I became exhausted and my place

                                                             ,2T
                                                                            ?AGe S i * OP SiX


ST^TSCENT OP PS 2425 Martin Jo hi: Hsniir-swav: Serial 2


was taken by another officer.
I than saw P3 Cox,                                and we assisted agroup of supporters to carry away
Q   m :~ -r>   A r   ;*   r \ l    -* Q->-* -1
               Ui-        £''-*»     G>—   sjko

?3 Cox ?.nd I the:, folia?, another placard and made our way back towards ;
the centre per. but by this time, the majority of casualties had been
carried away.

I then found Inspector Darling who instructed me to try to reform                                      I
Serial 2. I searched the half of the pitch nearest the West Stand
but only succeed infinding PC 495 Puraley and PC 448 Turner.                                           |
I saw PC 3235 Roberts tending the injured, and instructed her to
remain with a casualty.

Together with several other officers, I made my way to the players
entrance to stand by as a makeshift serial. On arrival there, I
noted that the time was 4.15 pa.

I can put no other timescale on the events above.

During the attempts to rescue persons inside the Center pen of the
West Stand, I was assisted by many Liverpool supporters who behaved
with regard only to   the needs of others. However, I was also subjects
to abuse from other Liverpoolfans, and spat upon whilst trying to
tend the injured.

The efforts of PC 2980 Wright at Gate 3 and inside the centre pen
were tireless and that Officer was prominent in the rescue attempts.

Superintendent Greenwood was most successful in restoring order at
Gate 3 using a megaphone.

It is my opinion that rescue attempts v’ere severly hindered by the
chain fence of the centre pen.

However, almost all of the dead were leaning forward against the
perimiter wall and pinned down by the crowd behind. These persons
were below the level of the Officers on the perimiter track and had
to be lifted both upward and outward. Even had there been no
peritniter fence, it would have been very difficult to raise people
agaist the v/eight on top of them.

Rescue would have been much easier if the terracing did not continue
down below the level of the perimiter track.

After          remaining outside the players tunnel for several minutes
I was          instructed to go to the North Stand with other officers.
After          remaining there until 5.00 pa, together v.dth other Officers
I was          stood down and left the ground.

This statement has been made with reference to a report which I
prepared on Monday, 17th of April 1989 at Hanmerton Road Police
Station. A copy of that report was handed by me to Inspector
Darling on that date. A copy of that report is attached. I have
retained the original report.

This statement consists of six pages, each signed by me.                                It is true
to the best of my knowledge and belief.
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                    R«f:      p.1 o f 5
        From:   police Sergeant 2425 Hemingway
                                                                   Station/Dept: Hannertor. ~oed
        To:     Chief Superintendent, 'F' Division                 Date:         17.4.89



                SUBJECT:        INVOLV^^I.T OF S31I/1 T,'0 ,T HILLSB030UGK FC0T3/Ii G X'
                                           DIKING F C U . 32:i- FINAL



                I report in regard to the ;bove incident. Together vdth PS 235S Cox,
                I was in charge of Serial 2, which consisted of ten officers from
                T>* Group, F Division, deputed to work on the South Stand lower deck.

                ft*ior to the start of the natch, it was decided that PS COX would have
                overall control of the serial, which would be split into two detachments;
                two pairs of constables under PS COX would cover the South Stand lower deck
                at theSpion Kop end, and three pairs of Constables under ny innediete
                supervision would cover the South Stand lower deck at the I'est Stand e~i.

                At 11.15 an, the serial deployed, end officers made an initial check a
                the entire South Stand lower deck for suspicious articles. None were
                found.

                At aproxinately 11.30 an, the serial deployed as descirbed earlier, with
                officers in the following pairings and locations:    (Ph-se 1, pre-n tch)

                Tea® 1     PC 2051 J-ckson end PC 192 Simpson.      Supervise turnstiles 35 - 3£

                           PC 130? Pitt and PC 3153 Roberts.      Supervise turnstiles    33 • 3^

                           PC 1926 McGuiness and PC 495 Pursley. Petrol Gangways/Sneck bar

                           PC 448 Turner and PC 3235 Roberts.      Supervise turnstiles 19 £■ 20.

                           PC    157 West and PC 2417 Rotehell.   Supervise turnstiles       21 end 2

                Teams 4 and 5 were inside the ground, controlling turnstiles which            giveacc
                to the South Stand lower deck.

                Teams 1 & 2 for ed the half serial under PS COX, Teams 3»^ & 5 formed the
                half serial under myself.

                During the period 11.30 am to 1 pn, the officers remained on their points
                but were almost inactive as virtually no people entered the ground during
                this period.

                At aproxinately 1pm, supporters began to enter the ground in increasing
                numbers. % 2 pa, the South Stand lower deck v/as about half full when
                both Football Teans went out to inspect the pitch. Together with PC 1526
                KcGuiness and PC 495 Pursley, I went down to the pitch level of the South
                Stand to prevent any supporters getting onto the pitch due to the preser.ee
                of the players. There were no public order problems in that area.

                At this time,   I could clearly see that the Spion Kop was virtually   fullof
                Nottingham Supporters, but that the West Stand upper deck was less than one
                third full and the West Stand lower deck wts virtually empty in the outer
                pens, whilst the center pen was more than half full.

Gen/2
 Report of PS 2425 Hemingway, Serial 2.                                    c.
                                                                        of 5 .


 At^aproximately 2.15 pm, the pisvers having left the pitch, I went to the
 rear of Folice Control end Supervised Teams 4 t- 5 on "heir turnstiles.

 During the period 2.00 pm until 2.40 pn, I rer.ained in the rear of the
 South^ St end lover deck supervising turstiles end (
                                                    ~angvays with the officers
 o* _esns 3*4 & 5« I had no view of events in the Vest Stand during thi6
 tine.

 /.t eproximrtely 2.40 pin, I went to the top of the gangway of the South Stand
 lover deck nearest to the V/est Stand. I s d w PC 3034 Nicol and a male officer
 clmbing into the South Stand lower deck. I ran to then and they told me that
 they had seen Liverpool fans climbing from the l.’est Stand lover deck into
 the South Stand lower deck. The fans had gained access by climbing from
 the outer pen nearest to the South Stand across the fence which sepnarates
 the two stands.

 I looked into the V/est Stc-nd end could see that the pen on the lower deck
 nearest to the South Stand was not full. There vere e. large number of people
 inside but there was room for many more. This part of the Vest Stand lower
 aeck was eproximately two thirds full at this time.

I innediately deployed team 5, PC 157 V/est and PC 2417 Botchell from the
turnstile ares to the South Stand lov/er deck and positioned them at the
fence sepparating the lover decks of The V/est and South Stands to prevent
supporters climbing the fence.

At aproxinately 2.45 pa I returned to the area of turnstiles 19 to 22 and
assisted the officers there; PC 448 Turner and PC 3235 Roberts.

During the period 2.45 pn to kick off time at 3.00 pm, I saw several
Liverpool supporters try to climb over the turnstile box which sepparatee
the rear of the V.est Stand lower deck from the rear of the South Stand lover
deck, i.e. Turnstiles 21 and 22. I stopped them from doing this by
climbing the steps to the Police Control box and shouting to then, telling
thee they would be ejected if the came down in the South Stand.

As far as I could see, these supporters made no effort to try to enter the
outer pen of the .est Stand lower deck which is adjacent to the turnstile
box that they were trying to climb. All r: n off to the rear of the Vest
St-: r.d when challenged.

At aproxinately 2.50 pn, whilst engaged in the above action, I could hear
what appeared to be urgent radio traffic. I attenpted to listen clearly to
this but was jostled by three Nottingham supporters, who clearly found the
sight of a Policeman with a finger in each ear rather amusing. I was unable
to he r any further radio traffic fron this point until eproxirr.ately 4.0 0 pn
due to crovd noise and losing ny radio earpiece at an early stage in the
events that follow.

At 3»00 p~, as the game kicked off, I went to the top of the gangway of
the South Stand lower deck nearest to the Vest Stand to locate the officers
fron Tea~ - for their phase two duties (i.e. during the course of playing
time. All officers had been deputed to a grngv.’cy during this period).
                                                                 9- 0 ri 4 c >


 Report of TS ?k25 Hemingway, Serirl 2.                                       *.
                                                                         of 5*.


 iSier I reached the top of this g'ngwsy, I sow thct several officers
 fror Seri-1 1 were near to the pete leading from thecentre t*- of the
 West Stf.nd lov/er deck onto the pitch: i.e. Gate 3.

 It appeared th;.t the gnte wr.s open and supporters were gettir.- out onto the
 pitcr., I innedi" tely ran dovx to the pitch level of the star.:., but could
 not clearly make out whr.t war happening. I turned to goback to the top
 of tr.e steps for a clearer viev, and saw Superintendent IIUPJ..C at the top
 of these steps, leading tea- • 4 from my serial down the step;.

 I ran with these officers around the pitch to Gate 3 of the     -srt Stand
 lower deck.

 ^ driving there, I saw thet this pen was crammed with prople, mcny of
 whose faces were being crushed against the fence. I pushed t: the front
    £ group of Constables and found myself directly outside gite 3»

 I there saw that four people were trying to get out of this £;te onto the pitch.
 Three men were at the front, toe was almost clear of the gate, but his leg
 was pinned inside the pen by people behind him. A second mar vas lying half
 •*-n   half out of the g?te, his chest on the track surround--- the pitch.
 Behind these two were a woman whose arms were at her sides. 3ke was clearly
 krvi-£ great trouble breethir.", A third man was next to her, sr; s outstretched
 shove his herd.                                                           ,
                                                                                     I
-'LI °- these people were pinned aov.Ti by an enournous v/eight c: t>eople fron behinj
Together with another young officer, who I believe is PC 298: '.Tight froc
E2 S:odivision, I attempted to pull these people free. Other officers
fssisted us, including PS 2916.

Despite our best efforts for more than five minutes, we were enable to move
the people at the front at all.

As ve continued to try to pull people out, I ssw the woman des;ribed above
beginng to turn grey and then blue. I saw that there was no rovenent from
other people near to the fence, who did no respond to our shouting and
encouragement to try to move back.

After several minutes more of fruitlessly trying to move the reople at the
front, it became plear that they simply could not be pulled c_t. During
this ti'ie, I felt people jumping out oner my back as I bent cr.n to pull.

At^t-jis time, PC 2980 Uright end I entered the centre pen via Gate 3 by
clinbi;ng over the people at the front.

3y tr_ns time, the situation at the rerr of the centre pen hac eased slightly
and I vas able to climb down onto the terrace near to a broker crash barrier.
I turned and saw that there were many people, I though as r.iarg as fifty,
lying and leaning immobile between where I was standing and Gite 3. All
were rlue faced and glassy eyed. My immediate impression was that they
were =11 dead.

I fo*— w a tall fat map lyinr jn frnnt. nf me on the terrace. 3 .s skin was
blue,                                     and his eyes were lifeless end glassy.
I et tempted E.A.3 and heart massage, but it was apparent as I brethed into
him t;:t his chest did no move but his lower abdomen expanded. I continued
for sone minutes without result.
Report of FS ?425 Heningvny, Seri:l 2.




I then heard people nearby shouting "He's dive, he's alive". I turned
end ea\: two men standing near e nan lyin~ near to the pile of bodies on the
terrace.

By this time, other officers had also entered vie gate three into the centre
pen. Assisted by these two Liverpool supporters and other officers,
notably PC 2980 './right and PS 18-55 of the Nottingham Constabulary (v.’ho vas
we-ring e yellov: jacket) we carried this nan to Gate 3*

At Gate 3i I ssw Inspector Uoodwcrd >..’ho was attenpting to order the situation.
I called to him that this nan was alive, m d he cleared a t>Fth for us to gcte
3.

l.'e carried the man out and placed hin on the pitch. One of the Liverpool
supporters began S..' .3 end I attempted cardi; c massage as the mrn'e heart
had by now stopped. I w:>e relieved by a nan v.*ho identified himself as a
psychiatric nurse end I returned to the area of G te 3»

% ‘.his tine, Superintendent GR-dr.'OOD h d arrived, and very successfully
ordered the situation using a megaphone. In my viev:, Superintendent
GRZLSTJl/OOD's ordering of the situation at Gate 3* encouragesent and
exhortation to his officers was of the greatest importance in freeing
people as quickly as possible.

A chain was formed by Supt. G-lEEIf./OOD and we passed bodies fron hand to h:nd
fror the centre pen onto the pitch via gate 3 «

These were recieved by a conbination of supporters and Police Officers e;.d
carried away on makeshift stretchers. During this period, I saw Inspectors
Darling and Beresford who were attempting to direct officers to assist
casualties and restoring order.

After several minutes, I became exhausted and another officer took my place
in the chain.

I searched for other members of Serial 2. I found PC 3235 Roberts and
saw her tending to injured persons, directing supporters as to how they
could help* I then found PS 2358 COX, and we assisted a group of supporter*
to carry a man away on a placard. PS COX and I then took a placard and
went toward the centre pen, but by this time, the majority of the casualties
had been carried away.

I then met Inspector Darling, who instructed me to try to reform the serial
as best I could. I found PC~ 495 Pursley, PC 448 Turner and several others
end we made our way to the front of the South Stand ne?r to the players
entrance.

--fter remaining there several minutes, we were instructed to go to the
North stand and await further instructions. On arrival there I noted that
the time was 4.15 Pr;i* '

I c;n put no tiraescale on the events between 3 *0" pn and 4.15 pa«

Sore tine later the Officers in the North Stand were stood dom.       I returned
to Mannerton Soad Police Station and went off duty.

I subsequently contacted all of the ner.hers of Serial 2.    i discovered th-t
                                                                          3

 Report of PS ?k?$ Hemingway, Seri-1 2.                                  5#
                                                                      of 5*.


 ell^of the officers cn this serial had been directly involve: vilh the events
 * “.te * or        ettempted o revive cesulaties. In prrticulsr, IC 192f
 i.ccuinens h-d continued Z.A.I? on a young girl from finding her on the "pitch
 el- the w r y to hospital. Unfortunately, the girl hrd died.

 •Mist I personally s w many officers acting selflessly to assist the
 injured, I feel that the contributions of tv;o Officers stand rut.

Police Sergeant 1855 of the Nottingham Constabluary was at the forefront of
attests to remove the injured at Gate 3 . This officer vas Cone amongst *
u._icers from e strange force, yet remained in control and surressfullv
directed the people around him.

c°lict-Constfble         '-'right was present at Gate 3 when I arrived there.
  s efforts in attempting to pull people free were extreme ani tireless.
During this period, he continued to present a calm front to *.*e people
 e v s trying to assist, trying to encourage and reassure the::. '.Tien it
became apparent that our efforts there were proving fruitless, he entered
the centre pen at my instruction without hesitation, despite being faced
.7.c.?en*c -*f: 'Crowd in a snail area, /ss the situation progressed, PC 29SD
       continued to try to assist the injured in any w; y possible.
When the situation hrd calmed somewhat, I again saw PC bright calming
and reassuring his fellow officers who appeared to be distressed.

I feel that the efforts of Police Constable 29SO ’.right are varthv of the
highest praise.

I submit this report for your infornrtion.




K.J._.eningwcy, PS 2^25   (Serirl 2, Saturday 15.CA.89).

V . l.^9
