                                                                                                        M I R . 15


         fk ^ S      c?f                    ,
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised   ________ l_j~ [ — ^   _[----- ®--------------   Number



T itle
                                    Q-rJllJ        f\ c ir       l^jfo             /n       £ly ctuXi'd-^ O -z d tT
(Inclu d e source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y j t f N   o      /£-<*                  de*            dr bf&tfl                               Receiver

                                                          k&SL                          ---- -------------------
                                                                                                                                          yfuX-j
                                                                                                                                           Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                       Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions


                                                                                                                                              tndexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                        O/M         SIO
 E x a m in e d -   fu rth er action to be taken




 Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                                                 V > V' -a?
                                                                                              M,           C « .r
          Public Order Act 1986
                        C H A P T E R 64

           ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
                               Part I

                          N e w O ffen ces
Section
 1.   Riot.
 2.   Violent disorder.
 3.   Affray.
 4.   Fear or provocation of violence.
 5.   Harassment, alarm or distress.
 6.   Mental element: miscellaneous.
 7.   Procedure: miscellaneous.
 8.   Interpretation.
 9.   Offences abolished.
10.   Construction of other instruments.

                               P a r t II
                   P ro cessio n s a n d A ssemblies
11.   Advance notice of public processions.
12.   Imposing conditions on public processions.
13.   Prohibiting public processions.
14.   Imposing conditions on public assemblies.
15.   Delegation.
16.   Interpretation.
                              P art III
                          R a c ia l H a tre d
                  Meaning o f “racial hatred”
17. Meaning o f “ racial hatred ”.
         Acts intended or likely to stir up racial hatred
18. Use of words or behaviour or display of written material.
19. Publishing or distributing written material.
20. Public performance of play.
                              A
c. 64                      Public Order Act 1986


Section
21. Distributing, showing or playing a recording.
22. Broadcasting or including programme in cable programme
    service.

                      Racially inflammatory material
23. Possession o f racially inflammatory material.
24. Powers o f entry and search.
25. Power to order forfeiture.

                         Supplementary provisions
26.   Savings for reports of parliamentary or judicial proceedings.
27.   Procedure and punishment.
28.   Offences by corporations.
29.   Interpretation.

                                    P a r t IV

                             E x c lu s io n O r d e r s
30.   Exclusion orders.
31.   Offences connected with football.
32.   Effect o f order.
33.   Application to terminate order.
34.   Information.
35.   Photographs.
36.   Prescribed football matches.
37.   Extension to other sporting events.


                                     Part V

                      M isc ella n eo u s a n d G e n er a l
38. Contamination o f or interference with goods with intention
     o f causing public alarm or anxiety, etc.
39. Power to direct trespassers to leave land.
•40. Amendments, repeals and savings.
41. Commencement.
42. Extent.
43. Short title.

      Sch ed u les:
          Schedule 1—Sporting events.
          Schedule 2—Other amendments.
          Schedule 3—Repeals.
                          Public Order Act 1986
                                PGA 1986 c.64
                            ISBN 0 10 546486 4

                               CORRECTION
  Page 22, in the first line o f section 34(2), “ section 28 ” should
read “ section 33


                     PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY J. A. DOLE
        Controller and Chief Executive of Her Majesty's Stationery Office and
                        Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament
       LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
January 1987                                                                    (571371)
                                                            e.64
                           ELIZABETH II




       Public Order Act 1986
                          1986 CHAPTER 64
An Act to abolish the common law offences o f riot, rout,
  unlawful assembly and affray and certain statutory
  offences relating to public order; to create new offences
  relating to public order; to control public processions
  and assemblies; to control the stirring up o f racial
  hatred; to provide for the exclusion o f certain offenders
  from sporting events; to create a new offence relating
  to the contamination o f or interference with goods; to
  confer power to direct certain trespassers to leave land;
  to amend section 7 o f the Conspiracy and Protection o f
  Property Act 1875, section 1 o f the Prevention o f Crime
  Act 1953, Part V o f the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act
  1980 and the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.)
  Act 1985; to repeal certain obsolete or unnecessary
  enactments; and for connected purposes.
                                      [7th November 1986]

                   b y the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, b y and
     e it e n a c t e d


B    with the advice and consent o f the Lords Spiritual and
     Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, and b y the authority o f the same, as follows:—

                                 Part I

                           . N e w O ffen ces

  1.— (1) Where 12 or more persons who are present together Riot,
use or threaten unlawful violence for a common purpose and
the conduct of them (taken together) is such as would cause
a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for
2                                  Public Order Act 1986


    Part I   his personal safety, each of the persons using unlawful violence
             for the common purpose is guilty of riot
                (2) It is immaterial whether or not the 12 or more use or
             threaten unlawful violence simultaneously.
               (3) The common purpose may be inferred from conduct.
                (4) N o person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be
             likely to be, present at the scene.
               (5) Riot may be committed in private as well as in public
             places.
                (6) A person guilty of riot is liable on conviction on indictment
             to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or a fine or
             both.

Violent         2.— (1) Where 3 or more persons who are present together
disorder.    use or threaten unlawful violence and the conduct of them
             (taken together) is such as would cause a person of reasonable
             firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety,
             each of the persons using or threatening unlawful violence
             is guilty of violent disorder.
               (2) It is immaterial whether or not the 3 or more use or
             threaten unlawful violence simultaneously.
                (3) N o person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be
             likely to be, present at the scene.
               (4) Violent disorder may be committed in private as well as in
             public places.
                (5) A person guilty of violent disorder is liable on conviction
             on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years
             or a fine or both, or on summary conviction to imprisonment for
             a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding the statu­
             tory maximum or both.

Affray.        3.— (1) A person is guilty of affray if he uses or threatens
             unlawful violence towards another and his conduct is such as
             would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the
             scene to fear for his personal safety.
                (2) Where 2 or more persons use or threaten the unlawful
             violence, it is the conduct of them taken together that must be
             considered for the purposes of subsection (1).
               (3) For the purposes of this section a threat cannot be made
             by the use of words alone.
                (4) No person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be
             likely to be, present at the scene.
                      Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64              3


   (5) Affray may be committed in private as well as in public          PaxtI
places.
  (6) A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
ably suspects is committing affray.
  (7) A person guilty of affray is liable on conviction on indict­
ment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years or a fine
or both, or on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding the statutory
maximum or both.

  4 . — (1)A person is guilty of an offence if he—                F ear or
     (a) uses towards another person threatening, abusive or
               1 ..     ,       ,    •                             of violence,
          insulting words or behaviour, or
     (b) distributes or displays to another person any writing,
          sign or other visible representation which is threaten­
          ing, abusive or insulting,
with intent to cause that person to believe that immediate un­
lawful violence will be used against him or another by any
person, or to provoke the immediate use of unlawful violence
by that person or another, or whereby that person is likely to
believe that such violence will be used or it is likely that such
violence will be provoked.
   (2) An offence under this section may be committed in a
public or a private place, except that no offence is committed
where the words or behaviour are used, or the writing, sign
or other visible representation is distributed or displayed, by a
person inside a dwelling and the other person is also inside
that or another dwelling.
  (3) A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
ably suspects is committing an offence under this section.
   (4) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable
on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not ex­
ceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard
scale or both.

  5.— (1) A person is guilty of an offence if he—                   Harassment,
     (a) uses threatening, abusive or insulting words or be- di^tres°r
          haviour, or disorderly behaviour, or
     (b) displays any writing, sign or other visible representation
          which is threatening, abusive or insulting,
within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused harass­
ment, alarm or distress thereby.
  (2)   An offence under this section may be committed in a
public or a private place, except that no offence is committed
4                c. 64                Public Order Act 1986


    Pa r t I     where the words Or behaviour are used, or the writing, sign or
                 other visible representation is displayed, by a person inside a
                 dwelling and the other person is also inside that or another
                 dwelling.
                   (3) It is a defence for the accused to prove—
                      (a) that he had no reason to believe that there was any
                           person within hearing or sight who was likely to be
                           caused harassment, alarm or distress, or
                   (b) that he was inside a dwelling and had no reason to
                           believe that the words or behaviour used, or the writing,
                           sign or other visible representation displayed, would
                           be heard or seen by a person outside that or any other
                           dwelling, or
                      (c) that his conduct was reasonable.
                    (4) A constable may arrest a person without warrant if—
                       (a) he engages in offensive conduct which the constable
                            warns him to stop, and.
                       lb) he engages in further offensive conduct immediately or
                            shortly after the warning.
                    (5) In subsection (4) “ offensive conduct ” means conduct the
                 constable reasonably suspects to constitute an offence under this
                 section, and the conduct mentioned in paragraph (a) and the
                 further conduct need not be of the same nature.
                    (6) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable
                 on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
                 standard scale.

M ental            6.— (1) A person is guilty of riot only if he intends to use
element:         violence or is aware that his conduct may be violent.
miscellaneous.
                    (2) A person is guilty of violent disorder or affray only if he
                 intends to use or threaten violence or is aware that his conduct
                 may be violent or threaten violence.
                    (3) A person is guilty of an offence under section 4 only if he
                 intends his words or behaviour, or the writing, sign or other
                 visible representation, to be threatening, abusive or insulting,
                 or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting.
                    (4) A person is guilty of an offence under section 5 only if he
                 intends his words or behaviour, or the writing, sign or other
                 visible representation, to be threatening, abusive or insulting,
                 or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting or
                 (as the case may be) he intends his behaviour to be or is aware
                 that it may be disorderly.
                    (5) For the purposes of this section a person whose awareness
                 is impaired by intoxication shall be taken to be aware of that
                 of which he would be aware if not intoxicated, unless he shows
                      Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64              5


either that his intoxication was not self-induced or that it was         Part I
caused solely by the taking or administration of a substance in
the course of medical treatment.
  (6) In subsection (5) “ intoxication ” means any intoxication,
whether caused by drink, drugs or other means, or by a com­
bination of means.
  (7) Subsections (1) and (2) do not affect the determination for
the purposes of riot or violent disorder of the number of
persons who use or threaten violence.

  7 .— ( l ) No prosecution for an offence of riot or incitement Procedure:
to riot may be instituted except by or with the consent of the miscellaneous.
Director of Public Prosecutions.
   (2) For the purposes of the rules against charging more
than one offence in the same count or information, each of
sections 1 to 5 creates one offence.
   (3) If on the trial on indictment of a person charged with
violent disorder or affray the jury find him not guilty of the
offence charged, they may (without prejudice to section 6(3) of
the Criminal Law Act 1967) find him guilty of an offence under 1967 c. 58.
section 4.
   (4) The Crown Court has the same powers and duties in
relation to a person who is by virtue of subsection (3) con­
victed before it of an offence under section x4 as a magistrates
court would have on convicting him of the offence.

   8. In this Part—                                                 Interpretation.
      “ dwelling ” means any structure or part of a structure occu­
           pied as a person’s home or as other living accommoda­
           tion (whether the occupation is separate or shared with
           others) but does not include any part not so occupied,
           and for this purpose “ structure ” includes a tent, cara­
           van, vehicle, vessel or other temporary or movable
           structure;
      “ violence ” means any violent conduct, so that—
                 (a) except in the context of affray, it includes
              violent conduct towards property as well as violent
              conduct towards persons, and
                 (b) it is not restricted to conduct causing or in­
              tended to cause injury or damage but includes any
              other violent conduct (for example, throwing at or
              towards a person a missile of a kind capable of caus­
              ing injury which does not hit or falls short).
                                A2
6              c. 64                   Public Order Act 1986


    Part I        9.— (1) The common law offences of riot, rout, unlawful
Offences       assembly and affray are abolished.
abolished.        (2)     The offences under the following enactments are abol­
               ished—
1661 c. 5.           (a) section 1 of the Tumultuous Petitioning Act 1661 (pre­
                           sentation of petition to monarch or Parliament accom­
                           panied by excessive number of persons),
1793 c. 67.          (b) section 1 of the Shipping Offences Act 1793 (inter­
                           ference with operation of vessel by persons riotously
                           assembled),
1817 c. 19.          (c) section 23 of the Seditious Meetings Act 1817 (prohi­
                           bition of certain meetingswithin one mile of West­
                           minster Hall when Parliament sitting), and
1936 c. 6.           (.d) section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936 (conduct con­
                           ducive to breach of the peace).

Construction     10.— (1) In the Riot (Damages) Act 1886 and in section 515
o f other      of the Merchant Shipping Act 1894 (compensation for riot
instruments.
               damage) “ riotous ” and “ riotously ” shall be construed in accor­
1886 c. 38.    dance with section 1 above.
1894 c. 60.
1906 c. 41.       (2) In Schedule 1 to the Marine Insurance Act 1906 (form and
               rules for the construction of certain insurance policies) “ rioters ”
               in rule 8 and “ riot ” in rule 10 shall, in the application of the
               rules to any policy taking effect on or after the coming into force
               of this section, be construed in accordance with section 1 above
               unless a different intention appears.
                  (3) “ Riot ” and cognate expressions in any enactment in force
               before the coming into force of this section (other than the enact­
               ments mentioned in subsections (1) and (2) above) shall be con­
               strued in accordance with section 1 above if they would have
               been construed in accordance with the common law offence of
               riot apart from this Part.
                  (4) Subject to subsections (1) to (3) above and unless a different
               intention appears, nothing in this Part affects the meaning of
               “ riot ” or any cognate expression in any enactment in force, or
               other instrument taking effect, before the coming into force of
               this section.

                                                  P a rt II

                                 P r o c e s s io n s a n d A s s e m b l ie s

Advance notice 11.— (1) Written notice shall be given in accordance with this
of public     section of any proposal to hold a public procession intended—
processions.       ^ to demonstrate support for or opposition to the views or
                        actions of any person or body of persons,
                     Public Order Act 1986                                     7


     (b) to publicise a cause or campaign, or                         Part H
     (c) to mark or commemorate an event,
unless it is not reasonably practicable to give any advance notice
of the procession.
   (2) Subsection (1) does not apply where the procession is one
commonly or customarily held in the police area (or areas) in
which it is proposed to be held or is a funeral procession organ­
ised by a funeral director acting in the normal course of his
business.
  (3) The notice must specify the date when it is intended to
hold the procession, the time when it is intended to start it, its
proposed route, and the name and address of the person (or of
one of the persons) proposing to organise it.
  (4) Notice must be delivered to a police station—
     (a) in the police area in which it is proposed the procession
          will start, or
     (b) where it is proposed the procession will start in Scotland
          and cross into England, in the first police area in Eng­
          land on the proposed route.
  (5) If delivered not less than 6 clear days before the date when
the procession is intended to be held, the notice may be delivered
by post by the recorded delivery service; but section 7 of the
Interpretation Act 1978 (under which a document sent by post is 1978 c. 30.
deemed to have been served when posted and to have been
delivered in the ordinary course of post) does not apply.
   (6) If not delivered in accordance with 'subsection (5), the
notice must be delivered by hand not less than 6 clear days before
the date when the procession is intended to be held or, if that
is not reasonably practicable, as soon as delivery is reasonably
practicable.
  (7) Where a public procession is held, each of the persons
organising it is guilty of an offence if—
     (a) the requirements of this section as to notice have not
          been satisfied, or
     (b) the date when it is held, the time when it starts, or its
          route, differs from the date, time or route specified in
          the notice.
   (8) It is a defence for the accused to prove that he did not
know of, and neither suspected nor had reason to suspect, the
failure to satisfy the requirements or (as the case may be) the
difference of date, time or route.
  (9) To the extent that an alleged offence turns on a difference
of date, time or route, it is a defence for the accused to prove
that the difference arose from circumstances beyond his control
                                 A3
8              c. 64                Public Order Act 1986


    Part II    or from something done with the agreement of a police officer
               or by his direction.
                  (10)   A person guilty of an oifence under subsection (7) is liable
               on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
               standard scale.

Imposing         12.— (1) If the senior police officer, having regard to the time
conditions     or place at which and the circumstances in which any public
on public      procession is being held or is intended to be held and to its route
processions,
               or proposed route, reasonably believes that—
                    (a) it may result in serious public disorder, serious damage
                         to property or serious disruption to the life of the
                          community, or
                    (b) the purpose of the persons organising it is the intimida­
                          tion of others with a view to compelling them not to
                          do an act they have a right to do, or to do an act
                          they have a right not to do,
               he may give directions imposing on the persons organising or
               taking part in the procession such conditions as appear to him
               necessary to prevent such disorder, damage, disruption or in­
               timidation, including conditions as to the route of the procession
               or prohibiting it from entering any public place specified in the
               directions.
                  (2) In subsection (1) “ the senior police officer ” means—
                     (a) in relation to a procession being held, or to a procession
                          intended to be held in a base where persons are assemb­
                          ling with a view to taking part in it, the most senior
                          in rank of the police officers present at the scene, and
                     (b) in relation to a procession intended to be held in a case
                           where paragraph (a) does not apply, the chief officer
                           of police.
                  (3) A direction given by a chief officer of police by virtue of
                subsection (2)(b) shall be given in writing.
                   (4) A person who organises a public procession and knowingly
                fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section is
                guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove that
                the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
                   (5) A person who takes part in a public procession and know­
                ingly fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section
                is guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove that
                the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
                  (6) A person who incites another to commit an offence under
                subsection (5) is guilty of an offence.
                      Public Order Act 1986


   (7) A constable in uniform may arrest without warrant anyone          P a r t II
he reasonably suspects is committing an offence under subsec­
tion (4), (5) or (6).
   (8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) is
liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the
standard scale or both.
   (9) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3
on the standard scale.
   (10) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is
liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the
standard scale or both, notwithstanding section 45(3) of the
Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (inciter liable to same penalty as 1980 c. 43.
incited).
   (11) In Scotland this section applies only in relation to a
procession being held, and to a procession intended to be held
in a case where persons are assembling with a view to taking
part in it.

   13.— (1) If at any time the chief officer of police reasonably Prohibiting
believes that, because of particular circumstances existing in any public
district or part of a district, the powers under section 12 will not processions,
be sufficient to prevent the holding of public processions in that
district or part from resulting in serious public disorder, he shall
apply to the council of the district for an order prohibiting for
such period not exceeding 3 months as may be specified in the
application the holding of all public processions (or of any
class of public procession so specified) in the district or part
concerned.
   (2) On receiving such an application, a council may with the
consent of the Secretary of State make an order either in the
terms of the application or with such modifications as may be
approved by the Secretary of State.
  (3) Subsection (1) does not apply in the City of London or the
metropolitan police district.
   (4) If at any time the Commissioner of Police for the City of
London or the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis reason­
ably believes that, because of particular circumstances existing
in his police area or part of it, the powers under section 12 will
not be sufficient to prevent the holding of public processions in
that area or part from resulting in serious public disorder, he may
with the consent of the Secretary of State make an order pro­
hibiting for such period not exceeding 3 months as may be speci­
fied in the order the holding of all public processions (or
                                 A4
10             c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


     Part II   of any class of public procession so specified) in the area or
               part concerned.
                  (5) An order made under this section may be revoked or
               varied by a subsequent order made in the same way, that is,
               in accordance with subsections (1) and (2) or subsection (4), as
               the case may be.
                  (6) Any order under this section shall, if not made in writing,
               be recorded in writing as soon as practicable after being made.
                  (7) A person who organises a public procession the holding
               of which he knows is prohibited by virtue of an order under
               this section is guilty of an offence.
                  (8) A person who takes part in a public procession the hold­
               ing of which he knows is prohibited by virtue of an order under
               this section is guilty of an offence.
                 (9) A person who incites another to commit an offence under
               subsection (8) is guilty of an offence.
                  (10) A constable in uniform may arrest without warrant any­
               one he reasonably suspects is committing an offence under sub­
               section (7), (8) or (9).
                  (11)A person guilty of an offence under subsection (7) is liable
               on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceed­
               ing 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale
               or both.
                  (12) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (8) is
               liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on
               the standard scale.
                   (13) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (9) is liable
               on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
               3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale
1980 c. 43.    or both, notwithstanding section 45(3) of the Magistrates’ Courts
               Act 1980.

Imposing          14.— (1) If the senior police officer, having regard to the time
conditions      or place at which and the circumstances in which any public
on public       assembly is being held or is intended to be held, reasonably
assemblies.
                believes that—
                     (a) it may result in serious public disorder, serious damage
                           to property or serious disruption to the life of the
                           community, or
                     (b) the purpose of the persons organising it is the intimi­
                           dation of others with a view to compelling them not
                           to do an act they have a right to do, or to do an act
                           they have a right not to do,
                he may give directions imposing on the persons organising or
                taking part in the assembly such conditions as to the place at
                      Public Order Act 1986


which the assembly may be (or continue to be) held, its maxi-          PartII
mum duration, or the maximum number of persons who may
constitute it, as appear to him necessary to prevent such disorder,
damage, disruption or intimidation.
   (2) In subsection (1) “ the senior police officer ” means—
      (a) in relation to an assembly being held, the most senior
           in rank of the police officers present at the scene, and
      (b) in relation to an assembly intended to be held, the chief
            officer of police.
   (3) A direction given by a chief officer of police by virtue of
subsection (2)(b) shall be given in writing.
   (4) A person who organises a public assembly and knowingly
fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section is
guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove that
the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
   (5) A person who takes part in a public assembly and know­
ingly fails to comply with a condition imposed under this sec­
tion is guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove
that the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
   (6) A person who incites another to commit an offence under
subsection (5) is guilty of an offence.
   (7) A constable in uniform may arrest without warrant any­
one he reasonably suspects is committing an offence under sub­
section (4), (5) or (6).
   (8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) is liable
on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceed­
ing 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard
scale or both.
   (9) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is liable
on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
standard scale.
   (10) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is
liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the stan­
dard scale or both, notwithstanding section 45(3) of the Magi- 1980 c. 43.
strates’ Courts Act 1980.
   15.— (1) The chief officer of police may delegate, to such Delegation,
extent and subject to such conditions as he may specify, any of
his functions under sections 12 to 14 to a deputy or assistant
chief constable; and references in those sections to the person
delegating shall be construed accordingly.
  (2)    Subsection (1) shall have effect in the City of London and
the metropolitan police district as if “ a deputy or assistant chief
constable ” read “ an assistant commissioner of police
                              A 5
12                c. 64                Public Order Act 1986


    P a r t II      16. In this Part—
Interpretation.       “ the City of London ” means the City as defined for the
                            purposes of the Acts relating to the City of London
                            police ;
                      “ the metropolitan police district ” means that district as
1963 c. 33.                 defined in section 76 of the London Government Act
                            1963;
                      “ public assembly ” means an assembly of 20 or more
                            persons in a public place which is wholly or partly
                            open to the air ;
                      “ public place ” means—
                                 (a) any highway, or in Scotland any road within
1984 c. 54.                   the meaning of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984, and
                                 (b) any place to which at the material time the
                              public or any section of the public has access, on
                              payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of
                              express or implied permission ;
                      “ public procession ” means a procession in a public place.

                                              P a r t III

                                          R a c ia l H a tr e d

                                    Meaning of “ racial hatred ”
M eaning of         17. In this Part “ racial hatred ” means hatred against a group
“ racial          of persons in Great Britain defined by reference to colour, race,
hatred ” .        nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origins.

                           Acts intended or likely to stir up racial hatred
U se o f words      18.— (1) A person who uses threatening, abusive or insulting
or behaviour      words or behaviour, or displays any written material which is
o r display of    threatening, abusive or insulting, is guilty of an offence if—
written
material.              (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
                       (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
                            likely to be stirred up thereby.
                    (2) An offence under this section may be committed in a public
                  or a private place, except that no offence is committed where the
                  words or behaviour are used, or the written material is displayed,
                  by a person inside a dwelling and are not heard or seen except by
                  other persons in that or another dwelling.
                    (3) A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
                  ably suspects is committing an offence under this section.
                    (4) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
                  defence for the accused to prove that he was inside a dwelling
                  and had no reason to believe that the words or behaviour used,
                      Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64                 13


or the written material displayed, would be heard or seen by a          P art   in
person outside that or any other dwelling.
   (5) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir up
racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section if he
did not intend his words or behaviour, or the written material,
to be, and was not aware that it might be, threatening, abusive
or insulting.
   (6) This section does not apply to words or behaviour used, or
written material displayed, solely for the purpose of being
included in a programme broadcast or included in a cable pro­
gramme service.

  19.— (1) A person who publishes or distributes written material Publishing or
which is threatening, abusive or insulting is guilty of an offence distributing
if—                                                                written
     (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
     (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
          likely to be stirred up thereby.
  (2) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to stir
up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the content of
the material and did not suspect, and had no reason to suspect,
that it was threatening, abusive or insulting.
   (3) References in this Part to the publication or distribution of
written material are to its publication or distribution to the public
or a section of the public.

   20.— (1) If a public performance of a play is given which Public
involves the use of threatening, abusive or insulting words or perform ance
behaviour, any person who presents or directs the performance Play-
is guilty of an offence if—
     (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
      (b) having regard to all the circumstances (and, in particu­
           lar, taking the performance as a whole) racial hatred is
           likely to be stirred up thereby.
   (2)      If a person presenting or directing the performance is not
shown to have intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence
for him to prove—
       (a) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that
            the performance would involve the use of the offending
            words or behaviour, or
       (b) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect
            that the offending words or behaviour were threaten­
            ing, abusive or insulting, or
14                c. 64                  Public Order Act 1986


     P a rt H I         (c) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that
                             the circumstances i n w h i c h the performance would be
                             given would be such that racial hatred would be likely
                             to be stirred up.
                     (3) This section does not apply to a performance given solely
                  or primarily for one or more of the following purposes—
                        (a) rehearsal,
                        (b) making a recording of the performance, or
                        (c) enabling the performance to be broadcast or included in
                             a cable programme service ;
                  but if it is proved that the performance was attended by persons
                  other than those directly connected with the giving of the per­
                  formance or the doing in relation to it of the things mentioned
                  in paragraph (b) or (c), the performance shall, unless the contrary
                  is shown, be taken not to have been given solely or primarily
                  for the purposes mentioned above.
                    (4) For the purposes of this section—
                       (a) a person shall not be treated as presenting a perform­
                            ance of a play by reason only of his taking part in it as
                            a performer,
                       (b) a person taking part as a performer in a performance
                            directed by another shall be treated as a person who
                            directed the performance if without reasonable excuse
                            he performs otherwise than in accordance with that
                            person’s direction, and
                       (c) a person shall be taken to have directed a performance
                            of a play given under his direction notwithstanding
                            that he was not present during the performance;
                  and a person shall not be treated as aiding or abetting the com­
                  mission of an offence under this section by reason only of his
                  taking part in a performance as a performer.
                    (5) In this section “ play” and “ public performance ” have
                  the same meaning as in the Theatres Act 1968.
1968 c. 54.
                     (6) The following provisions of the Theatres Act 1968 apply
                  in relation to an offence under this section as they apply to an
                  offence under section 2 of that Act
                     section 9 (script as evidence of what was performed),
                     section 10 (power to make copies of script),
                     section 15 (powers of entry and inspection).

                    21 .— (1) A person who distributes, or shows or plays, a record­
D istributing,
showing or
                  ing of visual images or sounds which are threatening, abusive or
playing a         insulting is guilty of an offence if
recording.                (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
                          (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
                               likely to be stirred up thereby.
                     Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64                 15


   (2) In this Part “ recording” means any record from which          P a r t III
visual images or sounds may, by any means, be reproduced;
and references to the distribution, showing or playing of a
recording are to its distribution, showing or playing to the public
or a section of the public*
   (3) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to
stir up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the
content of the recording and did not suspect, and had no reason
to suspect, that it was threatening, abusive or insulting.
  (4) This section does not apply to the showing or playing of a
recording solely for the purpose of enabling the recording to be
broadcast or included in a cable programme service.

  22.— (1) If a programme involving threatening, abusive or Broadcasting
insulting visual images or sounds is broadcast, Or included in or including
a cable programme service, each of the persons mentioned in
subsection (2) is guilty of an offence if—                       programme
     (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or         service.
     (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
          likely to be stirred up thereby.
   (2) The persons are—
      (a) the person providing the broadcasting or cable pro­
           gramme service,
      (b) any person by whom the programme is produced or
           directed, and
      (c) any person by whom offending words or behaviour are
           used.
   (3) If the person providing the service, or a person by whom
the programme was produced or directed, is not shown to have
intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence for him to prove
that—
      (a) he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the
           programme would involve the offending material, and
      (b) having regard to the circumstances in which the pro­
           gramme was broadcast, or included in a cable pro­
           gramme service, it was not reasonably practicable for
           him to secure the removal of the material.
   (4) It is a defence for a person by whom the programme was
produced or directed who is not shown to have intended to stir
up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had no
reason to suspect—
      (a) that the programme would be broadcast or included in
            a cable programme service, or
16               c. 64                  Public Order Act 1986


     P art H I           (b) that the circumstances in which the programme would
                              be broadcast or so included would be such that racial
                              hatred would be likely to be stirred up.
                    (5) It is a defence for a person by whom offending words or
                 behaviour were used and who is not shown to have intended
                 to stir up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had
                 no reason to suspect—
                       (a) that a programme involving the use of the offending
                            material would be broadcast or included in a cable
                            programme service, or
                       (b) that the circumstances in which a programme involving
                            the use of the offending material would be broadcast,
                             or so included, or in which a programme broadcast
                            or so included would involve the use of the offending
                            material, would be such that racial hatred would be
                            likely to be stirred up.
                   (6) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir up
                 racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section if he
                 did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the offending
                 material was threatening, abusive or insulting.
                    (7) This section does not apply—
                       (a) to the broadcasting of a programme by the British
                            Broadcasting Corporation or the Independent Broad­
                            casting Authority, or
                       (b) to the inclusion of a programme in a cable programme
                            service by the reception and immediate re-transmission
                            of a broadcast by either of those authorities.
1984 c. 46.         (8) The following provisions of the Cable and Broadcasting
                 Act 1984 apply to an offence under this section as they apply to
                 a “ relevant offence ” as defined in section 33(2) of that Act—
                       section 33 (scripts as evidence),
                       section 34 (power to make copies of scripts and records),
                       section 35 (availability of visual and sound records);
                 and sections 33 and 34 of that Act apply to an offence under
                 this section in connection with the broadcasting of a pro­
                 gramme as they apply to an offence in connection with the
                 inclusion of a programme in a cable programme service.

                                    Racially inflammatory material

Possession
                   23. (1) A person who has in his possession written material
o f racially     which is threatening, abusive or insulting, or a recording of
inflammatory     visual images or sounds which are threatening, abusive or
material.        insulting, with a view to—
                      (a) in the case of written material, its being displayed,
                           published, distributed, broadcast or included in a cable
                           programme service, whether by himself or another, or
                      Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64          17


     (b)       in the case of a recording, its being distributed, shown,   Part III
           played, broadcast or included in a cable programme
           service, whether by himself or another,
is guilty of an offence if he intends racial hatred to be stirred up
thereby or, having regard to all the circumstances, racial hatred
is likely to be stirred up thereby.
   (2) For this purpose regard shall be had to such display, pub­
lication, distribution, showing, playing, broadcasting or inclu­
sion in a cable programme service as he has, or it may reasonably
be inferred that he has, in view.
   (3) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to
stir up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the content
of the written material or recording and did not suspect, and
had no reason to suspect, that it was threatening, abusive or
insulting.
   (4) This section does not apply to the possession of written
material or a recording by or on behalf of the British Broad­
casting Corporation or the Independent Broadcasting Authority
or with a view to its being broadcast by either of those
authorities.

  24.— (1) If in England and Wales a justice of the peace is Powers o f entry
satisfied by information on oath laid by a constable that there and search-
are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person has pos­
session of written material or a recording in contravention of
section 23, the justice may issue a warrant, under his hand
authorising any constable to enter and search the premises
where it is suspected the material or recording is situated.
   (2) If in Scotland a sheriff or justice of the peace is satisfied
by evidence on oath that there are reasonable grounds for
suspecting that a person has possession of written material or a
recording in contravention of section 23, the sheriff or justice
may issue a warrant authorising any constable to enter and
search the premises where it is suspected the material or record­
ing is situated.
   (3) A constable entering or searching premises in pursuance
of a warrant issued under this section may use reasonable force
if necessary.
  (4) In this section “ premises ” means any place and, in
particular, includes—
     id) any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or hovercraft,
     (b) any offshore installation as defined in section 1(3) (b)
          of the Mineral Workings (Offshore Installations) Act 1971 c. 61.
          1971, and
     (c) any tent or movable structure.
18               c. 64                  Public Order Act 1986


   P art III       25.— (1) A court by or before which a person is convicted of—
Power to order        (a) an offence under section 18 relating to the display of
forfeiture.                written material, or
                      (b) an offence under section 19, 21 or 23,
                 shall order to be forfeited any written material or recording pro­
                 duced to the court and shown to its satisfaction to be written
                 material or a recording to which the offence relates.
                   (2) An order made under this section shall not take effect—
                      (a) in the case of an order made in proceedings in England
                            and Wales, until the expiiy of the ordinary time within
                            which an appeal may be instituted or, where an appeal
                            is duly instituted, until it is finally decided or
                            abandoned;
                      (b) in the case of an order made in proceedings in Scotland,
                            until the expiration of the time within which, by virtue
                            of any statute, an appeal may be instituted or, where
                            such an appeal is duly instituted, until the appeal is
                            finally decided or abandoned.
                    (3) For the purposes of subsection (2) (a)—
                       (a) an application for a case stated or for leave to appeal
                            shall be treated as the institution of an appeal, and
                       (b) where a decision on appeal is subject to a further appeal,
                            the appeal is not finally determined until the expiry of
                            the ordinary time within which a further appeal may
                            be instituted or, where a further appeal is duly instituted,
                            until the further appeal is finally decided or abandoned.
                 (4) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b) the lodging of an
                 application for a stated case or note of appeal against sentence
                 shall be treated as the institution of an appeal.

                                       Supplementary provisions

 Savings for
                    26.— (1) Nothing in this Part applies to a fair and accurate
 reports of    report of proceedings in Parliament.
 parliamentary
 or judicial      (2)    Nothing in this Part applies to a fair and accurate report
 proceedings.  of proceedings publicly heard before a court or tribunal exercis­
                  ing judicial authority where the report is published contem­
                  poraneously with the proceedings or, if it is not reasonably
                  practicable or would be unlawful to publish a report of them
                  contemporaneously, as soon as publication is reasonably
                  practicable and lawful.

 Procedure and   27__ (1) N o proceedings for an offence under this Part may be
 punishment,   instituted in England and Wales except by or with the consent
                  of the Attorney General.
                     Public Order Act 1986                   c.64               19


   (2) For the purposes of the rules in England and Wales against     Part HI
charging more than one offence in the same count or informa­
tion, each of sections 18 to 23 creates one offence.
  (3) A person guilty of an offence under this Part is liable—
     ia) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term
           not exceeding two years or a fine or both ;
     (.b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
         exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding the statu­
         tory maximum or both.

   28.— (1) Where a body corporate is guilty of an offence under Offences by
this Part and it is shown that the offence was committed with the corP°rations-
consent or connivance of a director, manager, secretary or other
similar officer of the body, or a person purporting to act in any
such capacity, he as well as the body corporate is guilty of the
offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
  (2)    Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, subsection ( 1 ) applies in relation to the acts and
defaults of a member in connection with his functions of man­
agement as it applies to a director.

  29. In this Part—                                              Interpretation.
    “ broadcast ” means broadcast by wireless telegraphy (within
         the meaning of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949) for 1949 c. 54.
         general reception, whether by way*of sound broad­
         casting or television ;
    “ cable programme service ” has the same meaning as in
         the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 ;                   1984 c. 46.
    “ distribute ”, and related expressions, shall be construed
         in accordance with section 19(3) (written material)
         and section 2 1 (2 ) (recordings);
    “ dwelling ” means any structure or part of a structure
         occupied as a person’s home or other living accom­
         modation (whether the occupation is separate or shared
         with others) but does not include any part not so
         occupied, and for this purpose “ structure ” includes
         a tent, caravan, vehicle, vessel or other temporary
         or movable structure;
    “ programme ’’ means any item which is broadcast or
         included in a cable programme service;
    “ publish ”, and related expressions, in relation to written
         material, shall be construed in accordance with section
         19 (3);
    “ racial hatred ” has the meaning given by section 17 ;
20               c. 64                   Public Order Act 1986


     P art III           “ recording” has the meaning given by section 2 1 (2 ), and
                              “ play ” and “ show ”, and related expressions, in
                              relation to a recording, shall be construed in accor­
                              dance with that provision;
                         “ written material ” includes any sign or other visible
                              representation.


                                                 P a r t IV

                                          E x c l u s io n O r d e r s

Exclusion          30.— (1) A court by or before which a person is convicted
orders.          of an offence to which section 31 applies may make an order
                 (an exclusion order) prohibiting him from entering any premises
                 for the purpose of attending any prescribed football match there.
                    (2) No exclusion order may be made unless the court is
                 satisfied that making such an order in relation to the accused
                 would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection
                 with prescribed football matches.
                   (3) An exclusion order may only be made—
                      (a) in addition to a sentence imposed in respect of the
                            offence of which the accused is convicted, or
                      (.b) in addition to a probation order or an order discharging
                            him absolutely or conditionally.
                    (4) An exclusion order may. be made as mentioned in sub­
                 section (3)(b) notwithstanding anything in sections 2 , 7 and 13
1973 c. 62.      of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 (which relate to
                 orders there mentioned and their effect).

Offences           31.— ( 1 ) This section applies to any offence which fulfils one
connected        or more of the following three conditions.
with football.
                    (2 ) The first condition is that the offence was committed
                 during any period relevant to a prescribed football match (as
                 determined under subsections (6 ) to (8 )), while the accused was
                 at, or was entering or leaving or trying to enter or leave, the
                 football ground concerned.
                   (3) The second condition is that the offence—
                      (a) involved the use or threat of violence by the accused
                            towards another person and was committed while
                            one or each of them was on a journey to or from an
                            association football match,
                      (b) involved the use or threat of violence towards property
                           and was committed while the accused was on such a
                           journey, or
                      (c) was committed under section 5 or Part III while the
                           accused was on such a journey.
                      Public Order Act 1986                   c. 64


   (4) The third condition is that the offence was committed        P a r t IV
under section 1(3) or (4) or 1A(3) or (4) of the Sporting Events 1985 c. 5 7 .
(Control of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985 (alcohol on journeys to or
from certain sporting events) and the designated sporting event
concerned was an association football match.
   (5) For the purposes Of subsection (3) a person’s journey in­
cludes breaks (including overnight breaks).
   (6 ) The period beginning 2 hours before the start of the
match or (if earlier) 2 hours before the time at which it is adver­
tised to start, and ending 1 hour after the end of it, is a period
relevant to it.
  (7) Where the match is advertised to start at a particular time
on a particular day and is postponed to a later day, the period
in the advertised day beginning 2 hours before and ending 1
hour after that time is also a period relevant to it.
   (8 ) Where the match is advertised to start at a particular
time on a particular day and does not take place, the period
in that day beginning 2 hours before and ending 1 hour after
that time is a period relevant to it.

  32.— (1) An exclusion order shall have effect for such period Effect of
as is specified in the order.                                   order.

   (2) The period shall be not less than three months or, in the
case of a person already subject to an exclusion order, not less
than three months plus the unexpired period of the earlier order
or, if there is more than one earlier order, of the most recent
order.
  (3) A person who enters premises in breach of an exclusion
order is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 1 month or a fine not
exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or both.
  (4) A constable who reasonably suspects that a person has
entered premises in breach of an exclusion order may arrest
him without warrant.

   33.— (1) A person in relation to whom an exclusion order has Application
had effect for at least one year may apply to the court by which to term inate
it was made to terminate it.                                     order.

  (2)    On such an application the court may, having regard to the
person’s character, his conduct since the order was made, the
nature of the offence which led to it and any other circumstances
of the case, either by order terminate the order (as from a date
specified in the terminating order) or refuse the application.
22             c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


     Part IV      (3) Where an application under this section is refused, a further
               application in respect of the exclusion order snail not be enter­
               tained if made within the period of six months beginning with
               the day of the refusal.
                  (4) The court may order the applicant to pay all or any part of
               the costs of an application under this section.
                 (5) In the case of an exclusion order made by a magistrates’
               court, the reference in subsection ( 1 ) to the court by which it
               was made includes a reference to any magistrates’ court acting
               for the same petty sessions area as that court.
1980 c. 43.      (6 ) Section 63(2) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (power
               to suspend or rescind orders) does not apply to an exclusion
               order.
                 34.    (l) Where a court makes an exclusion order, the clerk
Information.
               of the court (in the case of a magistrates’ court) or the appro­
               priate officer (in the case of the Crown Court)—
                    (a) shall give a copy of it to the person to whom it relates,
                    (b) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                           it to the chief officer of police for the police area in
                          which the offence leading to the order was committed,
                           and
                     (c) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                           it to any prescribed person.
                  (2) Where a court terminates an exclusion order under section
                28, the clerk of the court (in the case of a magistrates’ court)
                or the appropriate officer (in the case of the Crown Court)
                     (a) shall give a copy of the terminating order to the person
                          to whom the exclusion order relates,
                     (b) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                          the terminating order to the chief officer of police for
                          the police area in which the offence leading to the ex­
                          clusion order was committed, and
                     (c) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                           the terminating order to any prescribed person.
                   (3) References in this section to the clerk of a magistrates’
                court shall be construed in accordance with section 141 of the
 1980 c. 43.    Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980, reading references to that A ct as
                references to this section.
                   (4) In this section “ prescribed ” means prescribed by order
                made by the Secretary of State.
                  (5) The power to make an order under this section shall be
                exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pur­
                suance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
                      Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64            23


 35.— (1) The court by which an exclusion order is made may         Part IV
make an order which—                                             Photographs.
    (a) requires a constable to take a photograph of the person
         to whom the exclusion order relates or to cause such a
         photograph to be taken, and
   (b) requires that person to go to a specified police station
         not later than 7 clear days after the day on which the
         order under this section is made, and at a specified
         time of day or between specified times of day, in order
         to have his photograph taken.
 (2) In subsection (1) “ specified ” means specified in the order
made under this section.
  (3) N o order may be made tinder this section unless an appli­
cation to make it is made to the court by or on behalf of the
person who is the prosecutor in respect of the offence leading to
the exclusion order.

  (4) If the person to whom the exclusion order relates fails to
comply with an order under this section a constable may arrest
him without warrant in order that his photograph may be taken.

  36.— (1) In this Part “ prescribed football match ” means an prescribed
association football match of any description prescribed by football
order made by the Secretary of State.                          matches.
  (2)    The power to make an order under this section shall be
exercisable by statutory instrument subject*to annulment in
pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.


  37.— (1) The Secretary of State may by order provide for Extension
sections 30 to 35 to apply as if—                                to o&er
     (a) any reference to an association football match included gP ° r t “ 8
          a reference to a sporting event of a kind specified in V
          the order, and
     (b) any reference to a prescribed football match included
          a reference to such a sporting event of a description
          specified in the order.
   (2) An order under subsection (1) may make such modifica­
tions of those sections, as they apply by virtue of the order, as
the Secretary of State thinks fit
  (3) The power to make an order under this section shall be
exercisable by statutory instrument, and no such order shall
be made unless a draft of the order has been laid before and
approved by resolution of each House of Parliament.
24                                      Public Order Act 1986


                                                  P art V

                                   M is c e l l a n e o u s an d G en er a l

C ontam ination     38.— (1) It is an offence for a person, with the intention—
of or
interference           (a) of causing public alarm or anxiety, or
w ith goods
w ith intention        (b) of causing injury to members of the public consuming or
o f causing                 using the goods, or
public alarm or
anxiety, etc.            (c) of causing economic loss to any person by reason of the
                               goods being shunned by members of the public, or
                         (d) of causing economic loss to any person by reason of
                               steps taken to avoid any such alarm or anxiety, injury
                               or loss,
                  to contaminate or interfere with goods, or make it appear that
                  goods have been contaminated or interfered with, or to place
                  goods which have been contaminated or interfered with, or
                  which appear to have been contaminated or interfered with, in
                  a place where goods of that description are consumed, used, sold
                  or otherwise supplied.
                     (2) It is also an offence for a person, with any such intention
                  as is mentioned in paragraph (a), (c) or (d) of subsection ( 1 ), to
                  threaten that he or another will do, or to claim that he or another
                  has done, any of the acts mentioned in that subsection.
                     (3) It is an offence for a person to be in possession of any of
                  the following articles with a view to the commission of an
                  offence under subsection ( 1 )—
                         (a) materials to be used for contaminating or interfering
                               with goods or making it appear that goods have been
                               contaminated or interfered with, or
                         (b) goods which have been contaminated or interfered with,
                               or which appear to have been contaminated or inter­
                               fered with.
                     (4) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—
                         (a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term
                               not exceeding 1 0 years or a fine or both, or
                         (.b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
                               exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding the
                               statutory maximum or both.
                     (5) In this section “ goods ” includes substances whether
                  natural or manufactured and whether or not incorporated in or
                  mixed with other goods.
                     (6 ) The reference in subsection (2) to a person claiming that
                  certain acts have been committed does not include a person who
                  in good faith reports or warns that such acts have been, or
                  appear to have been, committed.
                      Public Order Act 1986                                     25


  39.— (1) If the senior police officer reasonably believes that P a rtV
two or more persons have entered land as trespassers and are Power to direct
present there with the common purpose of residing there for trespassers to
any period, that reasonable steps have been taken by or on leave *anci-
behalf of the occupier to ask them to leave and—
     (a) that any of those persons has caused damage to pro­
          perty on the land or used threatening, abusive or
          insulting words or behaviour towards the occupier, a
          member of his family or an employee or agent of his,
          or
    (b) that those persons have between them brought twelve
          or more vehicles on to the land,
he may direct those persons, or any of them, to leave the land.
  (2) If a person knowing that such a direction has been given
which applies to him—
     (a) fails to leave the land as soon as reasonably practicable,
           or
     (b) having left again enters the land as a trespasser within
           the period of three months beginning with the day on
          which the direction was given,
he commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine
not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or both.
  (3) A constable in uniform who reasonably suspects that a
person is committing an offence under this section may arrest
him without warrant.
  (4) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
defence for the accused to show—
     (a) that his original entry on the land was not as a tres­
          passer, or
     (b) that he had a reasonable excuse for failing to leave the
          land as soon as reasonably practicable or, as the case
          may be, for again entering the land as a trespasser.
  (5) In this section—
     “ land ” does not include—
               (a) buildings other than—
                  (i) agricultural buildings within the meaning of
                        section 26(4) of the General Rate Act 1967,1967 c- 9-
                        or
                  (ii) scheduled monuments within the meaning of
                        the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 1979 c. 46.
                        Areas Act 1979;
               (b) land forming part of a highway ;
                                       Public Order Act 1986
               64


   Pa r t V



1971 c. 48.
                    - senior police officer -     -    -   £     £   2



                            a trespasser as against the occup                  ^ ^                  M(1)

                     “ Ve“     eth’e Caravan I S T d Control of Development Act
1960 c. 62.
                          I960 »          fVtp nnmoses of this scction <is
               S n g ^ p u ^ o / S ^ g L a pla?e notwithstanding that he
               has a h o m e elsewhere.

 Amendments,     40.— (1) Schedule 1,                                ^ a r ^ V ^ o f foe Criminal
 repeals and
 savings.      £ £ < £ £ £ > A i 1^80, shah have effect.
 1985 c. 57.      Q> Schedule 2. which contains miscellaneous and consequen-
 1980 c. 62.   tial amendments, shall have effec.      ^     ^ ^




                Pe«5» As respects Scotland, nothin*; ir. this Ac, aBects any
                power of a constable under any rule of law.


   Commence­         41.—(1) This Act        sh a1 1   cS n t ”bv order 'made'by statutory
   ment.
                 provisions or different purpose,
                                                                ^        b e a p p o ” te d f o r d ifle re n t
                                                                                            ^ ^             ^

                 a n '^ n t ^ it ^ T S                         ^ b e f o r e &e provision comes


                    ” <3) Where a                                                       ‘t o S e ^ o S
                    L7    r°efcre“ lys'to It s f f a r as it relates to those purposes.

                                           ••        this Act extend to England and
                         4 2 — (1) The provisions of this act bawu        c
     Extent
                                                                 en actm en t which does no. so

                                extend, or
                      Public Order Act 1986                     c.64


     (b) relate to the extent of provisions to Scotland or Northern         Part V
         Ireland.
   (2) The following provisions of this Act extend to Scotland—
      in Part I, section 9(2) except paragraph (a);
      in Part II, sections 12 and 14 to 16 ;
      Part I I I ;
      Part V , except sections 38, 39, 40(4), subsections (1) and (3)
           of this section and any provision amending or repealing
           an enactment which does not extend to Scotland.
   (3) The following provisions of this Act extend to Northern
Ireland—
      sections 38, 41, this subsection, section 43 and paragraph
           6 of Schedule 2.


  43.   This Act may be cited as the Public Order Act 1986.             Short title.
28                c.   64                 Public Order Act 1986


                                          SCHEDULES

Section 40 (1).                                SCHEDULE 1
                                             S p o r tin g E v e n ts

                                                     P a rt I

                                           E n g la n d a n d W a le s
                                                Introduction
1985 c. 57.         1. The Sporting Events (Control of A lcohol etc.) A ct 1985 shall
                  be amended as mentioned in this Part.

                                                    Vehicles
                    2. The follow ing shall be inserted after section 1 (offences in con­
                  nection with alcohol on coaches and trains)—
                  “Alcohol on      1A.— (1) T his   section applies to   a motor vehicle
                  certain other -whiCh __
                  vehicles.
                                    (a) is not a public service vehicle but is adapted to
                                         carry more than 8 passengers, and
                                     (b) is being used for the principal purpose of carry­
                                         ing tw o or more passengers for the w hole or part
                                         of a journey to or from a designated sporting
                                         event.
                                 (2) A person who knowingly causes or permits intoxi­
                               cating liquor to be carried on a motor vehicle to which
                               this section applies is'guilty of an offence—
                                    (a) if he is its driver, or
                                     (b) if he is not its driver but is its keeper, the ser­
                                         vant or agent of its keeper, a person to whom
                                         it is m ade available (by hire, loan or otherwise)
                                         by its keeper or the keeper’s servant or agent,
                                         or the servant or agent of a person to whom it
                                         is so made available.
                                 (3) A person w ho has intoxicating liquor in his posses­
                               sion while on a motor vehicle to which this section
                               applies is guilty of an offence.
                                  (4) A person who is drunk on a m otor vehicle to which
                               this section applies is guilty of an offence.
                                 (5) In this section—
                                     “ keeper ” , in relation to a vehicle, means the per­
                                         son having the duty to take out a licence for it
 1971 c. 10.                             under section 1(1) of the V ehicles (Excise) Act
                                          1971,
                                    “ motor vehicle ” means a mechanically propelled
                                         vehicle intended or adapted for use on roads,
                                         and
                        Public Order Act 1986                       c. 64            29


                 “ public service vehicle ” has the same meaning as in     SCH. 1
                     the Public Passenger V ehicles Act 1981.”.        1981 c. 14.

                             Fireworks etc.
   3. T he follow ing shall b e inserted after section 2 (offences in con­
nection with alcohol, containers etc. at sports grounds)—
“ Fireworks     2A .— (1) A person is guilty of an offence if he has an
etc-         article or substance to which this section applies in his
             possession—
                  (a) at any tim e during the period of a designated
                        sporting event when he is in any area o f a
                       designated sports ground from which the event
                       may be directly viewed, or
                   (b) w hile entering or trying to enter a designated
                        sports ground at any tim e during the period of a
                       designated sporting event at the ground.
              ( 2 ) 'It is a defence for the accused to prove that he
            had possession with lawful authority.
               (3) This section applies to any article or substance
            w hose m ain purpose is the em ission of a flare for purposes
            o f illum inating or signalling (as opposed to igniting or
            heating) or the em ission o f sm oke or a visible g a s ; and
            in particular it applies to distress flares, fog signals, and
            pellets and capsules intended to be used as fumigators
            or for testing pipes, but not to matches, cigarette lighters
            or heaters.
               (4) This section also applies to any article which is a
            firework.”.                           ,

                             Licensing etc.
  4. The follow ing shall be inserted after section 5—
“ Private        5A . — (1) In relation to a room in a designated sports
facilities for ground—
viewing
events.          (a) from which designated sporting events may be
                      directly viewed, and
                 (b) to which the general public are not admitted,
            sections 2(1) (a) and 3(1) (a) of this A ct have effect with
            the substitution for the reference to the period o f a desig­
            nated sporting event of a reference to the restricted period
            defined below.
              (2)      Subject to any order under subsection (3) below,
            the restricted period of a designated sporting event for the
            purposes of this section is the period beginning 15 minutes
            before the start of the event or (if earlier) 15 minutes before
            the tim e at which it is advertised to start and ending 15
            minutes after the end o f the event, but—
                 (a) where an event advertised to start at a particular
                      time on a particular day is postponed to a later
                                         Public Order Act 1986
30

                                      day, the restricted period includes the period m
     Sc h . 1
                                      the day on which it is advertised to ta k e place be­
                                       ginning 15 minutes before and ending 15 minutes
                                       after that tim e, and
                                  tb) where an event advertised to start at a particular
                                       tim e on a particular day does n ot take place,
                                       the period is the period referred to in paragraph
                                       (a) above.

                                 (3) The Secretary of State may by order provide, in re­
                              lation to all designated sporting events o r in relation to
                              such descriptions o f event as are specified m the order
                                    (a) that the restricted period shall be such period,
                                         shorter than that mentioned in subsection (2)
                                         above, as may b e specified in the order, or
                                   (b) that there shall be n o restricted period.
                                (4) A n order under this section shall be made by statu­
                              tory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in
                              pursuance o f a resolution o f either H ouse of Parliament.

                O ccasional      5B.— (1) A n occasional licence which is i n f o r
                licences.     anv place situated in the area of a ^designated spo
                              ground, and which w ould (apart from this sectl^ ) . ^ “ ° '
                              rise the sale of intoxicating liquor at the place during th
                              w hole or part of the period o f a designated sporting event
                              at the ground, shall not authorise such sale.
                                 (2) Where the sale of intoxicating liquor would (apart
                              from this section) be authorised by an occasional licence,
                              its holder is guilty of ah offence if he sells or authorises the
                              sale of such liquor and by virtue of this section the licence
                              does not authorise the sale.
                                  (3) A person is guilty of an offence if he consumes
                               intoxicating liquor at a place, or takes such liQuor from
                               a place, at a time when an occasional licence which wou d
                               (apart from this section) authorise the sale of the liquor
                               at the place does not do so by virtue of this section.

                Clubs.           5C.— (1) Subsections (3) and (5) of section 39 of the
                               Licensing A ct 1964 (clubs), and subsection (4) of that
 1964 c. 26.
                               section as it applies to subsection (3), shall not apply as
                               regards the supply o f intoxicating liquor in the area of a
                               designated sports ground during the period of a desig­
                               nated sporting event at the ground or as regards the keep­
                               ing of intoxicating liquor for such supply ; but subsections
                               (2) to (5) below shall apply.
                                  (2)    D uring the period o! such an event at the ground,
                               intoxicating liquor shall not be supplied by or on behalf
                               of a registered club to a member or guest m the area _ot
                               the ground except at premises in respect of which the
                               club is registered.
"1

                              Public Order Act 1986                        c. 64              31


                     (3) A person supplying or authorising the supply o f in­        SCH. 1
                  toxicating liquor in contravention of subsection (2) above
                  is guilty of an offence.
                     (4) A person w ho, during the period of such an event,
                  obtains or consum es intoxicating liquor supplied in con­
                  travention of subsection (2) above is guilty o f an offence.
                     (5) If intoxicating liquor is kept in any premises or place
                  by or on behalf of a club for supply to members or their
                  guests in contravention of subsection (2) above, every
                  officer o f the club is guilty o f an offence unless he shows
                  that it was so kept without his knowledge or consent.

     Non-retail     5D .— (1) During the period of a designated sporting
     sales.       event at a designated sports ground, intoxicating liquor
                  shall not be sold in the area o f the ground except by sale
                  by retail.
                     (2) A person selling or authorising the sale o f intoxica­
                  ting liquor in contravention of subsection (1) above is
                  guilty o f an offence.
                     (3) A person w ho, during the period o f such an event,
                  obtains or consum es intoxicating liquor sold in con­
                  travention of subsection (1) above is guilty of an offence.”.

                                   Supplementary
       5. In sections 2 and 3, after subsection (1) insert—
            “ (1A) Subsection (l)(a) above has effect subject to section
          5A(1) o f this A ct.”                        >

        6. In section 7(3) (power to stop and search vehicles), after “ public
     service vehicle (within the meaning of section 1 of this A ct) ” insert
     “ or a motor vehicle to which section 1A o f this A ct applies ” .

       7.— (1) Section 8 (penalties) shall be amended as follows.
       (2) In paragraph (a) after “ 1(2) ” there shall be inserted “ or
     1A(2) ”.
        (3) In paragraph (b) after “ 1(3) ”         there   shall be inserted “ ,
     1A (3) ” , after “ 2(1) ” there shall be inserted “ , 2A (1) ” and after
     “ 3(10) ” there shall be inserted     5B(2), 5C(3),5D(2) ”.
       (4) In paragraph (c) after        “ 1(4) ”   there    shall be inserted “ ,
     1A(4) ”.
       (5) A t the end there shall be inserted—
          “ (d) in the case of an offence under section 5B(3), 5C(4) or
               5D(3), to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale,
               and
          (e) in the case o f an offence under section 5C(5), to a fine not
               exceeding level 1 on the standard scale.”.
32            c. 64                  Public Order Act 1986


     Sch, 1                           Minor amendment
                 8.    Section 3(9) (notice varying order about sale or supply of in­
              toxicating liquor) shall have effect, and be taken always to have had
              effect, as if in paragraph (b) “ order ” read “ notice ”.

                                             P art n
                                            S cotland
                                           Introduction
1980 c. 62.     9. Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) A ct 1980 (sporting
              events: control of alcohol etc.) shall be amended as mentioned in
              this Part.

                                             Vehicles
                  10. After section 70 there shall be inserted the following—
              “ A lcohol on    70A.— (1) T his section applies to a motor vehicle
              certain other which is not a public service vehicle but is adapted to
              vehicles.     ca n y more than 8 passengers and is being operated for
                            the principal purpose of conveying tw o or more passen­
                            gers for the w hole or part of a journey to or from a
                            designated sporting event.
                             (2) A ny person in possession of alcohol on a vehicle
                          to which this section applies shall be guilty of an offence
                           and liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a
                           period not exceeding 60 days or a fine not exceeding level
                           3 on the standard scale or both.
                             (3) Any person who is drunk on a vehicle to which
                          this section applies shall be guilty of an offence and
                          liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
                          level 2 on the standard scale.
                             (4) A ny person who permits alcohol to be carried on
                           a vehicle to which this section applies and—
                                (a) is the driver of the vehicle, or
                                (b) where he is not its, driver, is the keeper of the
                                     vehicle, the em ployee or agent of the keeper, a
                                     person to whom it is made available (by hire,
                                     loan or otherwise) by the keeper or the keeper’s
                                      em ployee or agent, or the em ployee or agent of
                                     a person to whom it is so m ade available,
                           shall, subject to section 71 of this A ct; be guilty of an
                           offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not
                           exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.”.

                  11.   In section 71 (defences in connection with carriage of alcohol)
               for “ or 70 ” there shall be substituted “ , 70 or 70A(4)

                  12.    In section 75 (police powers of enforcement) for “ or 70 ” there
                shall be substituted “ , 70 or 70A ”.
                         Public Order Act 1986                        c.   64


   13. In section 77 (interpretation of Part V)—                             Sch. 1
     (a) the follow ing definitions shall be inserted in the appropriate
          places alphabetically—
               “ “ keeper ”, in relation to a vehicle, means the person
            having the duty to take out a licence for it under section
             1(1) o f the V ehicles (Excise) A ct 1971 ;                 1971 c. 10.
               “ m otor vehicle ” means a m echanically propelled ve­
            hicle intended or adapted for use on roads ; ” ; and
     (b) in the definition o f “ public service vehicle ” for the words
          “ Part I o f the Transport A ct 1980 ” there shall be substi­
          tuted the words “ the Public Passenger V ehicles A ct 1981 c. 14.
          1981 ” ;

                              Fireworks etc.
  14.— (1)    A fter section 72 there shall be inserted the following—
“ Possession     72A .— (1) A ny person who has entered the relevant
o f fireworks
etc. at       area of a designated sports ground and is in possession
sporting      o f a controlled article or substance at any tim e during the
events.       period o f a designated sporting event shall be guilty o f an
              offence.
                 (2) A ny person who, while in possession o f a controlled
              article or substance, attempts to enter the relevant area of
               a designated sports ground at any tim e during the period
              of a designated sporting event at the ground shall be
              guilty of an offence.
                (3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
             or (2) above shall be liable on summary conviction to
             imprisonment for a period not exceeding 60 days or to a
             fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or both.
               (4) It shall be a defence for a person charged with
             an offence under subsection (1) or (2) above to show
             that he had law ful authority to be in possession of the
             controlled article or substance.
                (5) In subsections (1) and (2) above “ controlled article
             or substance ” means—
                  (a) any article or substance whose main purpose is
                       the em ission of a flare for purposes of illum i­
                       nating or signalling (as opposed to igniting or
                       heating) or the em ission of smoke or a visible
                       gas ; and in particular it includes distress flares,
                       fog signals, and pellets and capsules intended to
                       be used as fumigators or for testing pipes, but
                       not m atches, cigarette lighters or heaters ; and
                  (b) any article which is a firework.”.
  (2) In section 75 (police powers of enforcement) at the end of sub-
paragraph (ii) of paragraph (e) there shall be inserted—
     “ ; or
              (iii)   a controlled article or substance as defined in
            section 72A(5) of this A c t ”.
34               c .6 4                     Public Order Act 1986


Section 40(2).                                   SCHEDULE 2
                                             O th er A mendm ents

                            Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875 (c.86)
                    1.— (1) In section 7 of the Conspiracy and Protection of Property
                 A ct 1875 (offence to intim idate etc. with a view to com pelhng another
                 to abstain from doing or to do an act) for the words from snail
                 to the end there shall be substituted “ shall be liable on summary
                 conviction to imprisonm ent for a term not exceeding 6 m onths or
                 a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale or both- •
                     (2)    A nd the follow ing shall be added at the end of that section
                            “ A constable m ay arrest without warrant anyone h e reason­
                          ably suspects is com m itting an offence under this section.”.


                                      Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (c.14)
                     2.    In section 1 erf the Prevention o f Crime A ct 1953 (offence to have
                  offensive weapon) at the end of subsection (4) (offensive weapon
                  includes article intended by person having it for use by ham) there
                  shall be added “ or by som e other person


                                 Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (c.45)
                     3 , (i) part V of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982
                   (public processions) shall be amended in accordance with this para­
                   graph.
                     (2) In section 62 (notification^ processions)—
                        (a) in subsection (1)—                                „ , *„   ,
                                   (i) after “ below ” there shall be inserted (a) ; and
                                  (ii) at the end there shall be inserted—
                                “ ; and
                                      (b) to the chief constable.” ;
                           (b) in subsection (2)—
                                      (i) in paragraph (a), after “ council ” there shall be
                                   inserted “ and to the office of the chief constable ;
                                      (ii) in paragraph (b), for “ that office ” there shall be
                                   substituted “ those offices ”
                           (c) in subsection (4)—
                                      (i) after “ area ” there shall be inserted “ (a) ” ; and
                                      (ii) after “ them ” there shall be inserted—
                                   “ ; and
                                         (b) intimated to the chief constable,” ; and
                           (d) in subsection (12), in the definition of “ public place , for
                                “ the Public Order Act 1936” there shall be substituted
                                “ Part II of the Public Order Act 1986
                      Public Order Act 1986                        c .6 4              35


  (3)    In section 63 (functions o f regional and islands councils in      Sc h . 2
relation to processions)—
    (a) after subsection (1) there shall be inserted—
             “ (1A) Where notice of a proposal to hold a pro­
           cession has been given or falls to be treated as having
           been given in accordance with section 62(1) of this A ct—

               (a) if a regional or islands council have made an
                    order under subsection (1) above they may at
                    any tim e thereafter, after consulting the chief
                    constable, vary or revoke the order and, where
                    they revoke it, make any order which they were
                    empowered to m ake under that subsection ;

               (b) if they have decided not to make an order they
                    may at any time thereafter,-after consulting the
                    chief constable, m ake any order which they were
                    empowered to make under that subsection.” ;
   (b) in subsection (2) after “ (1) ” there shall be inserted “ or
        (1 A )” ;
   (c) in subsection (3)—

            (i) in paragraph (a)(i), after “(1)” there shall be inserted
          or (1A) above ” ;
            (ii) in paragraph (a)(ii), for “ such an order ” there
          shall be substituted “ an order under subsection (1) above
          or to revoke an order already m ade under subsection (1)
          or (1A) above ” ;
            (iii) at the end o f paragraph (a)(ii), for “ and ” there
          shall be substituted—
               “ (iii) where they have, under subsection (1A) above,
                     varied such an order, a copy of the order as
                     varied and a written statement of the reasons for
                     the variation ; and ” ;
             (iv) in paragraph (b), after “ (1) ” there shall be in­
          serted “ or (1A ) ”, and after “ made ” where third occur­
          ring there shall be inserted “ and, if the order has been
          varied under subsection (1A) above, that it has been so
          varied ” ; and
             (v) at the end o f paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—
          “ ; and

              (c) where they have revoked an order made under
                  subsection (1) or (1A ) above in relation to a
                  proposal to hold a procession, make such
                  arrangements as w ill ensure that persons who
                  might take or are taking part in that procession
                  are m ade aware o f the fact that the order has
                  been revoked.”.
36             c. 64                     Public Order Act 1986


     Sch . 2      (4) In section 64 (appeals against orders under section 63)—
                     (a) in subsection (I) for the words from “ a g a in st” to the end
                          there shall be substituted—
                               “ against—
                                  (a) an order made under section 63(1) or (1A) of
                                       this A c t ; or
                                   (b) a variation under section 63(1 A ) of this A ct of
                                        an order made under section 63(1) or (1A),
                              in relation to the procession.” ;
                       (b) in subsection (4)   after “ make ” there shall be inserted “ or,
                            as the case may    be, to vary ” ; and
                       (c) in subsection (7)   after “ order ” there shall be inserted or,
                             as the case may   be, the variation of whose order ”.
                  (5) In section 65 (offences and enforcement)—
                       (a) in paragraphs (£>) and (c) of subsection (1), after “ (1)   there
                            shall be inserted “ or (1A) ” ; and
                       (b) in paragraphs [b) and (c) of subsection (2), after ‘ (1)    there
                             shall be inserted “ or (1A)
                   (6) In section 66 (relationship with Public Order A ct 1936)—
                       (d) for “ the Public Order A ct 1936 ” there shall be substituted
                            “ Part II of the Public Order A ct 1986 ” ;
                       (b) in paragraph (a), for “ or order m ade under section 3
                            there shall be substituted “ under section 12 ” , and or that
                            order ” shall be omitted ; and
                      (c) in paragraph (b), “ or order under the said section 3 shall
                            be omitted.
                                     Criminal Justice A c t 1982 (c.48)
                   4. The follow ing shall be inserted at the end of Part II of Schedule
                 1 to the Criminal Justice Act 1982 (statutory offences excluded from
                 provisions for early release of prisoners)—
                                        P ublic O rder A ct 1986
                       27. Section 1 (riot).
                       28. Section 2 (violent disorder).
                       29. Section 3 (affray).”.
                                  Cable and Broadcasting A c t 1984 (c.46)
                   5.— (1) The Cable and Broadcasting A ct 1984 as it extends to
                 England and W ales and Scotland is amended as follow s.
                   (2) Omit section 27 (inclusion of programme in cable programme
                 service likely to stir up racial hatred).
                   (3) In section 28 (amendment of the law of defamation), at the
                 end add—
                   “ (6) In this section “ words ” includes pictures, visual images,
                 gestures and other methods of signifying m eaning.”.
                       Public Order Act 1986                      c. 64         37


   (4)   In section 33(2), in the definition of “ relevant offence” om it   Sch. 2
“ an offence under section 27 above or
  6.— (1) Section 27 of the Cable and Broadcasting A ct 1984 as it
extends to Northern Ireland is amended as follow s.
  (2) F or subsections (1) to (5) substitute—
       “ (1) If a programme involving threatening, abusive or insult­
     ing visual im ages or sounds is included in a cable programme
     service, each of the persons m entioned in subsection (2) below is
     guilty of an offence if—
          (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
          (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
               likely to be stirred up thereby.
       (2) The persons are—
          (a) the person providing the cable programme service,
          (b) any person by whom the programme is produced or
               directed, and
          (c) any person by whom offending words or behaviour are
               used.
       (3) If the person providing the service, or a person by whom
    the programme was produced or directed, is not shown to have
    intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence for him to
    prove that—
          (a) he did not know and had no reason to suspect that
               the programme would involve the offending material,
               and
          (b) having regard to the circumstances in which the pro­
               gramme was included in a cable 'programme service,
               it was not reasonably practicable for him to secure
               the rem oval of the material.
       (4) It is a defence for a person by whom the programme
    w as produced or directed who is not shown to have intended
    to stir up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had
    n o reason to suspect—
          (a) that the programme would be included in a cable
              programme service, or
         (b) that the circumstances in which the programme would
               be so included would be such that racial hatred would
              be likely to be stirred up.
       (5) It is a defence for a person by whom offending words or
    behaviour were used and who is not shown to have intended
    to stir up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had
    n o reason to suspect—
          (a) that a programme involving the use o f the offending
               material would be included in a cable programme
               service, or
          (b) that the circumstances in which a programme involving
               the use of the offending material would be so included,
38               c .6 4                   Public Order Act 1986


     Sch,   2                    or in which a programme so included would involve
                                 the use of the offending m aterial, would be such that
                                 racial hatred would be likely to b e stirred up.
                         (5A ) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir
                      up racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section
                      if he did not know , and had no reason to suspect, that the
                      offending m aterial w as threatening, abusive or insulting.
                         (5B) A person guilty o f an offence under this section is
                      liable—
                           (a) on conviction on indictm ent to imprisonment for a term
                                not exceeding two years or a fine or both ;
                           (b) on summary conviction to im prisonment for a term
                                not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding the
                                statutory m aximum or both.”.
                    (3) In subsection (8) (consents to prosecutions), for the words
                 from “ shall n ot be instituted ” to the end substitute “ shall not be
                 instituted except by or with the consent o f the Attorney General
                 for Northern Ireland.”.
                   (4) In subsection (9) (interpretation) for “ ‘ racial group ’ means
                 a group o f persons ” substitute “ ‘ racial hatred ’ means hatred against
                 a group of persons in Northern Ireland ”.
                    (5) After subsection (10) insert—
                         “ (11) This section extends to Northern Ireland only.”.

                                Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c.60)
                   7.    In section 17(l)(c) o f the P olice and Criminal Evidence A ct
                 1984 (entry for purpose o f arrest for certain offences) in sub-
                 paragraph (i) the words from “ 4 ” to “ peace) ” shall be omitted
                 and after sub-paragraph (ii) there shall be inserted—
                               “ (iii) section 4 o f the Public Order Act 1986 (fear ox
                             provocation of violence) ; ”.

Section 40(3).                                  SCHEDULE 3
                                                   R epea ls

                      Chapter              Short title                Extent of repeal

                 13 Chas. 2.        Tumultuous Petitioning     The whole Act.
                   Stat. 1. c. 5.    Act 1661.
                 33 Geo. 3.         Shipping Offences Act      The whole Act.
                   c. 67.            1793.
                 57 Geo. 3.         Seditious Meetings Act     The whole Act.
                   c. 19.            1817.
                 5 Geo. 4. c. 83.   Vagrancy Act 1824.         In section 4, the words from
                                                                 “ every person being armed ”
                                                                to “ arrestable offence ” and
                                                                 from “ and every such gun ”
                                                                to the end.
                 2 & 3 Viet.        Metropolitan Police Act    In section 54, paragraph 13.
                   c. 47.            1839.
                 2 & 3 Viet.        City of London Police      In section 35, paragraph 13.
                   c. xciv.          Act 1839.
                          Public Order Act 1986                           c. 64                39


                                                                                    Sc h . 3
    Chapter               Short title                 Extent o f repeal
3 Edw. 7.c .ccl.  Erith Tramways and Im­      Section 171.
                   provement Act 1903".
1 Edw. 8 & Public Order Act 1936.             Section 3.
  1 Geo. 6. c. 6.                             Section 4.
                                              Section 5.
                                              Section 5A.
                                              In section 7, in subsection (2)
                                               the words “ or section 5 or
                                                5A ” and in subsection (3) the
                                                words “ , four or five ”.
                                              Section 8(6).
                                              In section 9, in subsection (1)
                                               the definition of “ public pro­
                                               cession ” and in subsection (3)
                                               the words “ by the council of
                                               any borough or district or ”.
7 & 8 Geo. 6.      Middlesex County Coun­     Section 309.
  c.xxi.            cil Act 1944.
1967 c. 58.        Criminal Law Act 1967.     Section 11(3).
                                              In Schedule 2, paragraph 2(1)
                                                 (b).
1968 c. 54.        Theatres Act 1968.          Section 5.
                                              In sections 7(2), 8, 9(1), 10 (1)
                                                 (a) and (b), 15(l)fa) and 18(2),
                                                 the references to section 5.
1976 c. 74.        Race Relations Act 1976.    Section 70.
                                               Section 79(6).
1976 c. xxxv.      County o f South Glam­      Section 25.
                    organ Act 1976.           In Part I o f Schedule 3, the
                                                 entry relating to section 25.
1980 c. 62.        Criminal Justice (Scot­    In section 75(e)(i), the word
                    land) Act 1980.              “ or ” at the end.
1980    c. x.      County of Merseyside Act   In section 30(2), paragraph (b),
                    1980.                       the word “ and ” preceding
                                                that paragraph and the words
                                                from “ and may make ” to
                                                the end.
                                              In section 30(5), the words “ in
                                                the said section 31 or ”.
                                              Section 31.
                                              In section 137(2), the reference
                                                to section 31.
1980 c. xi.        West Midlands County       Section 38, except subsection
                    Council Act 1980.           (4).
                                              In section 116(2), the reference
                                                to section 38.
1980 c. xiii.      Cheshire County Council    Section 28, except subsection
                    Act 1980.                   (4).
                                              In section 108(2), the reference
                                                to section 28.
1980 c. xv.        Isle of Wight Act 1980.    Section 26, except subsection
                                                (4).
                                              In section 63(2), the reference
                                                to section 26.
1981 c. ix.        Greater Manchester Act     Section 56, except subsection
                    1981.                       (4).
                                              In section 179(2), the reference
                                                to section 56.
40            c .6 4                          Public Order A ct 1986


     Sch. 3
                  Chapter                     Short title                        Extent of repeal

              1981 c. xxv.         East Sussex Act 1981.      Section 29.
                                                              In section 102(2), the reference
                                                               to section 29.
              1982 c. 45.          Civic Government (Scot­ Section 62(10).
                                    land) Act 1982.           In section 63(3)(a)(i), the word
                                                                “ or ” at the end.
                                                              In section 66, in paragraph (a),
                                                                the words “ or that order ”,
                                                                and in paragraph (b) the
                                                                words “ or order under the
                                                                said section 3
              1982 c. 48.          Criminal Justice Act 1982. In Part I of Schedule 1, the
                                                               entries relating to riot and
                                                                affray.
              1984 c. 46.          Cable and Broadcasting Section 27.
                                    Act 1984.                 In section 33 (2), the words “an
                                                                offence under section 27
                                                                above or”.
              1984 c. 60.          Police and Criminal Evi­ In section 17(l)(c)fi) the words
                                    dence Act 1984.             from “ 4 ” to “ peace) ” .
              1985 c. 57.          Sporting Events (Control In section 8, the word “ and ”
                                     of Alcohol etc.) Act       at the end o f paragraph (b).
                                     1985.

                                    PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY W. J. SHARP, CB
                            Controller and Chief Executive of H er Majesty’s Stationery Office and
                                           Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament
.6 4                   Public Order Act 1986




            LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE

  546461)
                                   £ 4 -40 net
                             IS B N 0 10 546486 4
