 •i
                                                            DOCUMENT No.


  )
                                                               LS)

                                                               17 July 1990



 Hr Richard ¥«lls Esq
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield S3 8LY




 Following our telephone conversation of recent date I write to you with a
 proposition in connection with the routeing of the papers arising from the
 crime investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

You will k n o w that my investigation into the criminal and disciplinary aspects
is being supervised by the Police Complaints Authority. At the end of my
investigation, which is not far off, the PCA must make a statement that it is
satisfied vitLh the conduct of the investigation.    That statement will be sent
to you, the complainants and to the officers whose conduct has been called into
question.   T!^e only exception to that will be the PCA statement in respect of
your Assistant Chief Constable Mr Walter JACKSON.     In his case the PCA
statement w i ll go to your Police Authority.

In strict accord with the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the way for
this to be achieved is for me to submit my original report to the PCA, and at
the same tine send a copy to you (or your Police Authority). Once the PCA is
satisfied vitJh my investigation it sends the forementioned statement to that
effect, to y o u (or to your Police Authority).

You (or your Police Authority) are then required first to consider matters
related to any criminal offences revealed in the report and refer them to the
Director of Public Prosecutions.   Thereafter you are required to submit a
report to the PCA setting out your opinions as to the merits of the complaints
against polic® officers; any disciplinary charges preferred or proposed; the
merits or otherwise of convening a disciplinary tribunal; and any reasons for
not preferring disciplinary charges.

My proposition is that for various reasons; including the referral of the
matter by Pezs r Wright to the DPP in the first place; the complex circumstances
of the investigation; the bulk of the documentary and other evidence; and the


                                                      Continued.
