                                                                            C&P'&y
                                                                              /U L   f-f& G
Inspector Davenport
Superintendent Taylor.                                                      Z( ~(0 rCtcj
                                                                            fit& lf cc*<&
Action Number:   A294

From     Mr              (Groundsman at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club).

1*       "9 saw PC’s being assaulted on the pitch when they were attempting to
         resuscitate people".

2.       "Liverpool Supporters in the seats in the West Stand were lifting
         fellow supporters from the surrounding area at about 2pm. So that
         they could sit on the steps to watch the game.

From    Mr Graham Mackrell (Secretary Sheffield Wednesday Football Club).

1.      "Last year Liverpool Supporters coaches were stopped as they left the
        motorway and were checked by Police Officers for drinks and weapons.
        When cleared a sticker was displayed in the coach and other officers,
         knew it had been checked. That was not the case this year.

2.      "Last year the Police formed a cordon outside the tunnel leading to
         pens 3 and 4 in the West Terrace. This ensured spectators were
         directed to the outer pens. This was not done this year."
3.      "The Fox L.H. was drunk dry by Liverpool Supporters".

4.      "The refreshment bars in the West Stand were broken into by Liverpool
         Supporters after my staff locked up at about 3.15pm on the day".

         Crime Nol.   Fl/4114/89
         Hammerton Road Police Station.

5.      After the match was abandoned the police control box had numerous
         coins and other objects thrown at it.


From    Chief Ambulance Officer

1«      The emergency procedure for ambulances attending the ground requires
         them to drive into the right hand gates giving access to the Sports
         Hall, where injured persons should be collected and then driven out of
         the ground through adjacent roller shutter doors.

         As a result of numerous Police vehicles parked in this area the
         procedure could not be followed.

2.       As a result of the disabled spectators ramp being added to the North
         Stand - many ambulances sustained damage by colliding with metal posts
         whilst trying to gain access to the pitch.

3.      Other contingency plans were not followed e.g. viewing arrangements
         for relatives of deceased.

4.      List of arrested persons was not made available until 04.00 Hrs.
         Sunday 16.4.89 - would have assisted re relatives enquiries.
        Anonymous Liverpool Supporters.

        "It was packed in pens 3 and 4 at 1.50pm.   You couldn’t get your
        programme out of your pocket".

2.      "Many supporters with standing tickets gained access through the
        turnstile gates".

3.      "Just before the kick-off an announcement came over the tannoy asking
        supporters to move forward in the West Terrace - it was already
        packed".

4.      "After the match was abandoned no information was given over the
        tannoy until 16.05 Hrs. Nobody realised what was happening".



From    Shop Manageress, Shop adjacent to Leppings Lane entrance

1.      "6 to 8 fans took refuge in my shop shortly before 3pm to avoid the
        crush outside".




inspector J
H Division.
