 •   .                                        /                  /                 <£2 q±/ /zs
P o lic e Sergeant 1515 David Alexander OTGEESf©
 South Yorkshire Police, Ecclesfield*


         At 9am SATURDAY 15 APRIL 19&9 I commenced duty At Ecclesfield Police Station^ and was
there transported to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, duties as per the F.A. Cup semi
Final, Liverpool V Nottingham Forest* At 9               that date filtered North Stand and briefed
re the days events* I subsequently collected packed meals for ay serial (serial Mf) and
rendezvoused with them outside the ground at the transit* The serial consited of myself,
10 P.C.s from A1 Doncaster and Inspector WAEDZ£ £ division* Phase one duties were to
proceed to Oughtibridge and search incoming coaches, busses, mini busses and vans* Pollowin
 further briefing by inspector WAKDI£ proceeded to Oughtibridge arriving at 1050 that same
day. Serial permitted time to consume packed mealo


          11 15am that same date commence search of visiting Liverpool supporters* Without
exception every coach, bus, mini bus and transit van on route to the ground was searched*
 Initially traffic to ground was light and sporadic* later thct day the traffic flow
^kcreased considerably such that the one way system became congested* The increase in
traffic flow was understood to be the result of heavy traffic congestion Halifax Road,
hence traffic diverted through Oughtibri<ge• Almost without exception, ewery vehicle
stopped had persons on board, who had consumed intoxicants* The supporters having
apparently learnt the previous years routines, and consumed all there intoxicants prior
to the searching points* In one instant two empty cardboard cases of Heineken ieger were
found in one minibus/Dransit* On the floor of one of these cases was a note, with words
to the effect      "ICXTR   TO LATE THIS YEAR, VtEVE DHJNK IT ALL. NA NA NE NA NA.»* written there on,
Many of the vehicles had empty beer cans littering the floor* Predominantly the vehicles
contained an issolated unopened can of beer* In each such case the beer was confiscated
and disclaimers signed*


         In the case of coaches alnsast without exception, they were totally devoid of any
intoxicants or empty cans* That is except for one coach which was awash with both full
and empty cans of beer* There was also a selection of bottles of intoxicants aboard that
coach* All aboard the coach denied ownership of the intoxicants* The intoxicants were
confiscated, and the driver reported for offences disclosed* Case papers by the reporting
officer, (DONCASTER P.C.).


         Despite most fans having consumed intoxicants they were not drunk, they were light
hearted, well humoured and well behavied* Of all the vehicles searched there was only one
fan who might be described as drunk* He was well behaved and good humoured, a passenger in
a transit mini bus of some dozen supporters* All occupants of that vehicle were lectured
on the possible consequences of misbehaviour by any one of their number* Throughout the
course of that duty in Oughtibridge there was a virtual constant flow of private vehicles
on route to the ground*
      By 2 30pn that date there was virtually no Batch traffic passing through CXightibridge o
 By 2 J+Opm that date not one vehicle could be identified travelling from that location
 to the football match. However at about 2 30po an empty transit van was stopped on route
to the ground. The driver had apparently got lost on route to the ground, and had attended
by a non recognised route* He had apparently deposited passengers at the ground and then
left to seek diesel® Aboard this mini bus was a substantial number of ftiU beer cans,
 (30 ♦) and several bottles of intoxicants. Driver reported for offences disclosed,
case papers by reporting officer* (Doncaster P.C.)


      Phase 1 duties scheduled up to 3pm. However due to lack of match traffic, resumed from
that location at 2 58pm*


     Phase 2 duties to meal at Claywheels i-ane. Having set off from Oughtibrilge, routed to

Claywheels lane Via Leppings lane*   Allowing for travelling time, I would anticipate having
passed along Leppings ^ane between 3pm and 3 05pBo On passing the ground everything appeared
^ ’derly. There were no fans on the roadway, all fans being confined to hard standing to the
front of the turastiles* There was no apparent dissorder at that time. There was a Police
Land Rover on the hard standing, with an Inspector or Chief inspector seated on the
off side roof, apparently observing/directing operations* No assistance having been asked
for, and non apparently required continued to Claywheels lane for mealo


     Almost immediatly after arriving at Claywheels lane, Radio message received requiring
all officers that location to attend Leppings lane terrace* The reason for attending was
not given* Together with serial and other P.C. *s from Claywheels lane boarded transit and
went directly to Leppings lane entrance* On arrival vehicle and driver left leppings
Lane, Claywheels Lane side of turnstiles* Serial then joined some 100 other officers
outside turnstiles, reason for assistance call still not known* No officer outside ground
appeared to know reason for assistance call* All officers instructed to form cordon
outside ground, oh the hardstanding near to the road* The few remaining fans outside the
ground were prevented from approaching ground* Amongst the fans still outside the ground
I recognised a number of persons who had attended via Ought ibridge. Those fans having been
searched prior to 2 30pm that day*


     The serial remained at that location for several ainutes* I there quiried with
Inspector WARDLE entering the ground, but was advised to remain where we were pending
consultation with other Inspectors that location* A short time later the first ambulance
arrived on the scene, and was directed through the police lines to the gate to the side of
the turnstiles* I then directed my serial into the ground via the gate at which the
ambulance had stopped* at side of ground* At that time there were some 4 - 6 casualties
layed to the rear taf the ambulance* One casualty wac on the ambulance stretcher, with
what appeared to be a police officer operating a face mask and bag* The entrance to the
 ground was partially blocked by the ambulance and casualties* 'Hie ambulance wqs then moved
 forward by P.C. 10^2 BRADOCK. I then together with an unknown officer moved conscious
 sitting casualty from rear of ambulance to against wallo This casualty appeared to have
 injury to left fore arm(appeared broken)o At this time the second ambulance arrived at
 the ground. I then entered the ground through that gate* and was immediatly berated by
 numerous fans, shouting abuse, blaming the police for the incident, jostling myself,
 in a state of histeria. All these fans were under the influence of intoxicants. It appeared
 that the fans were selecting supervisory ranks to abuse* Several fans noting colar number
 threatening to complain about myself and historically sreaming my number, and blaming
 me personally for the incident.


       I was there directed by a white shirted officer to form two lines at the gate and keep
 the access clear. Gathered several officers and attempted to carry out instruction®
 Insuficient numbers to carry out request, and gate tot seriously congested* I therefore
 advanced towards the tunnel giving access to the leppings lane terracing. To the rear
 of that tunnel I saw what I would estimate to be some dozen casualties} some of which
Appeared to be dead. At that time there were also numerous apparently non injured fans
 in the court yard to the rear of the tuimelo I there directed several officers to commence
                                                                      /

 clearing the cout yard onto Leppings lane* and assisted to carry out that task. Host
 made there way to leave the ground, however others berated officers requiring them
 to leave. Efforts to clear that court yard proved futile, due to supporters trick ling off
 the standing terrace, and from the seating terrace above replacing those already moved.
 The dead and injured were then moved from the court yard to outside the ground. I there
 noted that the number of officers at the court yard end of the tunnel was dwindling. There
 were few officers left in the court yard, and I therefore moved to the end of the tunnel
 to suppliment the officers already stood at that location, ^any of the persons attempting
 to gain access to the terrace,had apparently climbed into the seating area, returned via th
 steps, and were again trying to get to the standing terrace. All access to the terrace
^pts   prevented. Officers at that location were subject to constant abuse and hostility.


       It was whilst stood at the   tunnel entrance, that I managed to determin something of
 what had happened from the abuse being directed at me. Up to that point no radio informatio
 as to what had happened. Having arrived at the ground I made no effort to use the radio
 due to an excess of traffic. Whilst at the end of the tunnel I was approached by a
 doctor offering his services. I attempted to contact control via radio to establish
 where his services were required. Unable to do so, I directed a female P lice Constable
 to escort the doctor to the control box for deployment 0


       A tannoy message was subsequently made to vacate the ground. The ground vacated, I
 mustered my serial. Some of the    serial being found on the Leppings ^ane terrace others in t
 court yard to rear. All directed to return to the transit.
                                      h
                                      •• -
                                                                                    12$
     Throughout the incident in the ground* despite not knowing any of the officers around
me* I would commend them all for there approach, restraint, resilience and profesionalism.
Without exception officers did what they could despite untold provocation#


     Within a short time all the serial were back at the van0 Phase 3 duties were to have .
been foot patrol Leppings ^ane, supporter segregation# At that tine most fans had passed
along leppings I«ne* I therefore took my serial mobile* attending a reported fight in
Hillsborough Park* I then commenced a mobile patrol, followed bjr static observations
Halifax Road, near to the travellors rest public house#


     Whilst on static point Halifax i^ad approached by foreign; force dog handler, requesting
update on the incident* The dog handler suggesting that some 80+ dead* I advxsed the dog
handler that such figures were simply fantasy, having seen only some 12+ bodies outside the
Leppings Lane entranee* The enormity of the situation still obviously not apparent at that
stage* The situation was all quiet Halifax Road, despite traffic being stopped. I there
proceeded to Hillsborough Football Ground, and was subsequently stood down*


     I terminated duty on that date at 'Tp®*




#
