                                                              CPcTR |i I

Margaret Devlin

PC 3128,                       HQ   CID        Ext 3213.



On Saturday 15 th April 1989* I was on duty at Hillsborough re the Liverpool
Nottingham Forest Semi Final football match. I was in serial No *f1 which
covered from Wadsley Bridge railway station along Halifax Road to it’s
junction with Southey Green Road and the White Horse public house. I was
in company with PC 3176 Gilmour.

During the morning as coaches Ari&cars arrived the area filled up with
supporters. The White Horse pub was open and soon became full and the doors
had to be shut. A queue gathered outside the pub a few mam would gain
entry      cttvvea.*. tub** .

.Thre^ers off licence was also open for business and many youths queued up to
 buy drink. They were buying four packs of beer and lager some going across
 to the White Horse pub garden to drink it. The crowd were in good spirits
 and generally well behaved.

At approx 2.**0 pm as kick-off time approached the crowd began slowly to head
towards the ground along Halifax Road. As the crowd thinned , my serial
gathered together and we walked towards the ground.

We passed several groups of youths who were obviouslygiving someother
serials a little bit of trouble but nothing serious.

As we neared the gates to the ground one of the PC’snear the radio    turned
and shouted we were all required in the ground.

I entered the ground betwean the Spion cop and the North stand   at 3*09 pm
by the ground ’sO&ck. At the entrance to the pitch the serial    was met by a
senior officer and told to keep control of the area infront of   the Spion cop
and we spread out along the front of the Spion cop over to the   South stand,
infront of the Nottingham fans who were in a very angry mood.

There appeared to be some problem at the Lepping Lane end of the ground with
fans and police out onto the Playing field. Some of the Liverpool fans
managed to run up to the Nottingham end of the ground and were shouting
abuse at «the Nottingham fans, making them even more unsettled. Several of
the Nottingham fans tried to climb over the perimeter fencing.

As ambulances and fire tenders arrived on the pitch it was obvious something
serious had happened but no one really seemed to know what,exactly.

A crowd of Liverpool fans broke through the Police cordon which had form­
ed approximately £ ’s way down the pitch and ran up-to the Notts end and
commenced taking down the hoardings to use as stretches.

I stopped a lad who was walking about in a dazed state he had a small
hole in his forehead and was holding his left arm which appeared to be
broken. I asked him what happened and he stated that when the wiring
collapsed one of the spikes had gone into his head. He was looking for a
young lad , who had been with him. I took him to the gymnasium for treat­
ment and only then did I realise the extent of what had happened as there
were bodies laid out oWthe floor.
                                                                                Ill


I returned to my position and some Foreign Force dog men had also taken up
position there. Hie Notts fans seemed to have quietened down as a few jaf the
dead and injured where openly being carried out past them, and a couple
had been laid out on the pitch.

I remained at my original position until the supporters were asked to make
their way out of the ground and home.

I then with the rest of my serial walked back to Halifax Road with the
Liverpool supporters . They were very quiet but in a volatile mood.
Occasionally one of them would say something abusive towards us. It was
noticable that some of the Liverpool supporters were finishing off their
supply of alcohol as they made their way along.

Several reporters were trying to film the crowd and werethe subject of
some verbal abuse.

I remained at the junction of Halifax Road and Southey Green Road until
stood down. I then returned to Claywheels lane and then off duty at
Rotherham.
