                           Sheffield Archives Ref: r & - 1 1 b lo d S                    M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised   p/v [<o\ - n              Number
                                                                                                             ZS>\ C    O ^
                                                                                            Pi

T itle y f e y         l^ a a g ib c /                                                              (of IQ
(Include source and any document numbb, ,,


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                 Receiver



                                                                                                             7&f?
                                                                                                                 Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised     A   M   S   2   -                                                                35c/Z_
                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions              o o


                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                              4 tfl;T
                                                                                                                        SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                 Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                             snropsmre.
                                             18th April,1989.


Dear   Mr. Moynihan,

I have supported Liverpool F.C. for 45 years; on Saturday my wife and
I drove to Sheffield with my brother and nephew to watch the F.A.
Cup Semi-Final.   Apart from my wife we are all season ticket holders
and were fortunate to have stand seats in the North and West stands.
 A year ago we watched the same clubs at the same stage of the
competition.   I have watched the television coverage
      and I have been deeply offended by the remarks of some 'experts
who weren't at the ground.

 There is no doubt in my mind that in putting public control/ order
 before public safety the police must bear the major weight of blame
 for the tragedy.    In 1988 although the ticket allocation was equally
 unjust and potentially dangerous the         mar.ciha'1              — -
 a high priority and was excellent.    On Saturday there were more
 poli'ce~on the streets approaching the ground than in the immediate
 vicinity of the turnstiles.    Friends have told me of the vain struggle
 of two young police officers (one female) to restrain the crush
 at 2.55 at the entrances, and in no way, I feel, should the efforts
 of individual officers, particularly in rescuing people at the
 Lepplngs Lane End, be undervalued.    Nevertheless it did seem foolish
 for the police in the interests of order presumably, to stop every
 vehicle on the road to Hillsborough (from Oughtibridge) to require
 supporters travelling by minibus to leave their vehicles for search
 purposes, to direct everybody to park (when most of us knew what
 to do from our 1987 experience) and thus todelay the arrival of
many supporters with legitimate tickets.     The censorious remarks
of the Chairman of Luton Town ought to be seen in this context
- many of those who were trying to enter the ground from 2.30 onwards
were ticket holders who had been delayed by     police, acting presumably
in accordance with the orders of superior officers less concerned
with protecting the genuine supporter than rooting out the potential
malcontent.    Thus when the first police reinforcements arrived
at the ground ( long after the damage had been done) they, marched
in military fashion and lined u p ,confronting the North stand presumably
to restrain any breach of public order while the dead and dying
were ferried across the pitch on make shift stretchers by Liverpool
supporters.    Eventually, in some embarrassment, they reformed
to form a line across the centre of the pitch facing the Leppings
Lna End but taking no part in the rescue attempt and engaging in
individual skirmishes with distressed supporters.        Finally'the
initial grotesque attempt to' push supporters back into the seething
mass at Leppings Lane and the reluctance to open the gate must
also be seen in this context. The whole effort of the West Yorkshire
Police on Saturday, April 15th was directed at the protection of
property, the suppression of potential public disorder resulting
from drunkenness and the 'control' of the crowd.       There was little
evidence of a policy aimed at ensuring       the safety of the vast
crowd who had come, after all, to enjoy a football match.        I blame
the F.A. for their craven acquiescence in the manifestly unjust
ticket allocation which led to inevitable difficulties but most           -
of all I blame the police who decided at the highest level to put
public restraint before public safety and carried out a policy
which has at its root the belief that football supporters are dangerous
animals.


Yours sincerely,




                                               A
