NOTE FOR FILE
POLICE COSTS OF F.A. CUP SEMI-FINALS


F.A. Cup Semi-Final matches have been held at Hillsborough for the
last three years in succession namely, 1987, 1988 and 1989.
Numerous other Semi-Finals have been held there, but there was a
period of some years when due to the geographical location of teams
involved Hillsborough was not chosen.

In 1987 the overtime bill for this Force policing the Leeds v
Coventry Semi-Final was £117,196.03p. The amount charged to the
Club was £30,815.85.


In 1988 the cost of overtime to the Force was £79,901.31p. This was
an appreciable drop on the preceding year in terms of overtime,
brought about for two reasons. The first reason was that the
Leeds/Coventry match was played on a Sunday and therefore many more
officers would normally have been on rest days and were therefore
compensated at time and a half. In 1988 those officers were fewer
and compensated by officers mainly incurring overtime at time and
one third. Because Leeds United were no longer involved this did
permit some reduction in the number of officers employed.

The costing of policing matches at all the football grounds in South
Yorkshire is under a schedule of rates agreed with the five Football
League Clubs. These rates are based on the crowd attending starting
with a minimum figure which requires the attendance of a minimum
number of officers and adding additional officers to the cost as the
crowd rises. The charges for F.A. Cup Semi-Finals do not form part
of this contract.   It is specifically excluded from the contract
and the reason for this is the large number of officers involved and
the amount of overtime necessary.

F.A. Cup Semi-Final results are split roughly four ways. All the
gate receipts less expenses are divided between the two competing
Clubs, the host Club, in Hillsboroughs case Sheffield Wednesday and
the Football Association.  These proceeds are only divided after
expenses have been paid and part of the expenses are-.of course the
police charges. The charges to the Club for police services have
been as follows :-


            1987      £30,815.85

            1988    £ 3 9 , 8 0 0 . 00

            1989 (anticipated)


It will be seen that as a result of each Semi-Final played at
Hillsborough the ratepayers in South Yorkshire were faced with
considerable costs.
Shortly before the F.A. Cup Semi-Final a letter was received from
the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority asking whether or
not this Force would consider following their example and charging
Sheffield Wednesday as if the match was a normal league game. In
round figures this would have meant a charge of approximately
£6,000.00 as opposed to an anticipated account for £50,000.00. West
Midlands were implementing this policy because of the severe
financial state in which Aston Villa, the host Club, found
themselves. This is somewhat surprising as the Football Association
are responsible for the payment of police charges at F.A.Cup Semi-
Finals and not the host Club, although in practice the host Club may
well first pay it and then re-claim it from the F.A. A reply was
sent by the Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority stating
that our charges would be approximately £50,000.00 based on exactly
the same charges as 1988, but merely updated to take account of the
1 September 1988 Police pay rise.

Effects of 1989/90 Budget Cuts

In theory the budget cuts had no effect on the F.A. Cup Semi-Final
of 15 April 1989, at Hillsborough. Although each Divisional
Commander had his allocation of overtime for football matches cut in
percentage terms from the 1988/89 allocation, the amount still left
to each Division was in fact in excess of their actual spending for
1988/89, and in any case all of the overtime for F.A. Cup Semi-
Finals is classified as 'Special Event' overtime and has no impact
at all on the allocation of football overtime to 'F * Division or any
other Division.


Doubtless the Divisional Commander at 'F ' Division will have been
well aware of the overall budget cuts and in view of the "good
behaviour" involving the visits of Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
to Hillsborough during the current season have tempered his policing
requirements accordingly. He cannot however have totally ignored
the £1.8 million savings the Force is required to make during the
1989/90 financial year and sought to make the whole operation as
cost effective as possible.
