  Other Document Form                     Oate and time raised
                                                                                                         Number



  Title___________________          K                            i   n                 £ur& ifr tilr tfi
  (include source and any document number if relevant)


  Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No
                                                                                                                    Receiver



^Document registere^indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised

  Statement readers instructions                                                                                   Statement
                                                                                                                   Reader


  Indexed as indicated                                                                        Indexer

  No(s) of actions raised

  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                           0/M             SIO

                                                                                                        77
                                                                                                        tdr             Indexer
  Further action no(s)


  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

  MIR 15
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - FUND RAISING



MEETING HELD AT 11 OOAM FRIDAY 21 APRIL 1989
IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS




PERSONS PRESENT :




Assistant Chief Constable Anderson (Staff Services)
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson (Operations)
Chief Superintendents Ball, Broomhead, Owen and Thompson
Superintendents Bennett, Burdis, Greenwood, Lowe, Seller and Stuart
Chief Inspector Young
Mr J Richardson - Principal Personnel Officer




Assistant Chief Constable Anderson opened the meeting and explained that
following discussions on the aspect of fund raising for the Hillsborough
Disaster it had been deemed necessary to ascertain what policy should be
adopted by the Force.

He said that at the present it is thought that the Force should make a one
block donation and that would bring the matter of fund-raising to a quick
conclusion, because if police organized fund-raising events are allowed to
take place over several months it could have a detrimental psychological
effect on some officers who had experienced at first hand the events that
took place at Hillsborough on Saturday.

Mr Anderson suggested a possible way forward was for invitations to be
made through Divisional Commanders'and Departmental Heads to each officer
to make a donation of a suggested minimum amount and then the proceeds be
paid into Headquarters Finance for a cheque to be forwarded from the Force
to the Lord Mayor's Appeal Fund.

Mr Anderson explained that deductions from police officers pay at source
had been considered but there were difficulties which prevented this
action being taken at short notice.

He then invited comments from members   of the meeting.

Superintendent Greenwood said that he had spoken to many officers involved
at Hillsborough and he believed that a donation in the manner suggested,
by Mr Anderson could be seen as some form of compromise and officers feel
donations should be personal as opposed to official.
Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that there is a feeling within his
Division that officers want to make donations on a personal basis. He
suggested that monies from Divisional Sports & Social Funds could be used
as this belongs to officers and civilian members of the Force.

Superintendent Seller informed the meeting that a collection was already
taking place at 'C' Division and it had been decided to close the
collection on the 30 April and the proceeds be forwarded direct to the
Lord Mayor's Fund.

Superintendent Stuart stated that it was a good idea to set a date when
collections will be closed.

Chief Superintendent Thompson said that the feeling at 'A' Division was
that.it should be seen that the Force as a whole was making a donation.

Assistant Chief Constable Mr Anderson reminded members of the meeting that
it was important to consider this aspect with regards to the image
projected by the Force to members of the public.

Chief Superintendent Ball said he was concerned that if we did have a
collection on a Force basis and the donations did not achieve an
acceptable target the image of the Force could suffer.

Mr Richardson said that he considered the suggestion could amount to
"shooting ourselves in the foot" because if the donation is not enough
the public will say "is that all they could donate".  He suggested a
better way would be to simply remind officers of the Appeal Fund and urge
them to make personal contributions direct.

Superintendent Greenwood again said it should be personal not official
because if the donation was low or high it could give the wrong
impression.

Mr Richardson said it would be a no win situation because the press would
some how find an angle from which they would be able to criticise, whether
the amount be low or high.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that he did not think that the South
Yorkshire Police ought to make a donation as a body.

Chief Inspector Young agreed with Superintendent Greenwood's comments.

Detective Superintendent Burdis said that he had come across two schools
of thought. One was from officers who had attended the incident after
the tragic event had taken place and they had intimated that they would
donate their overtime payment to the Fund. The other was from the
officers who experienced the event at first hand and they had said they
would not donate anything.
                                  -   3   -




Superintendent Anderson said that he was of the opinion donations should
be on a personal basis.

Superintendent Stuart said that if the donation was done on an official
basis it is inevitable that someone will use it against the Force.

Superintendent Lowe said that he believed the image of the Force could
suffer because it is a somewhat Catch 22 situation, a low amount would
invite comment from many sources and a high amount similarly.

Chief Superintendent Ball said there is also a problem that if we do not
make a formal contribution this could also invite comment from the press
and media.

Superintendent Greenwood said that after the enquiry had been completed
he would then feel able to make an official contribution.

Detective Superintendent Burdis asked if the Chief Constable intended to
publish a message on General Orders because it could be appropriate to
mention the Lord Mayor's Appeal Fund in that message.

Superintendent Seller said that the official donation would create a
Catch 22 situation and it would probably be best to release to the press
and media that there has been an immediate response from officers of South
Yorkshire Police and there has been spontaneous donations on a personal
basis.

Superintendent Stuart said that where Divisional collections were taking
place the amount can be paid into the fund by one officer.   This would
prevent any misrepresentation of the Force, because as it is in the case
of the Force as a whole, comments could be made about the amounts donated
by Divisions.

Assistant Chief Constable Anderson said that he recognized the points
being made, but there was still the issue of detrimental effect on some
officers with long term fund-raising events.

Superintendent Seller said we would be treading on broken glass if we said
to any individual within the Force "do not organize them".

Assistant Chief Constable Anderson thanked the members for their comments
and said that it was a unanimous decision that officers and civilian
members of the Force should be left to make personal donations without any
obvious prompting from the Force. He urged Divisional Commanders and
Departmental Heads to bear in mind the problems long-term fund-raising
events could have with some individuals under their command.
                                      -   4   -




    Mr Anderson then promoted a discussion concerning the management and
    deployment of officers including members of the Special Constabulary, who
    had been involved at Hillsborough last Saturday for the remaining fixtures
    at that ground. After discussion it was agreed that it was a decision for
    individual officers who had been involved, whether they should or should
    not work match duties. Any request from officers wishing to withdraw from
    such duties should be respected, at least in the next four weeks.




♦   DISTRIBUTION :

    The Chief Constable
    Deputy Chief Constable
    Assistant Chief Constable (Management Services)
    Assistant Chief Constable (Staff Services)
    Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
    Chief Superintendents - 'A*, 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E', 'F
    Chief Superintendent - Operations & Traffic
    Chief Superintendent - C.I.D.
    Chief Superintendent - Management Services
    Chief Superintendent - Staff Services
    Chief Superintendent - Complaints & Discipline
    Mr J Richardson - Personnel Officer
