                INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND SHEFFIELD I g / O V M


BARBARA JAYNE HARDWICK
POLICE CONSTABLE 32^6
ATTERCLIFFE *C* GKOUP.

With regard to the above incident I have to report as follows.

At 8.00am Saturday 15th April, 1989 I commenced duty at Attercliffe Police Station
in full uniform, as part of serial 13 under sergeant 84-0 Wright of Attercliffe Police
Station. Our duties included the transportation of Liverpool suppor t e r s from the
Midland train station to Hillsborough prior to the start of the match, stand by during
the match and returning the Liverpool supporters back to Midland station at the
conclusion of the match.

At 0900am that morning I attended at West Bar gymnasium for a briefing about the
match presented by Superintendent Bates and-Chief Inspector King • We were thaa
allowed time to eat the packed lunch provided, after which I made my way down to
Midland Station in company with Police Constable 1668 Lecky on foot. We arrived at
the station at approximately 1000am that same date . Myself and other officers were then
deployed to form a line from the station entrance to waiting buses so that all supportees
caught the buses provided. I made two trips down to the ground on the buses with
pc lecky. The supporters on the buses appeared to be very quiet and were not anjr
trouble at all. Several of the supporters mentioned that they wished to get to the
ground as quickly as possible as they did not have any tickets.

On arrival at the ground their were hundreds of supporters stood in the road at
Leppings Lane. Some were drinking, some were quite rowdy others quiet. I saw tens of
fans asking other fans if they had any spare tickets and several tickets were sold
near to the tmrnstyles. The atmosphere was tense and fans were chanting football
songs. It was very noisy at that time but no more noisy than you would expect at
a major football match. There seemed to be no reason for fans waiting outside the
ground as they were but they were not encouraged to enter the ground.

Sergeant Wright instucted Pc lecky and myself to go to the gymnasium for some
refreshments and to stay with other officers on standby. This we did until about
half an hour later there was a call over the radio for officers to attend at the
Leppings Lane end of the ground as fans were trying to £brce their wajr into the ground.
I attended in company with Pc Lecky, Sergeant Wright and other Officers at gate A
in order to get out into Leppings Lane but due to the crush of fans at the other side
of the gate it was considered unsfe to open the gate as there might be a stampede of
fans. We then made our way to gate C where after persuading a steward to open the gate
we managed to work our way oujttof the ground near to the tumstyles. I believe that the
gates werecclosed to after we had got out.

At this time there weren't many people near to the gate. The majority appeared to be
pushing towards the turnstyles. In my opinion peoples lives were in danger due to the
crush of hundreds of people trying to get into such a small area. It was impossible
to push people back away from the turnstyles as they did not wish to miss the match.
I did nojf know at that time whether thw match had started or not. Gate C was opened
and Sgt Wright instucted me to start pulling people underneath some metal barriers near to
the turnstyles in order that they might go through the newly opened gatet so as to Base th<
pressure on the people near to the turnstyles. I did this but saw that other people
from the back of the crowd were runnung forward in order to get through the gate as
well. There seeded to be hundreds of people rushing through the gate. When the pressure
on the turnstyles had eased the gate aws closed and the crowd were allowed to     flxroufJi
the turnstylea again. I heard that the match had already started and the fans outside
the ground were still rushing to get in through the turnstyles. Tickets were still
being sold outside the ground at this time. Wiring the crush, prior to gate C being
opened fans were climbing over walls into the ground in order to escape the crush
assisted by Police Officers who were on tpo of the walls pulling fans over.

Just as the Leppings Lane end of the ground cleared there was a call over the radio
for officers to assist on the pitch at the Liverpool end as Liverpool fans were
invading the pitch. As myself and other officers made our way onto the pitch I heard
an announcement over the tanoid requesting that Liverpool fans leave the pitch and
return onto the stand. On arrival at the pitch I saw that there were no players and
the game appeared to have been abandoned. x looked to the enclosures directly behind
the football nets, The centre north enclosure appeared to be full of people trying to
escape. .Some were being lifted into the West ^tand eibove, some were climbing over
dividing fences into the North-a?>d Cenral Oouth enclosures and others were climbing
out of a small gate at the front of the enclosure in the tall barriers.

At first I did not realise what was happening and I started to ask people to move back
towards the enclosure. I then saw two injured youths being lifted out of the small
barrier gate. Officers were stood up against the barrier tring to reach over and help
fans to climb out of the enclosure. On realising that people Bare injured behind the
barrier I climbed through a small barrier gate in the Central ^outh enclosue and
assisted fans and other officers to lift injured over the dividing fence. My efforts
were somewhat thwarted by Liverpool fans shouting abuse and stating that it was all
the Polices fault. I found this upsettingvand shouted at the fans to either help or
stand back out of the way.

I helped to lift several injured and unconscious over the barriers and out of the small
gates; none of whome I can remember. After a few minutes more officers attended my
location so I then made my way onto the pitch wbEEe the injured were laid out
awaiting first aid. I assisted a ot oohns Ambulance girl to resusitate an elderly
gentleman and then moved on to other injured people who needed assistance. '<■ ihhn
approximately in his thirties was carried over the gate and laid on the pitch. He was
unconscious. I proceeded to give mouth to mouth, whilst another male officer unknown to
myself gave chest compressions. This went on for a few minutes until a man who identified
himself as a doctor stated that he was dead. A friend of the deceased agreed to stay with
him for purposes of identification. Following this I continued to assist and -comfort the
injured.

Bodies were carried out on wooden planks and eventually an ambulance attended on the
jjitch. I found other members of my serial and we all stood together in disbelief.
Suddenly there was a charge of Liverpool fans towards the Nottingham Forrest end of the
ground. This was thwarted by the swift action of the ^olice who made a line across the
width of the pitch. Tempers of the Liverpool fans were fraid and many shouted abuse at
us stating that we werefmurdering Bastards'* and that it aws all our fault. Others stated
that they should have had the other end of the pitch as they had more fans, things
quietened down and I stood with other members of my serial 011 the pitch. It was then
that we began to appretiate the true size of the disaster. We all felt very emotional
and found it difficult to fight back the tears.

We were finally given instuctions to escort the fans back to the train station on the
buses and this Me 8©S»ried out with abuse being thrown at us by many fans along the way.
I later attended the debrief at West Bar Police N a t i o n wher I found out that 95
people had died as a result of the tragedy. I could not believe this.

From attending at Leppings Lane I could not hear my radio and took all my orders from
sergeant Wright. I do not know whether there was a breakdown in radio transmissions
as much of the time the noise of the crowd was too loud to hear any--transmission.I
cannot comment as to whether the stewards were acting correctly as   can only recall
the steward at Gate C at Leppings Lane#
