S T ^ P f rm &
  752 - |128
        West Midlands Police




if



     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


             Part II
        PART II



This section of the report details the

history of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,

examining its experience in handling major

functions including previous Football

Association Cup semi-final matches.     It also

discusses traffic routes to Sheffield, the

allocation of ends of the ground to competing

teams and the confusion caused by ticket

markings and poor signing.   The final part of

the report details the stadium characteristics

including the turnstiles, the concourse and

Western terraces.   It concludes by reference to

the Safety Certificate dealing with crowd

capacities and specialist Health and Safety

evidence.



There is considerable photographic material

including video tapes and still photographs

which have come into police possession during

inquiries in connection with the disaster.        This

has been prepared as a separate section with its

own report and schedules of the material.     This

should be read in conjunction with this section

of the report.    Specific references to

photographic or video material are not made




                                                         23
unless the visual aid substantially assists in

making or clarifying a point.



There are also a number of scale plans of the

ground and relevant aspects within the ground.

These are included with this appendix report.

At this stage statements proving the individual

plans are not included, although they can be

made available.



Unless otherwise stated descriptions of relevant

areas of the ground contained in the report are

based on the approach from Leppings Lane.



GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS



All references in this edition of the report to

the "Green Guide", are either to the 1986Guide

to Safety at Sports Grounds, or in some

instances the 1976 edition.     In referring to the

Green Guide it must be stressed it is a

voluntary code and has no legal force at

present.   References are only included where

there may have been a significant departure from

the recommendations.
HEALTH AND SAFETY EXKCTITTVE



The Health and Safety Executive have provided

helpful technical advice and assistance

throughout this investigation with reports to

substantiate their findings.



Work carried out by the Health and Safety

Executive has in turn been the subject of a

review by Mr ____________of the Home Office

Forensic Science Laboratory at Wetherby.      He

concurs with the findings of the Health and

Safety Executive.



SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBAT.T. CLUB HISTORY



Formed in 1867 and elected to the Football

League in 1892 Sheffield Wednesday moved to

their present ground at Hillsborough in 1899.

Rubbish was tipped at either end of the pitch to

form banking and a stand moved from their

previous ground was erected on the site of the

present South Stand.   This was replaced in 1913

by the existing South Stand, the Spion Kop being

added in 1914, the North Stand in 1961 and the

West Stand in 1965 following the decision to

stage a number of World Cup games at the venue

in 1966.
Since 1912 30 FA Cup semi-finals, 19

International and 3 World Cup matches have been

played at this venue.   In addition the stadium

has been used to stage religious meetings, a

basket ball display, world class tennis and a

schools display for the Queen in 1954.   The

record crowd for the ground is 72,841 in 1934.



Prior to the designation of the Hillsborough

Stadium in 1979 under the Safety at Sports

Grounds Act 1975, an inter-agency group known as

the ’Officer Working Party* was set up to

monitor safety aspects of the stadium.   They met

twice annually or such shorter periods as were

necessary.   It comprised of the following

repre sentative s:



1.     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

2.     South Yorkshire Police.

3.     South Yorkshire County Fire Service.

4.     South Yorkshire County Council and later

       City of Sheffield Metropolitan District

       Council.

5.     Counsultant Engineers (Eastwood and

        Partners).



The Safety Certificate is discussed in a

separate section of this report.
EXPERIENCE OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL

CLUB



As previously mentioned, the Club have staged

many large scale functions at Hillsborough.

These can give some indication of the level of

their experience and that of the other agencies

involved.   That said, during the course of

enquiries in connection with this disaster

evidence has emerged of similar problems in

relation to late arrivals at the turnstiles and

crushing involving injuries in the West Stand

terracing at previous   F.A. Cup Semi-Finals.

Evidence has also come to notice of a filter

system being used in Leppings Lane on the

approach to the ground to remove non-ticket

holders and of the tunnel under the West Stand

being ’blocked off* to prevent overcrowding on

the terraces in pens 3 and 4.   These factors

are relevant to the current disaster.



The Semi-Finals concerned are 1956,1981,1987 and

1988.   These will now be considered:-



1956



This match was between Birmingham City and

Sunderland and took place on 17 March 1956.
St.Pages 752-754.     ___________________ , is a _________________

                                    He describes being on the West

                      Stand terracing with a friend, when there was a

                      massive surge of people from behind.     Both were

                      pushed some 10 feet forward onto a crush barrier

                      where the friend’s legs became entangled in a

                      crush barrier, and movement and breathing became

                      difficult.    Later he noticed others were

                      struggling for breath and were distressed.



                      As a result of this incident __________wrote to

                      the then Chief Constable of Sheffield.       His

Doc.Nos. 44-45.       letter of reply dated 20 March 1956. indicates

Doc.Page(s)307-308.   this was a localised problem caused by late

                      arrivals.    Only one person received injury.




                      1981



                      This Semi-Final was between Tottenham Hotspur

                      and Wolverhampton Wanderers, on the 11 April

                      1981.



                      This is the best documented and the most serious

                      of the previous incidents.    Tottenham fans

                      arrived late due to a combination of

                      difficulties on the Ml motorway and with local

                      diversions.    Their late arrival led to crushing




                                                                           28
                       at the Leppings Lane turnstiles and once in the

                       ground on the West Stand terraces.



St.Pages 755-757.      Gary VAUX. a                           describes

                       the situation at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane

                       and the subsequent crushing in pen 3 which

                       resulted in police opening the gate at the front

                       of the pen.



St.Pages 758-762.

                                was employed as a turnstile operator in

                       1981. In addition to confirming the crushing

                       both inside and outside the ground, he describes

                       how police officers in the area behind the West

                       Stand sealed off the tunnel entrance by

                       instructing stewards to close the gates.



                       Other statements and letters included in the

                       file corroborate these events.




Doc.No. 47.            A letter dated 15 April 1981 from Sheffield

Doc.Page(s) 314-315.   Wednesday Football Club to South Yorkshire

                       County Council, the licensing authority

                       responsible for the Safety Certificate, shows

                       that of 38 persons injured in the crushing, 30

                       were treated by the St John’s Ambulance Service

                       at the ground, 5 at The Northern General




                                                                          29
                       Hospital and 3 at The Royal Hallam Hospital.

                       Three of the 5 treated at The Northern General

                       were for more serious injuries including broken

                       bones. (Enquiries by West Midlands Police show

                       that the 3 persons named as receiving treatment

                       at the Royal Hallam were for injuries unrelated

                       to the crushing.)



Doc.No. 50.            Notes of a South Yorkshire Police de-brief

Doc.Paeefs) 320-324.   chaired by Assistant Chief Constable

Doc.No. 49.            (Operations) Mr R.J. GOSLIN, and a letter dated

Doc.Paeefs) 318-319.   3 June 1981 from Mr R. J. GOSLIN to the

                       Secretary of the Football Association, Mr E.A.

                       CROKER, describes the situation both in Leppings

                       Lane at the turnstiles and on the West Stand

                       terraces, as well as the numbers of injuries.

                       The letter      concludes that the crowd capacity of

                       10,100 in the Safety Certificate was too high.



                       Mr GOSLIN has now retired from the Police

                       Service and at this stage has not been

                        interviewed.



Doc.No. 48.            In addition a report dated 30 April 1981 from

Doc.Page(s) 316-317.   Chief Superintendent HEROLD to Mr Goslin is

                        included.   This confirms that the Police view on

                        the overcrowding had been communicated to

                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
A match between Leeds and Coventry City was

played on 12 April 1987.



Ferenc MORATH.is a                               He

describes how as he approached the ground late

because of delays on the Ml, Police were

checking coaches and fans on foot for tickets,

turning those without away.    The ’Kick off’ was

delayed for 15 minutes.    He went into the tunnel

under the West Stand which was part full of

people pushing forwards.    Others were trying to

get out of the pens and this caused crushing.

In pen 4 the crowd was tightly packed, yet pens

to MORATH’S left (pens 5 and 6) had ample room.



1988



This Semi Final took place on 9 April 1988,

between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.



Again the problems are well documented including

a large number of statements from Police

Officers serving at that match.    Statements from

these officers are dealt with separately in the

Police section of this report.
St.Pages 771-775.                           is a                He

                       describes being in the central section of the

                       Leppings Lane area which was packed solid.     At

                       times it was impossible to breath and crushing

                       was taking place.   During this crushing an

                       umbrella he was holding in front of him snapped

                       against the crush barrier.



                                    was so concerned about the crushing

Doc.No. 51.            that on 13 April 1988. he wrote letters to the

Doc.Page(s) 325-327.   Secretary of the Football Association Mr E.A.

                       CROKER and to the Minister of Sport C.B.

                       MOYNIHAN (the latter wrongly addressed).      There

                       is no evidence of either being received.



                       A number of other statements describing the

                       overcrowding are included in the file as a

                       representative cross section of the evidence

                       available.   At least one of these describes

                       crushing in pens 1 & 2.



                       FACTORS ARTSTNG FROM EXPERIENCE



                       Other matters worthy of mention arising from the

                       evidence are the problems caused by non ticket

                       holders and those fans with tickets for the

                       opposite end of the ground obstructing the

                       Leppings Lane turnstiles.    It is apparent that




                                                                             32
this, coupled with the presence of ’ticket

touts’ and fraud by the turnstile operators,

have been features in the overcrowding prior to

1989.



Efforts to obtain further evidence of injuries

or crushing received at other matches at

Hillsborough, have proved fruitless.



MATCH ARRANGEMENTS



This section of the report deals with the

allocation of ends, which was based on the need

for segregation and the geographical location of

the two clubs in relation to Hillsborough and

then explains the recommended alternative

traffic routes to the ground designed to enforce

segregation en route.   It deals with the

allocation of tickets and the relationship

between the ends of the ground and the number of

tickets available because of the ground

capacity.   It terminates with the confusion and

frustration caused by ticket and turnstile

marking and poor signing inside the ground.



These aspects are dealt with in detail in LORD

JUSTICE TAYLORS Interim Report.
ALLOCATION OF BHDS



Graham KELLY is the Chief Executive of the

Football Association. He deals with the

selection of Hillsborough Stadium as the venue

for the 1988 and 1989 Semi Finals and the

policy/proceedings involved.



Stephen Richard CLARK is the Competition

Secretary for the Football Association.     He

deals in more detail with events leading up to

the selection of Hillsborough.   He also deals

with conversations between himself, Mr ROBINSON

of Liverpool and Mr MACKRELL of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club, concerning the

allocation of ends.



Graham MACKRELL is the Secretary of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club. He confirms that

following a conversation with Mr CLARK about

Hillsborough as a venue they discussed

allocation of ends.   He approached Chief

Superintendent MOLE, the local Divisional

Commander at the time, concerning the Police

views on the subject and relayed the result of

that conversation back to Mr CLARK.
St.Pages 837-845,   Peter Beckett ROBINSON is the Chief Executive

                    and Company Secretary for Liverpool Football

                    Club.   His statement describes his views on the

                    selection of Hillsborough for the Semi-Final.

                    It also deals with the club’s reasons for

                    objecting to the allocation of ends and the

                    efforts he made to have the decision changed by

                    approaching Mr CLARK at the Football

                    Association.



                    At the time the decisions were made to use

                    Hillsborough Stadium in 1988 and 1989

St.Pages 846-859.   Chief Superintendent Brian Leonard MOLE was the

                    Divisional Commander of ’F ’ Division, the area

                    in which the ground is located.   On 23 March

                    1988, Chief Superintendent MOLE, Mr MACKRELL and

                    Mr ROBINSON, with others including a

                    representative of the Football Association,

                    had attended a meeting at Sheffield Wednesday

                    Football Club where the decision was made to

                    allocate Liverpool the Leppings Lane end.



                    No similar meeting took place in 1989 because so

                    far as the Police were concerned, the situation

                    was unchanged from the previous year. However

                    he explains how approaches were made to him in

                    1989 by Mr MACKRELL on behalf of the Football

                    Association concerning the allocation of ends.




                                                                       35
After discussion with his Assistant Chief

Constable Walter JACKSON, he informed Mr

MACKRELL there could be no change in the

arrangements.    He explains the geographical

rationale and the need for segregation.

In effect the choice meant that because the

Liverpool fans were allocated the Leppings Lane

end of the ground their 24,256 ticket holders

only had the opportunity to enter through 23

turnstiles.



Nottingham Forest, on the other hand, with

29,800 supporters, were able to use 60

turnstiles.



TRAFFIC ROUTES



It was suggested that one of the reasons for the

late arrival of a large number of Liverpool fans

at the Sheffield Wednesday ground, was delays on

the recommended routes caused by road works or

traffic accidents.    Evidence shows this did not

materially affect the situation adversely.



Statements and a report from persons supervising

or using the routes, dealing with the situations

as they perceived it, are included.
A Map is included showing recommended and

alternative routes from Liverpool to Sheffield

with the problem areas indicated.      This

illustrates how segregation of the two clubs

supporters en route to Sheffield was achieved.



ALLOCATION OF TICKETS



Mr KELLY, Mr CLARKE, Mr MACKRELL and Mr ROBINSON

deal with ticket allocations in their respective

statements.



TtfnraT MAwnrNcs - c o n f u s i o n



The Interim Report by LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

explains the confusion which occurred in

relation to ticket markings, turnstile markings

and the internal signs indicating access to the

Standing areas pens 3 and 4 on the West terrace

via the tunnel.



These ticket and turnstile confusions coupled

with the number of turnstiles available for

Liverpool supporters at the Leppings Lane end of

the ground, are a factor in the build up at the

turnstiles and their approaches.
                           Mr MACKRELL in his transcript of evidence to the

                           Inquiry, deals with this subject in some detail.



Part 1 St.Pages. 244-254                        is a part time Steward at

                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.   He explains

                           the ticket marking, turnstile lay out and the

                           different procedures for League and Cup Semi-

                           Final Matches.



St.Pages 901-920.                             is a

                                        He describes the confusion caused

                           among supporters on the approach to the

                           turnstiles by the ambiguous markings on the

                           tickets and on the turnstiles.



St.Pages 921-935.          Police Sergeant John MORGAN of South Yorkshire

                           Police, describes the difficulties caused to

                           supporters by the markings on tickets and

                           turnstiles and the subsequent chaos that

                           followed.



                           Sergeant MORGAN in his transcript of evidence to

                           the Inquiry, expands the evidence in his

                           statement in relation to this matter.




                                                                              38
                          RTATVTTIM   r.HAKACTERISTICS



                          A detailed description of the Stadium and its

Paras 22-53               location is included in the Interim Report by

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR into the Hillsborough

                          disaster.      It is not, therefore, proposed to

                          reiterate that description in this report.



Doc.Nos. 91-95. 107.      Scale plans, prepared by Ralph BRADE and

Doc.Paee(s) 722-726. 738. Associates, Consultant Engineers to the Judicial

                          Enquiry, are included showing the layout of the

                          ground.



                          PERIMETER GATES



                          This bank of six double gates are situated

                          across the mouth of the entrance into the ground

                          from Leppings Lane, are made of wrought iron and

                          painted blue.      They are relevant in that they

                          were closed by the Police at 1448 hours in an

                          attempt to control the supporters and take

                          pressure off the turnstiles.      Then at 1453 hours

                           the gate nearest to the River Don was forced

                           allowing supporters into the courtyard.



                           Examination of the forced perimeter gate

                           revealed that a substantial metal bolt at the

                           bottom, designed to locate into a hole in the




                                                                                 39
tarmac, had been bent.    There was also damage to

tarmac nearby where the bolt had been dragged.



Statements from two Police Officers    deal with

the gates being forced.



Plans showing the position of the gates and the

entrance off Leppings Lane are included.



COURTYARD



This is an area shaped like a bottle neck

between the outer perimeter gates and

turnstiles 1 to 16 and A to G.    The courtyard is

divided by a wall of metal construction running

from the perimeter gates to the brick wall of

turnstile 16.   There is also a metal barrier

running almost parallel    to this from half way

across the courtyard to the wall adjoining

turnstile G.    The effect of this is to divide

the courtyard between the two banks of

turnstiles 1 to 16 and A to G and create a

funnel for people towards the appropriate

turnstiles depending on which part of the ground

they wish to enter.



The wall of metal construction was built in 1985

to segregate home and away supporters.     This was
                        when proposals by EASTWOOD & Partners, which

                        would have achieved pens having their own

                        turnstile entrances and thus control capacities,

                        were rejected by the Club for financial reasons.

Doc.Nos. 96-97. 107.

Page(s) 727-728. 738.   Plans of the area are produced.



                        In the period between 1430 hours and 1452 hours,

                        this courtyard area became solidly congested

                        with supporters trying to get through the

                        turnstiles and many were crushed or injured.     It

                        was because of the crush in this area that the

                        decision to open the exit gates A, B and C was

                        ultimately taken.



                        TURNSTILES



                        There are a total of 95 turnstiles at

                        Hillsborough, 12 of which were not in use for

                        reasons of segregation on 15th April 1989.

                        Nottingham Forest fans were allocated 60 and

                        Liverpool fans the remaining 23 all from

                        Leppings Lane.



                        The twenty three turnstiles in Leppings Lane

                        contained in two sections 1 to 16 and A to G,

                        are divided by the metal wall previously

                        mentioned.   They were designed in such a way




                                                                              41
                       that turnstiles 1 to 10 served the West side of

                       the North Stand seated area, 11 to 16 the West

                       Stand seated area and A to G the West Stand

                       terraces.   As is previously explained the

                       turnstiles were altered with the courtyard in

                       1985.



                       There are indications from supporters, turnstile

                       operators and the Police that some of these

                       turnstiles were not functioning correctly and

                       that this restricted the flow of entry into the

                       ground causing overcrowding in the courtyard

                       which eventually built back into Leppings Lane.

                       A considerable amount of work has been carried

                       out by the Health and Safety Executive in regard

                       to the mechanical condition of the turnstiles

                       and the computerised counting system fitted.

                       Additional work has also been undertaken on the

                       flow rate of persons through the turnstiles

Doc.No. 89.            during the relevant period.   A Report on each of

Doc.Page(s) 567-605.   the aspects including photographs, plans,

                       diagrams and a full description accompany this

                       file.



Doc.Nos. 96-98         Plans prepared by West Midlands Police are also

Doc.Page(s) 727-729.   produced.




                                                                           42
EXIT GATES A.B AND C



These exit gates are dealt with in the

Interim Report by LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR.



Three large concertina type metal gates

measuring 4.064 metres across and 2.184 metres

high except ’B ’ gate which is 3.2 metres high.

They were built in 1985 during modifications to

turnstiles and concourse area.    Both sides of

the gates closed towards the centre and from the

inside only.   They were painted blue and were

capable of being locked and bolted.    In each

pair of gates one was fitted with a non-opening

glass observation panel at about eye level.



Gate ’A ’ is situated to the left of turnstile 1

and adjoins the outer perimeter wall of the

ground running at the rear of Vere Road.    Gate

’B ’ is at the end of the metal wall across the

courtyard and between turnstile 16 and A.     Gate

’C ’ is located to the right in the wall running

parallel with the River Don beyond turnstiles A

to G.



These gates, especially gate ’C ’, are highly

relevant as the opening of these allowed

supporters into the ground.      Many of those who
went through Gate ’C ’ on its opening on the

order of Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD at

1452 hours subsequently went into the tunnel and

on into Pens 3 and 4; crushing, injuries and

death followed.



A report by the Health and Safety

Executive dealing with the flow rate of

supporters through gate ’C ’ after the opening at

1452 hours has also been prepared and is

incorporated in the file.   Their count indicates

that 2,240 people passed through Gate ’C ’ before

it was closed at 1457.



Analysis of the evidence suggests 23 of the

deceased entered through gate ’C ’ after 1452

hours.   This statistic is obtained by reference

to witnesses or by visual identification which

has been prepared for the Coroners Inquiry.



POLICE CONTROL BOX



The Police Control Box is situated in an

elevated position in the South West Corner of

the ground overlooking the Leppings Lane

Terraces.   The Control Box houses the Police

Communications System and Video Monitors for the

five fully remote controlled cameras which are
operated from this location.    There is also a

facility for the Police to over-ride the Ground

tannoy system usually operated by the disc

jockey.



A diagram of the layout and facilities in the

Control Box and a plan of its position in the

ground are included.



KMEREKMCY CATE »E»



This is a small metal concertina type gate

opening from inside only and located in the wall

running parallel with the River Don, immediately

before it joins the side of the South Stand and

behind the Police box.    It is mentioned here

because it is not obviously marked, and it is

referred to in some of the documentation.



CONCOURSE



Beyond the turnstiles and behind the West Stand

is a concourse area which is divided into three

sections.   Each of these sections serves a

different part of the West and North Stands and

the West Terraces.     The three sections are

created by a metal fence and a brick wall.
These can be easily identified on the plans and

photographs produced.



There were a total of six portacabins on the

concourse at the rear of the West Stand.      Of

these, two serviced the turnstiles in the

northern part of the concourse at the rear of

turnstiles 1-10 and the other four the central

concourse served by turnstiles 11-16.   The

portacabins were variously used for selling

programmes or souvenirs and in one case by the

Police to store property seized from supporters.



SIGNS



The confusion over the markings on the tickets

and signing of the turnstiles in Leppings Lane

has been dealt with earlier in this report and

by reference to LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S Interim

report.   This section deals with the signs on

the ground side of the turnstiles and visible

from the concourse areas.



Before discussing these signs it is necessary to

remember that Liverpool supporters using the

West Stand terraces were supposed to enter the

ground via turnstiles A to G, and be in

possession of tickets marked ’Entrance ’B ’.
Having entered through one of the turnstiles A

to G and on the southern concourse supporters

could either go to their left through the gate

in the wall and into the central concourse area

giving access into pens 6 and 7 or up to the

West Stand seating area;     straight ahead into

the tunnel and pens 3 and 4; or round to the

right and either up another access into the

seated area or alongside the West Stand into

pens 1 and 2.



That explained, the main sign for the standing

areas, measuring 2.591 metres x .305 metres was

immediately above the entrance to the tunnel and

comprised of the word ’STANDING’ in .18 metres

letters painted in blue on a white background.



The letter ’A ’ was on the right and ’B ’ to the

left of the tunnel.     The ’B ’ sign corresponding

with the Entrance ’B ’ marking on the ticket was

likely to have attracted many supporters into

the tunnel.     It was, therefore, one likely

factor of many in the overcrowding of pens 3 and

4.   The possible view of the pitch through the

tunnel; previous knowledge of the ground layout

and the attraction of a viewing position behind

the goal were others.
The only other sign on this concourse section

indicating a standing area was a small one at a

height of 3.658 metres in letters .09 metres

high on a concrete pillar to the right

supporting the West Stand.     This directs

supporters along the side of the Stand and into

pens 1 and 2.   No signs existed on this part of

the concourse to indicate that access to

standing areas in pens 6 and 7 could be reached

by going to the left through the gate in the

wall.



Photographs and video material showing the

relevant signs are produced.



Statements from some supporters dealing with

signing within the ground are included.



Signing is dealt with in the Green Guide page

24, paragraph 57 which says "a comprehensive

system of signposting which clearly indicates

routes to the various parts of the ground should

be provided."



TUNNEL - WEST STAND



The tunnel is 22.17 metres long and unlit.     It

is located under the seating area of the West
Stand and is used primarily by supporters

entering through turnstiles A to G.    Rising at

first it then levels off briefly before

descending towards the terraces on a gradient of

1 in 6.      Page 30, paragraph 88 of the Green

Guide recommends a gradient of no more than 1 in

10 .



As the tunnel opens out on to the terrace a

radial fence divides pens 3 and 4.    Pen 3 is on

the right and Pen 4 on the left as you enter.

Short walls on either side extend out into the

pens.     There are gates at both ends of the

tunnel capable of being closed.



In the lead up to the disaster the tunnel became

congested with supporters moving forward to

access the viewing areas which were already well

occupied.    At 14.52 hours, when gate ’C ’ was

opened, other supporters entered the tunnel

adding to the congestion.



Plans of the tunnel are produced.



THE WEST STAND



The terraces, barriers, radial fences, perimeter

fences and pen gates onto the perimeter track

are discussed in this section.
^   Paras 125-129. 133.    The Interim Report by LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR into

    233-243                the Hillsborough disaster, deal with the

                           modification’s to barriers and radial fencing on

                           the West Stand terraces and illustrates the

                           various changes that have taken place.



                           Terraces



                           Running parallel to the goal line across the

                           front of the West Stand seated area, are the

                           terraces with a total of 7 pens, numbered by

                           their gates from left to right as you look at

                           them from the pitch, i.e pen 1 is in the South

                           West corner, immediately under the Police

                           control box and pen 7 is in the North West

                           corner.    Both corners are banked higher than the

                           rest of the terracing, with pen 5 being a

                           sterile area or void, unused by spectators.

                           From the tunnel exit down the terracing the

                           gradient is 1 in 4.5.



    Doc.Nos. 101-102.      Plans showing the terraced areas of the West

    Doc.Page(s) 732-733.   Stand and gradient are included.



                           Barriers



                           There are 3 rows of barriers on the terraces in

                           Pens 3 and 4 running parallel with the goal




                                                                                50
                      line.   The barriers are of two designs; those

                      fitted by HUSBAND and Co., the previous

                      engineers, and those fitted by EASTWOOD and

                      Partners the current engineers.   Both

Doc.No. 104.          types are shown in a diagram produced.

Doc.Page(s) 735.

                      The barriers of relevance are numbered 124a, in

                      the front row of pen 3, and 144 which was

                      removed from the back row of pen 3.      Number

                      124a, is one of the older style barriers and is

                      the one that collapsed during the crushing.

                      Number 144 was removed in 1986 at the request of

                      the Police after discussions in the Officers

                      Working Group.   Its removal was to

                      facilitate entry from the tunnel mouth into the

                      pens and prevent fans using it to climb from pen

                      3 into pen 4.



                      Documentation cataloguing the removal of

                      barriers is included.



St.Pages 1016-1056.   Dr Wilfred EASTWOOD in his written

                      submission   and transcript of evidence to

                      the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry

                      confirms the barriers on the West Stand

                      terracing were tested by his firm in July 1988,

                      and he describes the method adopted.




                                                                         51
Doc.No. 89.            The report by the Health and Safety Executive

Doc.Page(s) 484-533.   deals with barriers, commenting on the

                       application of the Green Guide, in relation to

                       height, spacing, condition and the testing of

                       the barriers by the Consultant Engineers.



                       The Green Guide, pages 35 to 38, refers to the

                       dimensions and design features of barriers.     The

                       Health and Safety Executive Report reveals that

                       these standards are not met by all the

                       present barriers.   However, in fairness the

                       previous Green Guide published in 1976 makes no

                       mention of these requirements.

Doc.No. 103.

Doc.Page(s) 734.       A plan showing the location of barriers is

Doc.No. 173/23-30      included. Photographs are included in the

                       separate section on photographic material.



                       Solicitors acting for a number of the interested

                       parties to this Inquiry have indicated a desire

                       for the independent testing of barriers 124a to

                       assist in civil proceedings.




                       Perimeter Fencing



                       Perimeter fencing was installed in 1977.     At the

                       front of the terrace this fence is 2.896 metres
                   high, comprising of heavy gauge metal wire

                   supported at intervals by metal posts set in

                   concrete which in turn are supported on the

                   pitch side by metal frames.    At the top of each

                   of these fences .381 metres of wire folds

                   inwards. This is designed to make it harder for

                   fans to climb over the fence onto the perimeter

                   track or the pitch.     The wire is welded to the

                   metal supports for strength and rigidity.      The

                   strength of the welding made it extremely

                   difficult for Police and fans to break open and

                   relieve the pressure, rescue fans and remove the

                   injured and dead.



                   In each of the pens there is a numbered gate to

                   the perimeter track which is primarily designed

                   for access to the pen in an emergency.     Eastwood

                   and Partners have measured the width of Gate 3

                   as 0.85 metres and Gate 4 as 0.83 metres between

                   the gate posts.     There are two other

Doc.No. 89.         measurements given by the Health and Safety

Doc.Page(s) 563.   Executive report and LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S

Para 260           Tnt.erim Report.    The Green Guide of 1986,

                   paragraph 215, recommends a width of 1.1 metres

                   for these gates.     However at the time gates 3

                   and 4 were constructed (1985) no such minimum

                   measurements existed.




                                                                         53
Each perimeter gate area was manned by a Police

Officer.



Plans showing the fence and gates are included

in the file.



Photographs and video material showing damage to

these fences are provided.



Documents relevant to this section of the

terrace are included.



Radial Fencing



Originally the West Terrace was completely

open.   Radial fencing between the perimeter

fence and wall of the West Stand, and which

created three large pens, was installed in 1981.

This followed crushing at the Semi Final earlier

that year.     Further radial fencing was added in

1985 dividing the large centre pen into what

are now pens 3,4 and the void pen 5.     This

fencing is 1.68 metres high and comprises blue

painted metal bars and was erected at the

specific request of the Police to facilitate

crowd control.     This was agreed by the Officer

Working Party.     Pens 1 and 2 and 6 and 7, are

not further subdivided by radial fences.        In
                         fact they are still the large pens as originally

                         created in 1981.



                         To the rear of the pens under the front of the

                         West Stand seated area there are gates in the

                         fence giving access between pens.   The gates are

                         difficult to see once the rear of the pens have

                         filled, this being a popular location which

                         usually fills early.   On the day of the disaster

                         these rear gates were locked in the open

                         positions.



Doc.No. 173/21. 26. 33   Photographs of the radial fencing are included.

Doc.No. 177/3

                         Documentation relating to the installation of,

                         or alteration to the radial fences is included.



                         WEST STAND - SEATING



                         Access to the West Stand which is all seating is

                         by way of turnstiles 11 to 16 and A to G, using

                         the staircases off the concourse.   The front of

                         the West Stand overlooks the terraces, giving

                         seated spectators a view of the terraces.      The

                         West Stand is divided by gangways for safety

                         purposes.    At the rear of the West stand is a

                         refreshment kiosk.




                                                                              55
              During the disaster a large number of supporters

              were lifted into the West Stand from the

              terraces below.



Doc.No. 128   Video evidence is available in the separate

              package showing the West Stand and supporters

              being lifted out.



              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB - CONTROL

              ROOM



              A Club Control Room is situated on the ground

              floor at the rear of the South Stand, close to

              the players’ changing rooms.   There is no view

              of the pitch from this room.   The occupants

              monitor the entry through the turnstiles around

              the ground, with a computer supplying ’print

              outs’ for ground management purposes. The room

              also contains the TV monitors from the various

              cameras located at turnstiles around the

              ground.   Recordings are made on a bank of 16

              video recorders. There is an ability to monitor

              any one of the five C.C.T.V.s being operated by

              the Police from their control box on request to

              them.



              In addition this Club control room acts as the

              main base station for the Club personal radio




                                                                 56
                          scheme.   This radio system is used by Senior

                          Stewards, Security Officers and Management on a

                          talk-through basis.



                          On the day of the disaster the room was occupied

St.Pages 1057-1062.       by Police Constable Harold GUEST. Roger

Part 1 St.Pages 617-619   HOULDSWORTH.                   Computer Engineers
St.Pages 1063-1064.
Part 1 St.Pages 598-616   retained by the Club, and Douglas John LOCK,

                          the Chief Security Officer for the Club.


Doc.No. 106               A Plan of the room is included.
Doc.Page(s) 737.

                          DIRECTORS’ BOX

                          The Directors’ Box is centrally situated

                          overlooking the pitch in the upper tier of the

                          South Stand.     There is access to the board room,

                          the office complex below, the Nostalgia Bar and

                          Steps Restaurant to the rear of the South Stand.


                          GROUND PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS



                          Tannoy



                          The current tannoy public address system was

                          upgraded in 1988 and broadcasts to locations in

                          and around the ground, including the Leppings

                          Lane turnstiles.     Capable of being directed

                          selectively to areas of the ground the system is

                          operated from the South Stand near to the
                       Police control box, by a Disc Jockey employed by

                       the Club.   Normally used for Club

                       announcements and musical entertainment, the

                       system can be over-ridden by the Police from

                       their Ground Control Box.



St.Pages 1065-1073.                          is the Disc Jockey and he

                       deals with the operation of the public address

                       system in detail.



                       Mr LOCK, Chief Security Officer employed by the

                       Club describes the upgrading of the system and

                       its use for emergency evacuation.



                       Other statements describe the public address

                       system in use.



Doc.No. 89.            A Report prepared by the Health and Safety

Doc.Page(s) 606-624,   Executive who examined the system is included,



                       Documents concerning the public address system

                       are also included.



                       Electronic Notice Board



                       Situated to the right of the Police Control Box,

                       when looking from the pitch, above the Finlux TV

                       and video sign is an electronic clock.   A board




                                                                          58
                      is also located there being capable of

                      displaying messages.   This display board was not

                      used at any stage in the disaster but the

                      electronic clock was in operation throughout.



                      POLICE ROOM



                      The Police Room is located under the North Stand

                      adjacent to the First Aid Room.   It is used as

                      the detention and documentation room for persons

                      arrested or being ejected from the ground.

Doc.No. 107

Doc.Page(s) 738.      The position of the room is shown on a plan.



                      FIRST AID ROOM



                      A First Aid Room is required under Schedule 2,

                      paragraph 8 (1) of the Safety Certificate.      This

                      room, which was upgraded in 1979, is manned by

                      the St. John Ambulance Brigade personnel during

                      matches.   St John Ambulance staff advise the

                      Club on the purchase of equipment for the room

                      which is located on the ground floor at the rear

                      of the North Stand alongside the Police room.




St.Pages 1095-1104,   Peter WELLS is the local Superintendent of the

                      St John Ambulance Brigade.   He describes the

                      relationship between himself and the club in




                                                                             59
                      relation to maintaining a standard of first aid

                      facilities.



                      Documents are included showing the modifications

                      to this facility.



                      GYMNASIUM



                      A gymnasium is situated at the rear of the North

                      Stand.     During and following the incident

                      it was used by the emergency services as the

                      temporary mortuary and casualty clearing

                      station.



Doc.No. 107           The position of the gymnasium is shown on the

Doc.Page(s) 738.      plan included.



                      B.B.C. CAMERA LOCATIONS



St.Pages 1105-1109.   John Edmond SHREWSBURY was the producer who had

                      overall control of the eight cameras used in and

                      around the ground on the day.     He remained in

                      the mobile BBC Control Room on the car park

                      between the South and West Stands.



St.Pages 1110-1118.   .Tnhn Walker MOTSON was the match commentator for

                      the BBC.     He was in the purpose built commentary
box above the South Stand.    He described the

events.



A plan is included showing the BBC camera

locations at the ground.     The most relevant

positions are those on the roofs of the South

and West Stands overlooking the Leppings Lane

Terrace.   This is covered in more detail in a

separate visual evidence report.



SAFETY CERTIFICATE



Designated under the provisions of the Safety at

Sports Ground Act 1975, on 1 January 1979, the

Safety Certificate for Hillsborough was issued

by South Yorkshire County Council on 21 December

1979, on Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s

promotion to the Second Division.     Attached to

the certificate are a number

of Schedules.     Schedule 1, deals with

Interpretation;     Schedule 2 the General Terms

and Conditions; and Schedule 3, Crowd Capacity

and Safety Stewards.



South Yorkshire County Council, as the issuing

authority, was responsible for the

administration and supervision of the

certificate until their demise in 1986 when
responsibility was transferred to Sheffield City

Council.   The Officer Working Party responsible

for supervision at the time of this disaster

comprised representatives from Sheffield City

Council, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,

EASTWOOD and Partners, South Yorkshire Police,

South Yorkshire Fire Brigade and South Yorkshire

Metropolitan Ambulance Service.



Statements, submissions and transcripts from

Herbert Edward McGEE. Chairman of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club, Mr MACKRELL, Dr

EASTWOOD and Chief Superintendent MOLE all refer

to the supervision of the Safety Certificate.

Other important witnesses are:



David VAUGHAN who is a Legal Representative

employed by Sheffield City Council.   He chaired

the Officer Working Party meetings.   He has not

been interviewed nor did he give evidence at

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S Hearings.



David BOWNES who is the Licensing Officer

employed by Sheffield City Council and was and

still is responsible for the administration and

supervision of the Club’s Safety Certificate.

He has not been interviewed but he did give

evidence at Lord Justice Taylor’s hearings.
St.Pages 1119-1122.    Superintendent Terence Willis STUART. of South

                       Yorkshire Police (Operations Department)

                       attended Officer Working Party meetings as a

                       police representative between 1981 and 1983.



St.Pages 1123-1128.    Inspector David William CALVERT of South

                       Yorkshire Police was ’F ’ Division’s Football

                       Liaison Officer.   He attended Officer Working

                       Party meetings in consultation with his

                       Divisional Chief Superintendent.   Inspector

                       CALVERT dealt with Club liaison from 1983 to

                       1989.



Doc.No. 78.            Minutes of the Officer Working Party from

Doc.Page(s) 396-443.   1979 to 1986 are included in the document

                       section of the report.



                       SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



                       At the time the County Council transferred

                       responsibility for licensing to the City

Doc.No. 82.            Council, there was a prepared schedule of

Doc.Page(s) 449-450.   responsibilities under the Safety of Sports

                       Ground act 1975 in existence.   This document

                       showed the responsibilities of the County,

                       Police, Fire Brigade and Building Control

                       Authority.   According to correspondence this

                       schedule was adopted by the City Council which
                    meant they then assumed the former County and

                    the Building Control functions.



                    In July 1987, these responsibilities were re

                    drawn by the City Council in draft form in a

Doc.No. 82.         document entitled Division of Responsibilities

Doc.Page(s) 450 i   between Authorities which proposed

                    responsibilities being divided between the

                    Building Surveyors (Department of Land and

                    Planning) and the Director of Environmental

Doc.No. 82.         Health and Consumer Services.     The draft was

Doc.Page(s) 450r.   agreed according to the minutes of a meeting of

                    the Officer Working Party on 16 July 1987 except

                    that the Environmental Health would not take a

                    lead role.   Quite how this division worked so

                    far as the council is concerned can only be

                    determined by interviewing Mr BOWNES.



                    CROWD CAPACITY



                    Schedule 2, paragraph 3, of the Safety

                    Certificate specifies the number of spectators

                    admitted to the stadium.   Part 1 of Schedule 3

                    details the number of spectators permitted in

                    various sections of the ground, a figure which

                    should not be exceeded.    The relevant capacities

                    are:-




                                                                         64
                       West terrace              7,200

                       North West terrace        2,900



                       No set capacities for each pen are indicated on

                       the Safety Certificate.



                       In 1981 when the radial fences were installed on

                       the terraces, creating the 3 large pens a crowd

                       capacity of 2,200 was declared for the centre

                       pen by Dr EASTWOOD based on calculations in the

                       1976 Green Guide.    When this large pen was

                       divided in 1985 into pens 3 and 4 and the void

                       5, an unknown person on Dr EASTWOOD’S staff

                       split the 2,200;     1,200 into pen 3 and 1,000 for

Doc.No. 74.            pen 4 and this is shown on the Plan included.

Doc.Page(s) 388.       These new capacities however were never

                       referred, it seems, to the Council or the Club

                       in order that the Safety Certificate could be

                       amended.    Furthermore, it did not take account

                       of the barrier configuration or exit gates at

                       the time.



                       Dr EASTWOOOD’S written submission and transcript

                       of evidence deal with this subject in greater

                       detail.



Doc.No.89.             A report from the Health and Safety Executive

Doc.Page(s) 534-566.   confirms the authorised crowd density for pens 3




                                                                             65
                       and 4 is in excess of the standards laid down in

                       the guide.



Doc.No. 89.            The Health and Safety Executive report on the

Doc.Page(s) 534-554.   findings of a count they made on a photograph of

                       Pen 3 at 1503 hours.     They counted at least

                       1,576 people.     It was not possible to make a

                       count of Pen 4.     However, their report

                       concludes the crowd density in Pens 3 and 4 at

                       1500 hours appeared identical.     It should be

                       remembered, however, that pen capacity could not

                       be controlled by restricting the flow of

                       supporters from the turnstiles.



                       Further calculations by the Health and Safety

                       Executive having regard to the recommendations

                       set out in the Green Guide show that the correct

                       capacity of Pen 3 should have been 822 and for

                       Pen 4, 871 persons.     Because there had been

                       other departures from the Green Guide which had

                       not been taken into account they believe it

                       would have been advisable to reduce these

                       figures further.



                       Pages 64 to 68, paragraphs 217-228, of the Green

                       Guide refer to crowd density and factors to be

                       taken into account in making calculations.        The




                                                                               66
                       extreme allowances recommended are 54 persons

                       per 10 square metres reduced to 27 persons per

                       10 square metres when the terracing materially

                       deviates from the recommended guidelines.        In

                       the case of Hillsborough the latter crowd

                       density should apply.



                       Since the Inquiry additional information has

                       come to notice concerning the crowd capacity set

                       for the North West terrace based on scale plans,

                       prepared by the previous consultants, which, it

                       transpires, were inaccurate.    Consequently crowd

                       capacity calculations by EASTWOOD and Partners

                       based on those plans were wrong.     The effect of

                       this error was to reduce the capacity of the

                       North West terrace from 2,900 to 2,242 and the

                       overall capacity of the West Stand

Doc.No. 83.            terracing to 9,442.     Correspondence between

Doc.Page(s) 451-459.   various agencies involved concerning this aspect

                       is included for information only.     It does not

                       have a bearing on the overcrowding of pens 3 and

                       4.



                       As a result of this finding a re-check of the

                       measurements in relation to pens 3 and 4 has

                       been made by EASTWOOD and Partners which agrees

                       the error.   The Health and Safety Executive have

                       confirmed that their calculations are based on




                                                                             67
the accurate scale maps produced by Ralph BRADE

and Associates, Consultant Engineers for the

Public Inquiry.



CONCLUSION



Conclusions drawn from this account of the

characteristics of the ground, as they relate to

the disaster, will be discussed in the final

report.
   West Midlands Police




   WITNESS LIST
  (ALPHABETICAL)




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        Part II
S JA 8 /1 5 5 . 3 . 9 0
                                                  WITNESSES
                                                (ALPHABETICAL)


                 HAS MADE OTHER NON MATERIAL STATEMENTS OR QUESTIONNAIRES.

(1.)            WITNESS AT THE PUBLIC INQUIRY
                SEE SEPARATE WITNESS INDEX

                                                                                PAGES

                                                    Supporter                    898 - 900

                BOWNES          David Malcolm       Chief Licensing          (Documents)     (1.)
                                                    Officer               Part II Appendix A

                BUTLER         Arthur               Principle District       (Documents)
                                                    Surveyor              Part II Appendix A

                CALVERT        Clive William        Police Inspector            1123 -   1128 (1.)

                CLARK           Stephen Richard     Competitions Secretary       830 - 836
                                                    Football Association

                                                   Disc Jockey                  1065 - 1073

                                                    Supporter                    994 - 999

                DOYLE          Brian Joseph         Supporter                   891 - 897

                                                   Supporter                    1088 - 1094

                EASTWOOD       Wilfred             Consultant Engineer         1016 - 1056 (1.)

                                                   Supporter                     763 - 766

                                                   Supporter                    758 - 762

                                                   Supporter                   1013 - 1015

                                                   Supporter                    950 - 957

                                                   Supporter                    797 - 799      *

                                                   Traffic Engineer             870 - 872

               GUEST           Harold              Police Constable            1057 - 1062 (1.)*

                                                   Supporter                   1074 - 1081

               HIGGINS         Trevor              Retired                     1128A-B         *
                                                   Police Sergeant

               JACKSON         Walter              Assistant Chief Constable      860 - 869    (1.)

                                                   Supporter                    981 - 990

               KELLY           Graham              Secretary,                   819 - 829      (1.)*
                                                   Football Association
                                2 .


                                                         PASES


KIRTON       Glen             Head External Affairs       829A-J       (1 )*
                              Football Association

                              Supporter                   876 - 884

                              Supporter                   788 - 792


MAHER        Peter            Supporter                   936 - 940    (1 .)*
MOLE         Brian Leonard    Chief Superintendent        846 - 859C   (1.)
MORATH       Ferenc           Supporter                   767 - 770    (1.)

MORGAN       John             Police Sergeant             921 - 935    (1 .)*
MOTSON       John Walker      BBC Commentator            1110 - 1118

                              Supporter                   793 - 796

                              Supporter                   776 - 781

                              Supporter                  1000 - 1004

                              Supporter                   806 - 812

McKAY        Graham           Detective Superintendent    961 - 980    (1.)

                              Supporter                   941 - 949

                              Electronic Engineer        1063 - 1064

ROBINSON     Peter Beckett    Secretary, Liverpool        837 - 845
                              Football Club

SAVAGE       Neil Michael     Supporter                   885 - 890

SCHOLEY      D.               Police Constable            958 - 960

SHREWSBURY   John Edmund      BBC Producer               1105 - 1109

                              Supporter                   800 - 805

STUART       Terence Willis   Police Superintendent      1119 - 1122   (1.)

                              Supporter                   782 - 787

VAUX         Gary             Supporter                   755 - 757    (1.)

                              Supporter                  813 - 818

WELLS        Peter            St Johns Ambulance         1095 - 1104   (1.)*
                              Superintendent
                              Supporter                  901 - 920

                              Supporter                  771 - 775
                              3.

                                                PAGES


                             Supporter           991 - 993

                             Highway Engineer    873 - 875

                             Supporter           752 - 754

WRIGHT        Ross Hark      Supporter          1082 - 1087

__________________________   Supporter          1005 - 1012
 SJA9/16 5 . 3 . 9 0

                                       WITNESSES fPUBLIC INQUIRY1
                                             AT.PHABKTT CAT.




                       NAME                    POBLIC INQUIRY DATE   TRANSCRIPT PAGE(S)


BOWNES                 David                           27.6.89           44 - 132
                                                       28.6.89            1 -      7


CALVERT                Clive William                   28.6.89            7-67


EASTWOOD               Wilfred                         22.6.89           75 - 119
                                                       23.6.89            1 -    82
                                                       26.6.89            1 -    85


GUEST                  Harold                          12.6.89          103     141
                                                       13.6.89            1        8

JACKSON                Walter                          26.5.89           52      76
                                                       30.5.89            1      74


KELLY                  Graham                          21.6.89           33 - 103


KIRTON                 Glen                           22.6.89            48 - 75


LOCK                   Douglas John                   29.6.89            45 - 101


MACKRELL               Graham Henry                   28.6.89            67 - 129


MAHER                  Peter Joseph                   18.5.89           149 - 155


MOLE                   Brian Leonard                  23.5.89            86     124
                                                      24.5.89             1     112


MORATH                 Ferenc                         26.6.89            99 - 107


MORGAN                 John                            6.6.89           123     141
                                                       7.6.89             1      27


McKAY                  Graham                          1.6.89           112     121
                                                       2.6.89             1     22
         NAME             PUBLIC INQUIRY DATE   TRANSCRIPT PAGE(S>


STUART   Terence Willis         29.6.89            107 - 108


VAUX     Gary                    15.6.89              1-14


WELLS    Peter                   12.6.89              8-39
                                 WITNESSES

                                INCLUDED IN

                                  PART 1

                               (ALPHABETICAL)



                                                PART 1 PAGE(S)




HOULDSWORTH   Roger                             617 - 619


LOCK          Douglas John                      598 - 616


MACKRELL      Graham Henry                       36 - 59


                                                244 - 254


McGEE         Herbert Edward                      1-6
   West Midlands Police




  D O C U M E N T LIST




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        Part II
                               DOCUMENT LIST


DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                            PAGE (S)


   44         Letter dated 20 March 1956 from city      307
              of Sheffield Police, replying to a
              letter f r o m R e g a r d i n g
              the Sunderland -v- Birmingham City
              semi final 17th March 1956.


  45          Letter dated 2 May 1989 from ]            308
                     to John SMITH, Chairman,
              Liverpool Football Club regarding
              serious crushing at the Sunderland
              -v- Birmingham City semi final 17
              March 1956.


   46         Letter dated 16 April 1989 to Chief    309 - 313
              Constable Geoffrey DEAR, West
              Midlands Police from
              regarding his experience of crushing
              at the Tottenham Hotspur -v-
              Wolverhampton Wanderers semi final
              11 April 1981.


   47         Letter dated 15 April 1981 from        314 - 315
              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
              Ltd, to South Yorkshire County
              Council regarding injuries to
              spectators at the Tottenham Hotspur
              -v- Wolverhampton Wanderers semi
              final 11 April 1981.


   48         Report dated 30 April 1981 from        316 - 317
              Chief Superintendent HEROLD to
              Assistant Chief Constable GOSLIN.
              Paragraph five confirms that the
              Police view on the overcrowding of
              the Leppings Lane terrace has been
              communicated to Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                             PAGE(S)


   49         Letter dated 3 June 1981 from           318 - 319
              Assistant Chief Constable GOSLIN,
              South Yorkshire Police, to E A
              CROKER, Secretary, Football
              Association regarding overcrowding in
              the Leppings Lane enclosure during
              the Tottenham Hotspur -v-
              Wolverhampton Wanderers semi-final 11
              April 1981.


   50         Undated minutes of the South            320 - 324
              Yorkshire Police de-brief regarding
              the Tottenham Hotspur -v-
              Wolverhampton Wanderers semi final 11
              April 1981, chaired by ACC
              (Operations) R J GOSLIN referring to
              the overcrowding in the Leppings Lane
              enclosure and the need to reduce the
              crowd capacity per the safety
              certificate.


   51         Letter dated 4 May 1989 from            325 - 327
                        to the Hillsborough Inquiry
              enclosing letters dated 13 April 1988
              to E A CROKER, Secretary Football
              Association and C B MOYNIHAN,
              Minister of Sport regarding crushing
              on terraces at the Liverpool -v-
              Nottingham Forest semi final 9 April
              1988.


   52         Report dated 18 April 1989 by Sgt       328 - 329
                      ~|Greater Manchester Police
              regarding roadworks and traffic
              delays on routes to Sheffield on 15
              April 1989 in that Police area.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                             PAGE(S )


   53         Report dated 17 January 1979 from       330 - 339
              Eastwood and Partners to   South
              Yorkshire County Council on ground
              capacity in connection with Sheffield
              Wednesday’s application for a ground
              safety certificate.


   54         Letter dated 16 May 1979 from Fire      340 - 343
              Services Dept South Yorkshire County
              Council, Divisional Commander to Mr D
              VAUGHAN, South Yorkshire County
              Council itemising a work schedule to
              be carried out at Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club before a safety
              certificate can be issued, indicating
              exit routes from the West and North
              West terrace are satisfactory.


   55         General Safety Certificate issued       344 - 355
              under the Safety of Sports Grounds
              Act 1975 to Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club by South Yorkshire
              County Council on 21 December 1979.


   56         Letter dated 2 September 1981 from      356 - 357
              Eastwood and Partners to South
              Yorkshire County Council proposing
              the installation of two radial fences
              on the West Stand terraces to aid
              crowd segregation.


   57         Plan number 3563/1 prepared by             358
              Eastwood and Partners and referred to
              in document 56.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                              PAGE(S )


   58         Plan number 3563/2 prepared by              359
              Eastwood and Partners and referred to
              in document 56.


   59         Letter dated 14 September 1981 from      360 - 361
              South Yorkshire County Council to
              Eastwood and Partners regarding
              radial barriers on the West Stand
              terrace.   Item 1 paragraph (c) refers
              to gates at the rear of the fences
              and that they should be under police
              control.


   60         Letter dated 18 January 1982 from        362 - 363
              South Yorkshire Police to South
              Yorkshire County Council regarding
              the satisfactory working of the West
              Stand terrace radial fences.     This
              letter also highlights concerns by
              the police over some crush barriers
              extending through radial fences.


   61         Letter dated 20 January 1982 from        364 - 365
              South Yorkshire County Council to
              Eastwood and Partners regarding the
              satisfactory use of the radial fences
              but highlighting the Police comments
              as per document 60.


   62         Letter dated 9 April 1985 from              366
              Eastwood and Partners to South
              Yorkshire County Council proposing
              plans for the segregation of
              spectators on the West Stand terrace.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                             PAGE(S)


   63         Plan number 6705/2 dated March 1985       367
              prepared by Eastwood and Partners and
              referred to in document 62.


   64         Letter dated 26th April 1985 from       368 - 369
              Eastwood and Partners to Sheffield
              Wednesday Football Club regarding the
              re-organisation of turnstiles at the
              Leppings Lane End.    Attached is a
              copy of plan 6705/4 dated 19 April
              1985 prepared by Eastwood and
              Partners.


   65         Letter dated 2 May 1985 from South      370 - 372
              Yorkshire County Council to Eastwood
              and Partners proposing the
              installation of a new radial fence
              from the central tunnel to the
              perimeter fence.     Attached is a
              drawing 6705/2 by Eastwood and
              Partners dated April 1985 showing the
              West Stand area of the ground and the
              new secondary radial fence (forming
              what is now the void pen 5).


   66         Letter dated 2 May 1985 from Eastwood   373 - 375
              and Partners to Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club regarding the
              re-organisation of the Leppings Lane
              turnstiles.   Attached is a drawing
              6705/3 dated 19 April 1985
              illustrating the proposed
              modifications.
DESCRIPTION                                PAGE ( S)


Letter dated 8 May 1985 from Eastwood        376
and Partners to South Yorkshire
County Council regarding the safety
aspects of gates in the proposed
radial fences.


Letter dated 10 May 1985 from South           377
Yorkshire County Council to Eastwood
and Partners conceding to the request
for two gates in the radial fencing.


Letter dated 17 June 1985 from             378 - 379
Eastwood and Partners to Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club proposing the
installation of the void area (Pen 5)
on the West Stand terrace, following
consultations with the Police.


Letter dated 26 September 1985 from        380 - 381
Eastwood and Partners to Corderoy and
Co, Quantity Surveyers, regarding
segregation work on the West Stand
terraces.


Letter dated 29 November 1985 from         382 - 385
Eastwood and Partners to South
Yorkshire County Council.    Item 4
showing recognition of crowd flow
problems at the Leppings Lane end of
the stadium.


Memorandum dated 26 February 1987             386
from Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club            - Secretary to Graham
MACKRELL) to Eastwood and Partners
(JAS - JA STRANGE Associate).     Item 3
concerns the capacity of the Leppings
Lane terrace.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                               PAGE(S)


   73         Telephone message dated 2 March 1987        387
              to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                         -       Secretary to Graham
              MACKRELL) from Eastwood and Partners
              (JAS - JA STRANGE Associate).    Item 3
              shows Dr EASTWOOD’S assertion that
              the gates at the rear of the radial
              fences on the West Stand terraces
              should be left open to allow even
              distribution of the fans throughout
              the terraces.


   74         Plan no 8945/1A dated 16 April 1987         388
              of the Hillsborough Stadium prepared
              by Eastwood and Partners.    This plan
              shows the capacities allocated to
              pens 3 and 4 on the West Stand
              terrace as 1,200 and 1,000
              respectively.


   75         Letter dated 22 April 1987 from the       389 - 390
              City of Sheffield Wednesday District
              Council to Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club.   The second paragraph
              shows the relationship and level of
              co-operation between the Police and
              Football Club to be ’very
              satisfactory.’


   76         Letter dated 29 December 1987 from        391 - 392
              Eastwood and Partners to Sheffield
              Wednesday Football Club regarding
              modifications to the public address
               system.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                               PAGE(S )


   77         Letter dated 7 February 1986 from the     393 - 395
              Home Office to all Metropolitan
              District Councils.     This letter
              re-inforces the responsibilities of
              the Councils under the Safety of
              Sports Grounds Act 1975 following the
              Local Government Act 1985.


   78         Minutes of meeting of the Officer         396 - 443
              Working Party between 18 December
              1979 and 22 January 1986.


   79         Minutes of meeting on 18 June 1986           444
              between South Yorkshire Police and
              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
              Paragraph two refers to the access at
              Leppings Lane.   Paragraph three
              refers to the West Stand and the
              possibility of removing barriers to
              assist the flow of fans into the
              ground.


   80         Minutes of the meeting of the Safety      445 - 447
              of Sports Grounds Advisory Group
              dated 17 September 1987.     Items 4, 5
              and 6 relate to Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club.


   81         Minutes of the meeting of the Safety         448
              of Sports Grounds Advisory Group
              dated 23 March 1988.     Item 1 relates
              to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
              and highlights the trend of
              supporters arriving 15 minutes prior
              to the start of a game hoping to gain
              admission.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                              PAGE ( S )


   82         Undated schedule itemising areas of      449 - 450
              responsibilities for the agencies
              involved in the administration of
              Ground Safety Certificate,
              originating from South Yorkshire
              County Council.


              Included are the following
              documents showing the transition
              of responsibilities following
              the abolition of South Yorkshire
              County Council in 1986:-


              Letter dated 27 July 1978 from              450a
              South Yorkshire Police showing
              its delegation of responsibilities
              to the Fire Services Committee.


              Minutes of a meeting held on                450b-c
              10 March 1987 between Council
              Departments raising the question
              of areas of responsibility.


              Letter dated 14 May 1987 from               450d-e
              City of Sheffield Metropolitan
              district to the Chief Fire
              Officer re administration of the
              Councils certificating function.


              Letter dated 7 July 1987 from               450f-j
              the Chief Fire Officer to Mr D BOWNES,
              Administration and Legal Department,
              City of Sheffield Metropolitan
              District seeking to re-affirm areas
              of responsibilities including the
              undated schedule (previously referred
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                             PAGE( S)


              to) and a draft document entitled
              ’Division of Responsibilities between
              Authorities.’


              Report dated 9 July 1987 from              450k-q
              Superintendent STUART, South
              Yorkshire Police, including Police
              related correspondence on the
              administration of the Councils
              certificating function including
              the document entitled ’Division
              of Responsibilities between
              Authorities.’


              Minutes of the meeting of the              450r
              Officer Working Party (S.A.S.G.A.G.)
              dated 16 July 1987 agreeing the
              responsibilities of the ’lead
              authorities’ for the administration
              of the ground safety certificate.


  83          Letter dated 4 January 1990 from        451 - 459
              Eastwood and Partners to Sheffield
              City Council enclosing a copy of a
              report in 1970 by Husband and Co,
              Consultant Engineers and Architects
              on the crowd capacity of the
              Hillsborough Stadium and specifically
              the capacity of the North West
              Terrace.   Also attached is further
              correspondence between the South
              Yorkshire Police and the West
              Midlands Police in January/February
              1990 regarding this aspect.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                             PAGE(S)


   84         Colour copy of the front and reverse      460
              of a Leppings Lane standing ticket.
              Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 15
              April 1989 - Cup Semi Final.


   85         Colour copy of the front and reverse      461
              of a West Stand seating ticket
              Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 15
              April 1989 - Cup Semi Final.


   86         Colour copy of the front and reverse      462
              of a North Stand seating ticket
              Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 15
              April 1989 - Cup Semi Final.


              1976 Guide to Safety at Sports          463 - 480
              Grounds (Football).


              1986 Guide to Safety at Sports          See inside
              Grounds.                                front cover

              Report on the Hillsborough Disaster     481 - 720
              by the Health and Safety Executive
              comprising sections on:-

              Examination of Crush Barriers Pens 3
              and 4.

              Collapse load calculations for
              Barrier 124A.

              An investigation into the number of
              people in Pens 3 and 4.

              An estimation of the maximum
              allowable capacity of Pens 3 and 4.

              An investigation of the turnstiles at
              the Leppings Lane entrance to the
              stadium.

              An investigation into the number of
              people entering the stadium through
              turnstiles A to G and through Gate C.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                              PAGE(S)

              Audibility of the Public Address
              System at Hillsborough Football
              Ground.

                                   FLANS

   90         Recommended and alternative routes       721
              taken between Liverpool and
              Sheffield, showing locations of
              delays, prepared by the West Midlands
              Police for the Judicial Inquiry.


  91          Central    Tunnel to Central Pens Plan   722
              (Ref No 1340/01) prepared by BRADES
              for the Judicial Inquiry.


  92          West Terrace Plan Details of Central     723
              Pens (Ref No 1340/02) prepared by
              BRADES for the Judicial Inquiry.


  93          Central Tunnel and West Terrace           724
              Longitudinal Section (Ref No 1340/03)
              prepared by BRADES for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


  94          Leppings Lane End - West Terrace Plan     725
              (Ref No 1340/04) prepared by BRADES
              for the Judicial Inquiry.


  95          Close Circuit Television Cameras         726
              Location Plan (Ref No 1340/05A)
              prepared by BRADES for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


  96          Layout of Turnstiles 1 - 8   and 9 to    727
              16 prepared by the West Midlands
              Police for the Judicial Inquiry.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                             PAGE(S)


   97         Layout of Turnstiles A to G prepared    728
              by the West Midlands Police for the
              Judicial Inquiry.


   98         Detail of Turnstile prepared by th      729
              West Midlands Police for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


   99         Plan drawing of Police Control Box at   730
              the Hillsborough Stadium prepared by
              the West Midlands Police for the
              Judicial Inquiry.


  100         Long section through Tunnel and         731
              Terraces showing approximate
              Gradients, prepared by the West
              Midlands Police for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


  101         West Stand and Terraces, Leppings       732
              Lane End, Hillsborough Ground,
              prepared by the West Midlands Police
              for the Judicial Inquiry.


  102         Central Pen West Stand Hillsborough     733
              (2200) persons, prepared by Sheffield
              Health and Consumer Services for the
              Judicial Inquiry.


  103         Middle Terrace, Leppings Lane End       734
              showing details of Crush Barriers
              and Fences, prepared by the West
              Midlands Police for the Judicial
              Inquiry.
DOCUMENT NO   DESCRIPTION                              PAGE(S)
  104         Typical Barrier Construction, Central   735
              Pen, West Stand, Hillsborough,
              prepared by Sheffield Health and
              Consumer Services for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


 105          Typical Detail of Perimeter Fence       736
              Central Pen, West Stand,
              Hillsborough, prepared by Sheffield
              Health and Consumer Services for the
              Judicial Inquiry.


 106          Plan drawing of Ground Control Box,     737
              Hillsborough Stadium, prepared by the
              West Midlands Police for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


 107          Plan of the Hillsborough Stadium,       738
              prepared by BRADES for the Judicial
              Inquiry.


 108          BBC plan showing position of Cameras    739
              and Cameramen.
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110789                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and I reside at the above address.

           I am a supporter of Sunderland Football Club and have been so for many

           years.   I used to attend football matches regularly.

           On 17th March 1956 (170356), I travelled from                       to

           the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, with my friend,

           to see the semi-Cup final between Sunderland and Birmingham.

           I cannot recall entering the Ground but I can remember climbing some

           steps which led to the terraces.

        Myself and           w ere in the Leppings Lane end at about half an hour

        before the kick-off.      I can remember that the layout of the terracing

        was such that there were no fences dividing the stand into sections.

           I can remember that the terrace was gradually filling up but I still

        had free movement as I stood waiting for the game to start.

        At kick-off time I recall seeing the football being kicked into the

           air and then I felt a massive surge of people come from behind.     This

           surge pushed myself and         forward and onto a crush barrier.    I

        think I was pushed about 10 feet forward,             got his leg trapped

           around the comer leg of the crush barrier.
I was to           left and so I managed to release his leg.     Because

of the number of people I felt I couldn't move easily at all.      I was

very concerned about          because he had had a

                   and therefore needed to be able to breathe easily.

We then pushed our way backwards to the rear of the terraces. I

remember seeing people at different places in the terrace struggling

for breath and being winded by crush barriers and distressed.

Once vie got to the back of the stand vie found that there was lots of

room.   We then made our way out of the Ground and drove heme.

I felt so incensed about missing the game that I wrote to the Chief

Constable of Sheffield, who I believe was the person responsible for

how many people were allowed into the terraces.      I strongly felt that

there w ere far too many people allowed into that terrace.

The Chief Constable replied promptly to my letter but denied there

being any real problem.

I then saw the problems and the tragedy at the Sheffield Wednesday

Ground on 15th April 1989 (150489), and I feel that the answer to the

tragedy not re-occurring is not necessarily to have seats on the

terraces, but simply to strictly control and limit the numbers allowed

into the various terrace sections.

I strongly feel that the tragedy that occurred at Hillsborough on

15th April 1989 (150489) was a problem which has been occurring year

after year, as I have experienced myself.

(Signed)                  (Witnessed)
                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   110789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           POL WPC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                         STATION

^M E:           GARY
                VAUX

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                                GARY VAUX (SIOJED)



        I am a single person residing at the above address with my girlfriend.

        As a result of an advertisement I read in a National Newspaper

        following the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday 15th April 1989

           (150489) I felt I had to respond by writing to the address given with

        my views.      The advertisement was basically asking anyone who had

        information or comments which they thought would be beneficial to the

        enquiry to write in.      I cannot remember who I addressed my letter to.

        My letter contained information relating to the 1981 (000081) Spurs v

        Wolverhampton Wanderers semi-final at Hillsborough, Sheffield, a game

^       I in fact attended together with some friends.

        The point I wanted to make was that exactly the same thing very nearly

        happened on that occasion when I was crushed prior to entering the

        turnstiles Leppings Lane end and had considerable difficulty getting

        into the ground.     When I got into the ground I walked along the tunnel

        and went to my right at the end into Pen three.      It was nearly kick

        off time by now and I really had to push to get into it.      I managed

        to work my way about two thirds of the way into the Pen and ended up

        on the last barrier before the pitch.      It was crushed more than a
VAUX                  GARY                                               £


normal football game but tolerable, however Spurs scored about three

or four minutes into the game at the far end (SPION KOP).   This caused

the crowd to cheer and people to rush into the Pens and I was then

really crushed.   I lost my footing and there were a lot of people

around me extremely distressed.   I had to hang onto a little boy who

had got lost from his father.

The crush caused me to move forward towards the gates.   I was still

holding the little boy.   When I got to the gate several of us shouted

to the Police and Stewards to open it.   People were passing out and

having difficulty breathing, people were getting hysterical, shouting

and screaming.

The game had just kicked off again after the goal when a senior Police

Officer obviously realised what was happening so he authorised the

gate to be opened causing us to spill out onto the apron of the pitch,

the Police then allowed at least 250 fans out of the Pen to relieve

the pressure and escorted them to the SPION KOP end where there was

more room.   A lot more fans were allowed to stay sitting outside the

Pens on the pitch.

On this occasion St. Johns Ambulance had to become involved reviving

mostly women who had passed out in the crush.

I suppose what I was trying to say was why wasn't thelesson    learnt in

1981 (000081).    The incident at Hillsborough made me relive my

experiences of 1981 (000081) and me realise how lucky I was then.
        VAUX              GARY


                                          GARY VAUX SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a

        During my duties at

                         I worked as a turnstile operator at Hillsborough

        Football Ground, Sheffield.     I worked in various turnstiles around the

        ground. Having read material since the disaster on the 15th April

        1989 (150489) I thought it right that my experiences, particularly for

        the F.A. Semi-Final games, be brought to the attention of the

        inquiry. Because of their position ie steward or turnstiles operator,

        they were allowed to purchase one terrace ticket at face value.        I

        can't exactly be sure but it was either 1980 (000080) or 1981

           (000081), it was the last league game before the semi-final.

        To receive our wages for the afternoons work we went to a

        secure area within the premises to pay our turnstile receipts in and

        receive our wages.    At this particular occasion we, that is the

        turnstile operators, had the opportunity to purchase our one ticket

        for the forthcoming semi-final game. In the same room there were one

        or two strange faces.     I was later told that ticket 'touts' had been

        in the cashing up room and presumed the strangers I had seen were the
                                                                           2


'touts'. The arrangement was apparently that those wishing to sell

their just purchased tickets could sell them immediately to a tout

for a profit.    I recall the tickets then cost   2.50 or   3 and were

sold to the touts for more than face value. I have to say that I did

not witness any transactions of tickets or cash betwsen turnstile

operators and the' touts'. What amazed me about this was the apparent

approval of the club or captain club officals who allowed the touts

into a secure area.    The security of the roan was down to a steward

who was posted outside each of the 2 doors giving access to the rocm.

When I learnt of what was going on I was surprised and obviously

showed this. My colleagues were surprised at my surprise and this

gave me the impression that the system of selling tickets to touts was

common knowledge. I am aware that the occasion of the Liverpool

Arsenal game (semi - final) in 1980 (000080) one of the turnstile

operators,                  closed his turnstile gate, left the ground

and sold his ticket to a Liverpool fan standing on the far side of

Leppings Lane.    This was done in full view of the Police at about 12.

30 pm (1230). Our instructions fran the Club were to obey the

instructions of the Police who were on duty outside / inside the

turnstiles. We were also told that the club did not expect a matching

tally of tickets and counts on the turnstile, implicit in that was

that people would go through the turnstile who did not have a ticket.

This was at complete variance with a usual league game      where   matching

 tallys were required between cash and numbers registered on the

 turnstiles counter. I am aware that offences went on and turnstile

 operators made extra money particulary on semi-final day.

 On both the semi-finals that I worked as turnstile operator I was told

 by the Police Officer outside the turnstile that anybody that got to

 the turnstile was to be let in.    The checking of the tickets would be
                                                                          3


undertaken by them outside.    Our job was to get than into the ground

as quickly as possible.
Because of the comments of fans as they came through the turnstile I

am aware of crushes outside the turnstiles.    For both semi-finals 1980

(000080) and 1981 (000081) I operated a turnstile at the Leppings Lane

end of the ground. The crush outside was worse in 1980 (000080) when

Liverpool played Arsenal than the crush in 1981 where Tottenham

played VJblverhampton.    From my own experience in the turnstiles more

Liverpool fans than Tottenham fans, both of whan had the Leppings Lane

end of the ground, arrived without tickets.     I'm probably talking

about two to three hundred extra fans going in without tickets based

on 25 to 30 going through my turnstile without tickets. Once the

fan got to the turnstile it was impossible to send him back because

of the crush.   In both instances, 1980 (000080) and 1981 (000081) the

better supported team had the Leppings Lane terrace and there were I

am aware crushing on the terracing both years. This crushing was

compounded both years by people with tickets for the Spion Kop

 terracing at the other end of the ground arriving at the turnstile

 after being directed there by the Police.    It was clear that the fans

 of the better supported team had managed to obtain tickets for the

 opposition teams standing area.    Our instructions from the Police were

 as I mentioned earlier, if they got to the turnstile     they were to be

 let in and this was so even before the crush outside the turnstiles.

 I am convinced that those without tickets and those with tickets for

 another part of the ground significantly contributed to the crushing

 in the terracing those years.     In terms of my turnstile I would

 estimate that 100 of the 1000 or so that passed through the turnstile

  I was operating fell on one of the above two categories and shouldn't

  have been in the Leppings Lane terracing. In both years the Police had
                                                                         4



to take corrective action.   In 1980 (000080) they were stopped further

access by instructing us to close our turnstiles early.   I assume the

remaining supporters were escorted to the Spion Kop end of the

ground. In 1981 (000081) when there were injuries, supporters were led

down the side of the pitch from leppings Lane to the Spion Kop during

half time and for the first few mintues of the second half. I saw

this as I actually watched that game from the South stand.

Before the start of the 1981 (000081) match the police on duty in the

area inside the ground behind the West stand instructed stewards to

close the gates to the tunnel which give access to the terracing

behind the goal and to direct supporters to the South side of the

stand to another part of the terracing.   The gates were not locked so

people could come out but not go in direct from the turnstiles.

It is my opinion that certain lessons from these two games were not

heeded by the Police in 1989 (000089).    This is particularly relevant

to the overcrowding on the Leppings Ln terrace which has happened at

many previous games where Hillsborough has been in a neutral venue.

As a football supporter I support Everton, I am totally against the

 use of vertical fencing to segregate the terracing for Police

 convenience. Such fencing as that in leppings Lane terrace does not

 ever segregate rival supporters and appears to be there as a means of

 controlling supporters by confining them to as small an area as

 possible, presumably for ease of observation.   There have been several

 occasions, most notibly at Nottingham Forest and Aston Villa where the

 local Police have refused to open the gates into an adjacent empty

 pen despite the obvious discomfort of supporters on the terraces.     On

 both occasions in the case of Nottingham the season end 85/86 (000085/

 000086) (Nottingham v Everton) and at Villa Park the Milk Cup sani-

  final 2nd leg 83/84 (000083/000084), the Police eventually opened pens
        when crushing became close to unbearable.




                                                    SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   130589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     ALLEN HUNT INSP2097
                                                                         STATION

^E:
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280689                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am the above person and I reside at the above address with my wife

           and one year old daughter.

           I am a                       in

                      I am a

           I am a regular football supporter, my club being Tottenham Hotspur, I

           am a season ticket holder for that club.

           Between               and                I lived in Sheffield and I was

                                                   of the Tottenham Hotspur

           supporters club, this club had an average membership between 50 and

           80. On April the 11th 1981 (110481), a Saturday I went to a football

           match at Hillsborugh stadium in Sheffield the game was an F.A. Cup

           semi-final between 'Spurs' and Wolverhampton Wanders the kick off was

           at 3.00 pm(1500). On that day I had a seat in the North Stand at the

           front corner near to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

           When the Hillsborough venue was chosen for the game our supporters

           club were very pleased.     I knew the ground very well and I was most

           surprised when 'Spurs' were allocated the leppings Lane end and

           'Wolves' were allocated the 'Spion Kop' my surprise was due to the
                                                                            2


fact that spurs had almost double the heme support that 'Wolves' did.

At the time of the game my supporters club had some 80 members and we

were only given 20 tickets, I heard of fans purchasing 'Wolves'

tickets for the 'Spion Kop' and attempting to get into the Leppings

Lane end, I had prior to the game made ccmnent of this to Spurs and I

understand that Spurs as a club voiced their concern to the F.A.

(Football Association).

I also voiced my concern to people at Sheffield Wednesday but they

said that the matter was out of their hands.

On the day of the game in 1981(000081) approximately 50 members of

my supporters club travelled together on a bus from Sheffield town

centre, two of us had tickets for the seats, aprpoximately 20 had

tickets for the Leppings Lane terraces, 15 had 'Kop' end tickets.     The

rest didn't have tickets at all.

We arrived at the game at about 1.30 pm(1330) we initially went as a

group to the 'Kop' end of the ground intending to try to swop 'Kop'

tickets for Leppings Lane tickets, however we couldn't get any.

Ticket touts were selling 'Kop' tickets for about three times face

value and some of my ticketless supporters purchased these.

We went to the Leppings Lane end of the ground and even though we were

very early for the game there were considerable numbers of fans

in a mob of people attempting to get into the ground, they were not in

any orderly queues at all, there was in fact quite a considerable

crush amongst the fans.

We actually entered the ground just after 2.00 pm(1400) on the day

with reference to the Leppings Lane standing area turnstiles the

Police allowed fans with any tickets, be they for that end or the Kop

into the Leppings Lane end.

I took up my seat at about 2.10 pm(1410). As I took up my seat I
__________________________________                                          3


inmediately saw problems occurring on the terraces at the Leppings Lane

end.   I can recall a crush of fans concentrated behind the goal area

with surges of fans caning in from behind I can't recall if the

terrace was divided into pens but the crush seemed to be spreading

behind the main fences.

At this time fans were passing out in the crowd, they were being

passed over the fence to stewards and St Johns Ambulance people.

People were being taken away on stretchers I would put the number of

people being taken from the pens in dozens.

People were being crushed in the crowd and they were screaming it was

clear to me that unless something was done quickly that a disaster

would occur as more and more fans were joining the terrace from

behind.

At about 2.30 pm(1430) at least one gate was opened in the fence.     The

particular gate was at the far side of the goal within minutes

literally hundreds and eventually I would estimate between 3-4,000

fans got onto the pitch, I think that opening the gate saved lives.

The Police moved the fans to the corner of the Spion Kop and put up a

cordon to separate the rival fans, the kick off was not delayed at

all, during the first half.   Fans were still being moved from the

Leppings Lane end into the 'Kop.'

In the second half of the game I can recall that the Leppings Lane end

was very full it seemed that the Leppings Lane end was still

overcrowded.

After the game I contacted the F.A. again and mentioned my previous

comments to them, the F.A. didn't bother to reply.

I feel that the F.A. and the Police should have learnt from this

incident and that decisions should have been made to prevent the

Hillsborough disaster in 1989(000089).
                                                                                 4


        There are obvious similarities between the two incidents both were F.

        A. Cup Semi-Finals, both had teams with vastly different support and

        on both occasions the team with the greater support was given the

        smaller end of the ground and the smaller ticket allocation.

        Shortly after the Hillsborough disaster Mr kelly from the F.A. Stated

        on the television that the F.A. had arranged many F.A. cup semi-finals

        at the ground and that they had not had problems in the past.




                                                                        SIGNED

         TAKEN
         PLACE

         TIME:             DATEs

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                 PC
                                                                           STATION

NAME:           FERENC
                MDRATH

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                             FERENC MDRATH (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my wife and I work in           at the




           I did not attend the F.A. Cup Semi fined at Hillsborough, Sheffield,

           that was played this year between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest but

           I attended the Semi final played at that ground in 1987 (000087)

           between Leeds and Coventry.    I am a Leeds United supporter and that

           particular year Leeds were given the Leppings Lane End of the

           Hillsborough Stadium.   I wrote to the Heme Office with my views of

        what happened two years ago at Hillsborough and how it related to the

           events that occurred this year, in reply to an advert that appeared in

           the national press. Two years ago I attended the match travelling from

           London with the Leeds Supporters Club.   Due to delays on the Motorway

        with the volume of Coventry supporters attending the match, we were

           late getting into Sheffield.   One of the points I would like to

        make is that when we parked the coach the police were there

           and would only let people off the coach who had a valid ticket

           for the match.   A further check was made by police as we got
MDRATH                 FERENC


near to the game, but this check was more of a token gesture,

however, people without tickets shouldn't have been allowed

down by the turnstiles.    As I actually got to the turnstiles at

the Leppings Lane End of the ground, there was just a mass of

people outside, with no orderly queues being formed.    There

were police officers about, some on horseback, others on foot.

I don't remember how many altogether.    These officers weren t trying

to form any sort of orderly queues at the turnstiles,

however, every so often the mounted officers on their own would

 go into the crowd in what I think was an attempt to stop

pushing at the front, by the turnstiles.    This was happening

just prior to the actual 'kick-off' time of the match.    The

 'kick off' time had by this time already been delayed for, I

think, fifteen minutes because of delays with Coventry

supporters getting to the ground.    Once at the turnstile I

showed my ticket and went into the lepping Lane End.

Once I was in the ground I noted that the game had already

 'kicked off'.   I noted that there was no direction being

given by police officers or stewards inside the ground and

 everyone like myself headed for the tunnel under the West

 Stand.   As I entered the tunnel I noted that the crowd was

 back up the tunnel.    I believed this was the only way onto the

 terraces, not having seen any other signs directing otherwise.

 I therefore, pushed my way through the tunnel not knowing what was

 ahead of me.    I noted that people, generally fathers with young lads

 or girls, were pushing back out of the tunnel, away from thepitch.         At

 this point there was what I would describe as a bad crush. As      I got

 to the top of the terracing, Leeds nearly scored, which

 created a shove forward, which enabled me to make my way into
MDRATH                 FERENC


the crowd at the top of the terracing.     Once into the terracing

I was tightly packed against other supporters to the extent that I

couldn't clap ray hands.   It was that packed in these centre pens

that I saw seme supporters climb the fencing at the side of the pens,

moving to the outer edges of the terracing and others being

helped up into the West Stand.      I could see that the outer pen

to ray left was half empty.     I remained in this centre pen 4,

throughout the first half.      At half time I left the pen and

went back through the tunnel.      For the second half I made ray way

 round the West Stand, after overhearing a conversation, into Pen

 7, where there was much more room.      I noted there was empty

spaces all over the place.

What has frightened me in reading about the incident this

year, is that two years ago I pushed ray way along the tunnel

to the terracing, as people have done this year, believing it to

 be the only way onto the terracing.      Two years ago I was

lucky in that no people were being crushed to death at the

front.     This year the people in the tunnel have been unlucky,

not realising that the crush is killing people at the front.

Two years ago I was impressed by the organisation of the

police before the match up until I was outside the

turnstiles.      Once outside     the   turnstiles and inside the ground

 there was a    total lack of     organisation.

 One thing I    would like to     add   is that even when I was packed

 in at the back, I didn't know          what the situation was down atthe

  front.

                Ference Morath
        MDRATH                FERENC                                    4


                                                FERENCE M3RA2H SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:      120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                        j




                                                                            770
                                                                        STATION

l^S:

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am a                                                        I have

           been attending football matches as a spectator for many years at a

        variety of football clubs.

           On 15th April 1989 (150489) I attended at Hillsborough for the F.A.

           Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.   I was in

        company with my wife as usual we all had tickets for seats in the

           South Stand. We all travelled from London to Sheffield by train and

           arrived at approximately 11.45am (1145).   We walked into Sheffield and

           had lunch, following which we took one of the organised buses to the

           ground arriving at 1.15pm (1315).   We watched the Nottingham Forest

           coach arrive and then entered the South Stand by the appropriate gate

           for row L Gangway 1.   We experienced no delay in travelling from the

           railway station to the ground.   On this journey I did see people

        drinking outside the public houses but I saw no disorder whatsoever.

        We also did not experience any delay in getting into the South Stand.

           Having entered the ground we took up our seats from which we had

        perfect view of the goal line of the Leppings Lane end.      Our seats

        were directly in line with this.       I did not see any alcohol being
consumed inside the ground.

At approximately 1.30pm (1330) the Spion Kop on the South Stand were

fairly full but I noticed that the North Stand which was directly

opposite appeared to be empty.     I remstiber particulary noticing the

shortage of fans in the North Stand but I cannot recall how full the

West Stand was at this time.     However by 2.30pm (1430) I can recall

that the central area of the West Stand was well occupied but the

outer wings of this area significantly not well occupied.     I know this

terrace area well because at the same fixture last year I actually

stood on the central terrace of the West Stand and I am aware of the

narrow exit pjoints. ie two gates at the top of the radial fencing.

On looking across this year I was not aware of either Police Officers

or Stewards at these gates.    At around 3.00pxn (1500) I became aware of

what appeared to be crowd surging in the central section of the West

End terracing and it gave the impression of crowd misbehaviour.

People sat around my area were all commenting on this.      Even after the

game was stopped it still seemed that there was crowd misbehaviour

and this continued to be my impression for sometime.

 I became aware around the start of the game that people were being

helped up into the seated area above the terraces and I saw

policemen indicating from the front of the fencing to the fans to go

back.This carried on for sometime.      I can also remember that when the

 game was stopped a large number of fans had gathered behind the goal

 at that end.
 The impression I gained after the game had been stopped was that the

 Police were still treating this incident a disturbance in the crowd.

 There was no impression of co-ordination in respect of pjolice action,

 they appeared just to be shouting and waving at the crowd to move

 back.   There was no impression of control over the actions of the
                                                                         3


Police.

I did not see anything which I beleive was directly concerned with the

breaking of a barrier in pen 3.   My recollection is though after about

4 or 5 mninutes after the game ending it became apparent that there

was a serious situation and casulaties were being brought out.    At

this point Police action seemed to change but despite this there

appeared to still be surging from the back of the crowd.   I would

also say that for at least half an hour there was still no co­

ordination of action by the Police.   I would say though that the

Police, St Johns Ambulance and in the latter stages Fire Brigade who

were there worked very hard at an individual level.

As time progressed I became aware of the seriousness of the situation

as more and more casulaties were receiving first aid such as mouth-to-

mouth and heart massage.   The one thing that struck me and others

was that we were given no information as to what was happening.      I

think Kenny Dalgleish made an appeal to the crowd to which he said

there was one or two problems.    I can also remember an annoncement for

people to stay calm but no information was given.

We remained in our seats for approximately 40 minutes and saw the

tragedy unfold with fans using makeshift stretchers and more and more

injured lying down.   I recall an ambulance coming onto the pitch and

driving around the edge slowly to the scene behind the goal, I thought

at the time why doesn't it just drive across the pitch.

Having witnessed the appauling tragedy I was very concious that at the

very same match last year I had stood in the central section of the

Leppings Lane area and was appauled at the overcrowding that was

allowecf to take place.

The whole area was packed solid to the point were it was impossible to

move and where I and others around me, felt considerable concern for
                                                                         4


personal safety.   As the result of the crush an umbrellla I was

holding in my hands was snapped in half against the crush barrier in

front of me.   I would emphasise that the concern over safety related

to the sheer numbers admitted and not to crowd behaviour which was

good.   My concern over safety was such and at times it was impossible

to breathe that at half time when there was movement for toilets,

refreshments etc I managed to extricate myself from the terrace,

having taken the view that my personal safety was more important than

watching the second half.   This unfortunate overcrowding spoiled for a

great many people what would and should have been a pleasant and

enjoyable footballing occassion.

Such was my concern that I wrote to the Secreatry of the FA Mr Crocker

setting out what had taken place and asked me how overcrowding with

the direct inpact on, crowd safety was allowed to

occur in an all ticket match.   I wrote in similar terms to the

Minister of Sport Rt Hon C.B. Mbynihan tut for some inexplicable

reason my temporary secretary addressed this letter to

_______________ Speke, Liverpool, and regretably I failed to notice

this mistake. I received neither acknowledgement or reply to either

of these letter. I was therefore particulary concerned that having

pointed out the serious overcrowding problems that occured in the

1988 (000088), that such appauling tragedy should be allowed to

develop on the 15th April 1989 (150489). I should say that not

receiving a letter from the Minister of Sport maybe understable as

the letter wrongly addressed. I produce to you copies of the letter

dated 13th April 1988 (130488) (Exh No    )R e f [
                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:    100589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     INSP 3078 SMITH
                                                                        STATION
NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                                          (SIGNED)



           I am a Liverpool Football cup supporter and on Saturday 15th April

           1989 (150489), I attended the Liverpool versus Nottingham Forest

        football match being staged at Hillsborough Football Stadium at

        Sheffield.

        I went to the match in a van with about another nine people.

        I got about 4 or 5 tickets for the Leppings Lane standing area at

        #6.00 each.    I had one and the others went to one in the van with me

        who had not got one and the others went to other friends who made

        their own way there.

        We left the          area at about 10.00 am (1000) and went straight

        through to Sheffield.    We arrived there at about 12.00 hrs (1200).

        We didn't stop at all and I can't remember seeing any roadworks on

        the way.    When we got into Sheffield we drove around looking for a

        certain pub to have some food and a drink but we couldn't find it.

        We tried two others but they were full of supporters and we couldn't

        get near to the bar.    We then went to a Whitbread house and we had a

        meal and something to drink.

        A short time after we left there we parked the van in a side road
                                                                           2


about a 20 minutes walk from the ground.     I think this must have been

about 2.30pn (1430).

On the walk through to the ground I saw a lot of fans about but there

was no drunkeness or unruly behaviour. There were some policemen

about but they weren't doing a lot.     There weren't any walking along

with us.

We arrived at the turnstiles at about 2.50pn (1450).     There were no

queues just a whole crowd of people from the road right up to the

turnstiles.   I saw one person on the bit® gates, just one of the

crowd, who was shouting "Get back" and waving his arms.    He was also

shouting "Remember Ibrox".

I saw a couple of policemen on horses.     I heard one of the crowd

shout, "Can't you get the game put back?"    One of the Policemen

shouted, "No".     There were no other policemen visible to me nor any

stewards.

I didn't seem to have been there very long when, after getting into

the crowd, we were ushered through some gates.     I don't know which

gates they were, all I remember was seeing the tunnel.    This was

obviously the way into the ground because there was a crowd of people

walking through.

I went through the gate easily and no-one checked my ticket the

details of which was Leppings Lane standing entrance "B" number LL3 46

25 valued #6.00.    While outside I saw that the turnstiles I should

have used were lettered "B" and they were for access into the terraces

presumably the same area into which I went when I got through the
 I                     1
gate.   I also noticed that some of the turnstiles seemed to be closed.

I didn't see anyone climbing over them.

When I went through the gates there were no signs of police or

stewards in that area.     I also didn't see any signs whatsoever inside
                                                                           3


the gates which told me where to go.     Because of this I just went with

the crowd towards the tunnel and was in fact in the leading pack going

through at that particular time. I had fairly easy access through the

tunnel and could see where I was going.     I didn't see any police or

stewards at the beginning or end of the tunnel.

I came out of the tunnel and as I did so, I was pushed from the rear

and I was forced into the left hand side into pen 4.

I was in the same pen for the same match last year and on that

occasion I had seen some high terracing off to my left and that was

where I had my eye on getting to, because there was a crush of people

in that pen last year.     I had my heels t o m off my shoes and had to

throw them away.

At that point I was on my own.    None of my friends were anywhere near

me I was being pushed forward and the crush was getting worse.     In

these situations I always get my arms out and above shoulder height.

As I was getting pushed forward I got to a position marked at (1) K4

on the grid plan and at this position I stood all over a body.     I

shouted, "There's a lad down here on the floor".     Somebody shouted,

"He's dead.   Forget him. Lets think about others".    I managed to look

down and I was able to make out that it was a large man.     I couldn't

say what he was dressed in at all.

At about this time the teams were out on the pitch kicking up prior to

the match starting.    I remember thinking to myself. " What the hell

are they are doing", as they kicked off.

The pressure is still gaining on me and I was being pushed in two

directions, first to my left and then back a little to my right in a

continuous movement.     I saw some people climbing up the fence to get

out and I saw a policeman pushing them back into the crowd.

While this was being done we were passing people over our heads, as
we have done on several occasions at Anfield and other grounds, and

some of these were very limp and their faces were blue.        They appeared

to me to be dead.

After passing quite a few over my head I realised that I was close to

the fence and after passing another one over a policeman said to me, "

you get out now." he grabbed me and started to pull me out through a

hole in the fence.     It looked as though it had been t o m away.   When I

got out I went over to the pitch and just lay down to get some air in

my lungs and rest.

While I was lying there, a lad reached over and grabbed me on my left

wrist.     He said, "I can't feel my legs".    He looked as though he was

about to go to sleep so I started to talk to him. I said, "What's your

name?"     He said I think I remanber it right, as               I asked him

where he was from.     He said,               in Liverpool".   I asked him

how old he was.     He said, "17" I think.    I asked him where his friends

were and he said he was by himself.      I said, "Well. If you go in the

ambulance, I'll go with you.      Don't worry".   Somebody else came and

they put him onto a stretcher.      I went with him when they took him to

the far end of the pitch and when they took him to a gymnasium       I

was blocked out by a whole crowd of ambulancemen, policemen and

firemen.     I heard someone say, "We'll have to take him for an

operation," and I had the impression that they were talking about

            I went to the gym and sneaked in to try to find the lad.     I

couldn't find him.     I saw that there was a lot of people lying all

around.    I saw one lad who was sitting up in a kind of daze.     He asked

me to get him a drink of water.      I found a cup from somewhere and

eventually got him some water and took it to him.

Just then a girl in a Nottingham Forest jumper came to me and said, "I

know I'm a Nottingham Forest supporter.       I've come with my husband and
                                                                              5


ray father I can't find them.    I am a nurse and I can help with these

people".     I must have said to her that I can't find ray mates and that

must have been why she said that she couldn't find her husband and

father.     I must have looked to be suffering from shock or something.

When I went to get the water for the first lad I had to go towards the

back and through a door.     In there I saw tables and there were people

sitting there counting money.     I was disgusted at this.   There were

people dying 20 yards away from them and they were counting money.

Surely that could have waited.     They must have safes on the ground.

When I left there a bit later I just went to look for my mates and I

found one on the pitch,     he said, "It's alright.   Everybody is

together except for two".    We just hung around for a few minutes, met

up with the others and left the ground to go back to the van.        We

found one of the two that was missing waiting for us there.       That left

one outstanding.    I don't know what time I left the ground.

We hung around for ages by the van but he didn't turn up.       We got in

the van and toured the hospitals in the area but still we couldn't

find him.

We eventually left Sheffield at about 3.00am (0300) and it wasn't

until later that day that we found out that the last missing lad in

our van had got a lift home with someone else and that he was okay.




I think that if the F.A. had have allocated the ground better all this
        wouldn't have happened.    The allocation of tickets to Liverpool was

        way under the amount of fans requiring them.    I think that it would

        have been easy to get the Liverpool fans to the larger end.

        When the incident happened the police seemed to be in a shocked daze

        and the fans themselves were the ones who instigated all the aid to

        injured people in the crowd.   There seemed to be a total lack of

        caraiunication and leadership within the police ranks.



                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
^         PLACE

         TIME:             DATE:    120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE                    PC-

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
                                                                       STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150689                                                          (SIGNED)



        I am a single man and I live at the above address with my mother.

        Since my childhood I have been a supporter of Liverpool Football Club

        and I attend nearly all of their games either home or away.    I am also

        a member of the Heart of England Liverpool Supporters Football Club.

        On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended the Liverpool v

        Nottingham Forest F.A. Cup semi-final, which was staged at

        Hillsborough. I travelled to the game as part of an organised Heart of

        England coach party and was picked up by the coach in Nuneaton.     I had

        obtained my ticket from Liverpool FC and it was for admission to the

        West Stand seats at a cost of   12.00.   The coach picked up supporters

        from all over the Midlands before finally heading for Hillsborough.

        The coach was full of supporters, most of whan I am familiar with.

        There were two brothers who I knew by sight, but not to talk to.     I

        now know that their names were Carl and Nicholas HEWITT.    I have seen

        both of them on several occasions when I have been with the Supporters

        Clubs trips to matches.

        After the last pick-up the coach went straight to Steffield.    There

        were no stops made.   We were held up by match traffic on the Ml
                                                                            2


(Nottingham supporters) and also on the outskirts of Sheffield.

We arrived at a designated coach parking place in Sheffield, at about

1.45pm (1345).     All the other Liverpool supporters coaches were parked

at this location, which was at a side road near a brewery.

               and myself went and got some fish and chips and sat and

ate them on a wall.     We then made our way on foot towards the ground,

the location of which was well known to us frcm our past visits.

I last saw the HEWITT brothers when we had all alighted from the

coach.     I did not see them again.

         and myself arrived at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane at between

2.20 (1420) and 2.30pm (1430).     During the walk to the ground I saw

one or two people who were drunk.       There were several fans drinking

from cans.    We did not have a drink ourselves.     There was a strong

Police presence in the roads leading to the ground, but they weren't

directing any of the supporters, who all seemed to know where they

were going.

We arrived at the turnstiles from the North side of Leppings Lane and

I could see several hundreds of supporters standing around in the

roadway, making no attempt to get into the ground.      We looked at the

signs above the turnstiles and after puzzling for a short while as to

where we had to queue we found our entry point.      Once we found this

point we had no trouble getting.       There were about twelve people in

front of us and it took us about two minutes to get in.

I was searched by Police on three occasions whilst entering the

ground; once before going through the turnstiles, once immediately on

leaving the turnstile and then again a few yards further on.      I am

quite used to being searched frequently at games. I think it is

because of my appearance.

Outside the turnstiles I had seen two mounted Policemen and a few
others on foot spaced out between the turnstiles.     As feu: as I was

aware there were no problems at all.     I recall a couple of occasions

when I was approached by people asking for spare tickets.

I cannot recall seeing any stewards in the turnstile area.     I did not

see any open gates in the area either.     I had seen a couple of young

supporters attempting to climb on top of the turnstiles.     One of them

actually stood on top and was told by a Policeman to get down.     He

replied that he couldn't.

Once through the turnstiles we saw a sign directing us to the seats in

the West Stand, which was entered via a set of steps built on to the

rear of the stand.     There was a strong Police presence in the area

between the turnstiles and the ground, but I can't recall whether

there were any at or around the location of the tunnel leading to the

terrace.     There were two stewards checking tickets at the foot of the

steps.     I did not witness anything unusual between the turnstiles and

the steps.

Once inside the stand we were directed by a steward to our seats,

which were in the first row, slightly to the right of the goal.     From

our seats we had a perfect view of the pitch and the terracing below

us.          was seated to my left.   The time at this stage was between

2.30 (1430) - 2.35pm (1435).

At no time did I see anyone drinking alcohol in the ground.

At the time of taking my seat I noticed that the two pens behind the

goal were tightly packed with supporters, yet the areas on both sides

were way below capacity with large empty spaces.    At no time did I see

any fights or disturbance.

As kick-off time drew near the crush in the pens below us reached a

critical stage.    There was panic and I could see that those at the

front were having difficulty in breathing. People were climbing over
___________________________                                                4


the side fences at both sides, others attempting to climb over the

fence at the front, but were pushed back by Police, who didn't appear

to be aware of what was happening.

Sanebody alongside me grabbed the hand of one of the crushed

supporters and tried to pull him up.     I instinctively helped and we

pulled him up into our stand.    At once people all along the front row

began reaching down and hauling dozens of supporters up.       I myself

must have pulled about eight supporters up before I finally fell

backwards.    When I finally straightened up again other people were in

front of me and I was unable to get to a position to pull any more

fans up.     The crush was that extreme that we found it highly difficult

to pull supporters out.    On one occasion we had to pull at two

supporters at once before we could loosen them from the crush.      A

third supporter who we weren't pulling also came out with them and he

was raised to a point where he was sitting on other supporters

shoulders.    He remained there for a few seconds before we hoisted him

into the stand.    Once we had loosened the top half the fans bodies it

was much easier to bring them the rest of the way.

Most of the fans we dragged up were not badly hurt physically, but

they were frightened, out of breath and in a panic-stricken state.

Before the crush had become really bad there had been three Policemen

spaced out long the front row our stand.     I was under the

impression that they were there to stop fans climbing from the terrace

into the seats for a better view, which had been a problem in last

years semi-final as I understand.     I don't know where these Policemen

went after the crush began.

After I had fallen back I began helping the fans who were still being

hauled up.     I generally got them to their feet and told them to get up

the back to make way for others to be pulled up.     I couldn't see much
                                                                            5


of the pens, but I was aware of fans climbing over to the pitch.        I

wasn't aware until much later that a barrier had broken in pen 3.

I recall at one stage seeing a Policeman remove about eight fans

through the gate, which was directly in front of me.     He took them all

off to the right towards the Police Control box.     Then two different

Policemen came to the gate and it was closed again, even though people

were still trying to get out.     They really had to force it shut.     I

couldn't understand why they did this.     They couldn't have realised

what was happening.

I have one vivid recollection of a teenage girl, about eighteen or

nineteen years old, who was close to the fence at the front to the

right of the gate.     She was facing away from the pitch towards me.

She was an attractive girl with long dark brown hair.     When I first

sighted her I remember she had an expression of agony on her face.

She was jaimed motionless and was in a very poor state.     She was in

this position for some considerable time.     I don't know what happened

to her from the time I last looked at her.     I think I would be able to

identify ter.

I think the Police were slow to appraise the situation, but once they

began to take positive action they were as effective as one could

reasonably expect.     However, I do feel that the problem should have

been acted upon as early as 2.45pm (1445).

I feel that a similar tragedy could have occurred at last years semi­

final at the ground, which I attended.     I was in pens 1 and 2 and

there was a severe crush which lasted about fifteen minutes.     I was

squeezed tight against a safety barrier and sustained bruising around

my ribs.   I eventually managed to ease myself under the barrier to

escape the pressure.     I do not feel that the West Stand safely houses

the amount of supporters it is supposed to.
        At no stage during the events this year did I witness anything I would

        consider to be a criminal offence.



                                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:    150689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     POL PC'
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I reside at the above address with my family.   I am employed as a

                                                 I have been going to football

        matches for about 40 years and for about the past 14 years I have been

        a Liverpool supporter.     On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I

        went to the F.A. Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham

        Forest at the Hillsborough football ground in Sheffield.      My son,

                             is a season ticket at Liverpool football club and

        he got a ticket for us both for the standing area at the Leppings Lane

        end of the ground.    I drove to Sheffield from home with my wife, once

        in Sheffield she made her own way                  to visit relatives.

        parked in a side road near to the ground in Fielding Road.      I arrived

        there at about 8.45 am (0845), and I almost immediately met up with my

        son who had driven from              to meet me in Sheffield.    We had

        arranged to meet in the same place that we parked last year when we

        attended the semi-final.    We spent the next couple of hours in a

        nearby park, reading newspapers and we returned to the car to eat some

        food which my wife had packed.    We made our way to the ground at about

        10.55am (1045) to see if the ground was open.      We had been informed by
                                                                              2


two daily newspapers, the 'Mail' and 'Today' one or other of those,

to arrive early because the ground would be open at 11am (1100) and

that there would be provided with entertainment.    When we got there

the turnstiles were closed, there were a lot of police about, but

there wasn't anything for than to do.     We waited around the ground for

the turnstiles to open, whilst we were doing so we were approached by

at least 3 people who offered us tickets to buy.    They appeared to

have wads of at least 50 tickets. I don't know what price they were

asking for them because we just told them that we had tickets and

weren't interested.     I didn't notice any discernible accent that these

'ticket touts' had.     At about 11.30am (1130) the first turnstile

opened, I think it was number one, it was the one on the far left.       We

handed our tickets in and went through, we weren't searched at all,

although there were also a lot of police inside the ground as well at

this point.    We made our way through the tunnel and into pen 4.     When

we got into the pen there were only another two people in there.      We

knew exactly where to go because we went to last years semi-final.

Last year we stood in pen 4, towards the back near to the fence which

divides pen 4 and pen 5.    Last year we stood behind the barrier which

is situated there and we experienced a big crowd crush which pushed us

from behind onto that barrier.     This was painful and frightening so

this year we decided to stand in the same place, but in front of the

barrier so that it would protect us from any push that might come fro m

behind.    The pen was overfull last year, but I do remember that

efforts were made to alleviate the crush in the pen by announcements

made before the match. This year, the pen gradually filled up and from

2.15pm (1415) there was a crowd and we found our places to watch the

game.     By 2.30pm (1430) I felt that the pen was very overfull and felt

even more full than last year. There was a gate open just behind us
________________________________                                          3


which led into pen 5, this gate was open when we first went into the

pen and I never saw it closed and it was still open after the disaster

had occurred.    We were so crushed together at this point that it

would have been impossible to duck down under the barrier to move

back towards the gate,    I was experiencing a crowd surge from the

front of the pen pushing us backwards.    I can only presume that this

occurred because as more people came into the pen from the tunnel this

forced people at the front, particularly at the front and towards the

left of the pen where there wouldn't be as much pressure on them from

behind, to move backwards in an effort to find some space.    Some

people managed to climb over into pen 5, over the fence, and a few

got through that open gate at the back.    Also some were being lifted

up into the standing area.    I managed to maintain my position, and so

did my son because we were trapped between the barrier and the fence.

I recall seeing BEARDSLEY hit the cross bar with a shot at the

Nottingham Forest goal.    I remember experiencing a lot of crowd

movement, but I can't recall if this was before or after BEARDSLEY had

hit the crossbar.    I wasn't aware of why this was happening, and I

remember seeing people clambering up the fences at the front of the

pen.   My first thoughts were that it was an attempt at a pitch

invasion, but as people got over the fence they didn't run onto the

pitch, and I saw one man start to pull at the fence as soon as he had

got out of the pen. One policeman tried to stop him doing this, but

whether he realised what was really happening or whether the man had

told him, but the policeman then started to help the man to pull at

the fencing.    Before this was happening, when I described the crowd

push that I experienced coming fro m the front, it was so intense that

as people were forcing their way backwards, seme were crawling between

my legs to get to the rear of the pen.    As I saw more people climbing
                                                                          4


over the front fence and trying to pull it down I realised that there

was a problem in the crowd.     I saw seme people being passed over

people's heads towards the front, near to the fence dividing pen 4 and

pen 3.   I saw the gate at the front of pen 4 opened and gradually more

people started to get onto the pitch, it was a slow process as people

tried to get out of this narrow gate.     I could see that people were

now injured and were being attended to by police, St. Johns Ambulance

and other spectators. For about 15 minutes there appeared to be

confusion on everyones part concerning what was happening and what to

do about it.   We decided to stay where we were, it wouldn't have been

until 4pm (1600) before we would have been able to move due to the

size of the crowd.     I don't feel that we could have been of any help

as there were many people assisting the injured.    I recall that the

first ambulance arrived on the pitch quite quickly, there then

appeared to be a gap before any others turned up on the scene.    I saw

supporters pulling down hoardings and ferrying people off the pitch to

the far end.   The first sign that I recall of any organisation from

the 'authorities' was when Kenny DALGLISH made an announcement

appealing for calm.    He said that there was a 'problem' but didn't

explain what it was.    Before this announcement it appeared to me that

the Nottingham Forest fans, in particular at the other end of the

ground, didn't know what was happening.    They were booing the

Liverpool fans who had got onto the pitch.    I did see one Liverpool

supporter run up to the Nottingham Forest end of the ground and raise

his fists, but that was the only incident of 'hooliganism' that I

saw. This man had actually got through a police line that had formed

up across the half-way line.    At no point did myself or my son make

our way onto the pitch, when we left the pen it was via the tunnel.

After 4.30pm (1630) there was an announcement that the game had been
                                                                                       5


        cancelled, but it was obvious by then that the game wouldn't continue,

        the fencing had been ripped off at the front of the pen and so had the

        net from the goal posts.     At about 4.40pm (1640) myself and my son

        decided to leave the ground.       Most people seemed to leave at this time

        and it was crowded outside, but calm.       We made our way back to

        Fielding Road to our car.    The main point that I would like to make

        about what occurred at the ground was that prior to the gates being

        opened and the massive crowd crush that then occurred, that the centre

        pens, 3 and 4, were very overcrowded at 2.30pm (1430).        I experienced

        this crowd push from the front and not from the rear as I explained

        earlier and I believe that this may have led to seme of the injuries

       even before the kick off.         I feel that something should have been done

        at this point to alleviate this crowding, but no action was taken by

        the police or stewards to do so and there weren't any announcements

       made to encourage people to move into the outer pens.         I was not aware

        at any time of any people near to me dying or being seriously

        injured.   The only ones I saw who appeared to be so were being treated

        on the pitch.   I would be willihg to give evidence at any subsequent

       enquiry.

                                                                           SIGNED

         TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:              DATE:        120589

WITOESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                  PC
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100789                                                             SIGNED)



           States:   I live at the above address and am employed by

           Since the late 60's I have been a Liverpool Football Club supporter,

        but since I came to live in           in 1984(000084), I have not been a

        regular spectator.

           I attended the FA cup semi final in 1988(000088), at Hillsborough,

        between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, in Sheffield.        My one

        recollection of that game was that as I stood in the terraces at the

        Leppings Ln end of the ground, I was subjected to quite an extensive

        crowd crush, so much so that I remember being quite concerned for the

        safety of a young lady who was with me.      I also remember on that

        occasion seeing fans being passed from the terraces up to the stand

        above, as the terrace was too full.

        On 15th April 1989 (150489), I again went to Hillsborough football

        ground to see the FA cup semi final between Liverpool and Nottingham.

           I got my ticket for the game from my son's godfather, who had obtained

        it from the Liverpool club.       It was a ticket for the Lepping Lane

        terrace and I paid     6.00 for it.

           I travelled to the game with                  who works for the same
company as I do.     He picked me up from my heme at about 12.00 md

(1200), the two of us then travelled to Sheffield together.    We had an

uneventful journey to Sheffield and I remember little traffic.    We

went into the centre of Sheffield where in Pond St we met a female

relative of                            I think it was at about 1.00 pm

(1300) we met her.

The three of us then went to a public house, I think was called the

Fat Cat, where we had seme food and drink.     In the pub we met up with

a man I know as                        brother and two other men I did

not know.   There were no problems in the pub, in fact we were talking

to Nottingham Forest supporters and everyone was quite happy.

                 and I then went in        car to go to the ground.    We

parked the car in a side road of an industrial estate near to the Owl

public house.

There was a Police van outside the Owl public house but we did not ask

nor were we given any directions as to which way to go, we followed

the crowds of supporters.    By this time it was about 2.40 pm (1440),

we would not have planned to be this late but had been delayed by

                who had had to wait for someone to collect his ticket.

On my way from the car to the ground I did not see anything that I

would not have expected to see at any other football match other than

the fact that I did think there seemed to be a large number of people

still outside the ground at that late stage.    We walked round the left

of the ground as you look at it from Penistone Rd, there did not

appear to be many people about till we turned right into Lepping Ln

and approached the turnstiles. By now it was at least 2.55 pm (1455),

we were all four still together.

The scene that greeted us was one of utter chaos, there were no queues

just a large wedge of people outside the turnstiles trying to get in
_________________________________                                          3


the ground.     I did see seme Police officers outside the ground, one

was a mounted officer, who was trying to split up the crowd, without

success and others made a forlorn attempt to close the gate giving

access to area in front of the turnstiles, they just prevented by the

weight of the crowd.     I joined the crowd trying to get in and there

I lost contact with my three friends.

The pressure of the crowd round me suddenly seemed less, by this

time I was to the right of the Lepping Lane turnstiles and a few yards

from a blue concertina gate.     I did not see the gate being opened but

I saw it was open and Police Officers at the gate were beckoning the

fans to go in.     I just followed the stream of fans through the gate.

There were Police and stewards in the area just inside the gate but I

received no instructions where to go.     I saw no signs directing me

either.     I had first I went to the toilet in that area just to the

left of the tunnel giving access to the terrace.     I came out and

actually went down the tunnel.     I don't remember there being any

problems in the tunnel and I recall that as I got to the terrace at

the end, it was just in time to see Peter BEARDSLEY hit the bar at the

and then I went to the left into what I now know to be pen no. 4.

As soon as I was on the terrace I had no control on where I went, and

I recall I was pushed virtually sideways to the left.     In a very short

time I was against the metal fence dividing the pen I was in from the

next one.    After a short time it was not quite so packed and fans were

helping other fans to climb onto barriers, then over the fence into a

narrow pen at the side.    There was a gate from the narrow pen onto the

pitch so fans could get out.     I took my turn, climbed over the fence

and got onto the pitch.     I know by this time the players had left the

pitch.

All I remember after this is that my spectacles were broken, and I
        just wandered around on the pitch.     I had no comprehension of what had

        happened, and in fact I asked a Policeman if I could get out of the

        ground, he directed me which way to go and I just left the ground.        I

        think it was still only about 3.20 pm (1520).     I wandered about

        outside the ground for seme time and eventually went back to the car,

                         were at the car but I did not see          again that

        day.

        I would just like to say that I feel that the tragedy started outside

        the ground, people failed to see what was occurring and did not have a

        plan to deal with the crowd.     I feel there was inadequate policing and

        stewarding.     No one seemed to have learnt the lessons of last year.




                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:   100789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         DC
                                                                        STATION

01E:

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 151089                                                          (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), together with my son       and

           brother                                                         we

           went to the semi final at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.

           We arrived around 1.15 pm (1315) parked the car and went into the

           ground at the Leppings Lane entrance.

           Because I had been to the semi final in 1988 (000088) I did not go

           into Pen 4 behind the goal posts because on that occasion I had got

           crushed behind a barrier owing to the large crowd caning down the

           tunnel and forcing their way onto the terraces.

           As a result of that experience I made my way to by the side of the

           North Stand by Gate 7 which is an elevated terrace which gives a

           better view of the match.

           At around 2.50 pm (1450) I was looking at Pen 3 and four and suddenly

           saw what had been gaps in the crowd by the perimeter fence fill up

           very quickly and the same thing happened that had occurred in 1988

           (000088) with supporters being crushed.   The two teams came out and

           play started but I was more concerned with the tremendous crush that

           was going on behind the goal posts at the West stand.   I could see
                                                                         2

fans trying to get out by climbing the perimeter fence and trying to

open the perimeter fence gates but the Police and Stewards did not

open them.

After a short time the match was stopped and the players left the

pitch.

People were still climbing over the fence and by that time the

perimeter gates had been opened and people were staggering onto the

pitch.

I then saw a supporter a man in his mid to late twenties stagger out

of gate 3 and go onto the pitch just past the penalty spot.   He was

staggering around and I thought at the time he was drunk, but realise

since it may have been the result of crushing and difficulty with

breathing.   A policeman in uniform and wearing a helmet walked towards

this man from the other end of the ptich from the North Stand

direction came up to him and just punched the man in the face.   The

supporter fell to the ground and I did not see any more of him because

of the increasing number of Policemen and supporters coming onto the

pitch. I cannot describe the Policeman any further because he was too

far away.

My specific complaint is that even if the supporter had of been drunk

the Policeman should not have punched him but should have helped him

or removed him off the pitch.   I am definite it was a punch and in no

way was the Policeman helping the supporter.
                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             DS
                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 061289                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.      I

           support Liverpool Football Club, but I have never had a season ticket.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) Liverpool were to play Nottingham

           Forest at Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, in the semi final of the

           F A Cup.   I had visited this football ground only once before and

           that was the year before, when again the same two teams were playing

           in the semi final of the F A Cup.

           In 1988 (000088) at Hillsborough I had stood behind the goal, in one

           of the central pens and was pushed about a bit.   I believe it was as

           bad in 1988 (000088) in the crowd as it was this year.   Within 20

           minutes of the game starting in 1988 (000088) I managed to get pulled

           up, out of Leppings Lane terraces and into the safety of the West

           Stand above.   I remained in the West stand for the rest of that

           particular game and shared a seat with someone.

           For the game on 15th April 1989 (150489) a friend Mr

           managed to get me a #6 ticket for the Leppings Lane terraces, this

           being the Liverpool end of the ground.

           On 15th April 1989 (150489), I left my house about 7.45 am (0745) that
morning.                   collected me, he was in a taxi we then

collected two other friends,

                     and

                                     The taxi took us to Lime St, Railway

Station in Liverpool, where we caught the 9.10 am (0910) train to

Sheffield.     The train went directly to Sheffield with to steps and

arrived in Sheffield at about 1230 hours (1230).

On arrival in Sheffield the passengers were met at the railway station

by the Police, who escorted us to some waiting double decker buses.

This surprised me, as we were not on a football supporters train, but

on the normal service train.      The bus drove us straight to the

Hillsborough Stadium, and the trip cost #1 each.      We all had to show

our ground tickets to the Police at the Railway station, before we

could get onto the buses.

During our journey we met other lads that I know frcm this area.        We

all next went into a public house in Sheffield.      There was bouncers on

the door, and they were only allowing Liverpool fans inside the pub.

This pub was called the Gate.      I had a drink and something to eat

there was no problem inside the pub.

We walked back towards the football ground, at the most a ten minute

walk and I arrived outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground at

about 2.30 pn (1430).

The area was packed I could see about 6 turnstile gates, but there was

 not 6 queues, just one large mass of people.      I was being squashed in

 this crowd.    I saw young kids who had fainted in this crowd as they

waited to go in.     They were carried off.    People were screaming mostly

 out of anger, to get the turnstile gates opened.      Not all of these

 gates were open at that time.                   and two or three friends

 were going into the stand.                    and I had tickets for the
Leppings Lane terracing.

I saw two mounted policemen outside and another one standing by a wall

outside the turnstile, for Leppings Lane, near the entrance at the

comer of the North Stand.      Two other policemen were on top of the

wall above the turnstiles, and they were helping fans enter the

ground, by pulling them over the wall.

With my friends I climbed the wall, I was helped on top of the wall by

a fan already on the top.   Once I was on top of the wall I helped the

next person up onto the wall, I had climbed the wall to escape the

crushing outside the ground.     The wall I climbed was between

turnstiles 'A and C'. I walked along the top of the wall and the

policeman there motioned me forward towards where he was.     I was then

able to climb down into the courtyard beyond the turnstiles. I never

seen any other gates opened at the ground.

             , and I were still together in this area I never saw any

signs indicating which way to enter the terrace.     There was a gate

inside this courtyard and a policeman standing beside it.     We walked

past this point, turned left and saw a tunnel ahead of us.     We walked

towards the tunnel. There was no police or stewards at the entrance

to the tunnel.   I could see through the tunnel, it was empty of fans.

I could see the heads of the players who were on the pitch.       We

entered the tunnel and once inside I could tell by the noise from the

crowd that the game had started.     It was by now 2 or 3 minutes past 3

oclock (1502) (1503) we had an easy passage along the tunnel.

On entering the terrace the three of us moved to our right into an

area known as pen 3.   We moved into the packed terrace and slightly

forward to get a view of the game.      I have indicated this position as

number 1, on a separate grid sheet, which I now produce (Exhibit

No      ) (Case Ref No         ).   This would be 3 or 4 minutes past 3
o'clock (1503) (1504).     The three of us stayed in this position for

seme minutes while play was still going on.

I found that I could not make my way forward any further in the

terracing.     The crowd was tightly packed together.    The three of us

had decided to move forward down the terracing, out of the density of

the crowd.     There was a tremendous surge from behind me.    This came

without warning.     The effect of this surge pushed all three of us

forward.

I have again marked this position on the same separate grid sheet,

which I now produce (Exhibit No         ) (Case Ref No        ) I have

marked this position as number 2.

The three of us were still together.     The game was still being played.

There was even more pressure on my body in this second position.         I

was now having trouble breathing.     I was sweating by now as well, as I

had on a coat.     As the pressure continued I got separated from my two

friends,           was closest to me, both were in front of me, I was

pushing back as hard as I could.

I next lost sight of           I didn't know what had happened to him.           I

could still see          , I saw his eyes were open, his face turned from

red to blue coloured and I could see that he was frothing at the

mouth.     As I continued forcing backwards I lost sight of

I could see people towards the front of the terracing who had black

coloured faces, due to the crowd pressure. I had by now a good idea

that these people were dead.     They all appeared limp, with no

straining of their muscles.

I also saw people on the ground, near the front of the terracing.            I

remember one                  lad, he had no shirt or trousers on, only

underpants.     This man was lying beneath a barrier to my right and

ahead of me, this man was white                  I later saw an
ambulanceman treating this nan on the pitch and trying to electrically

stimulate his heart.      I can't remember any others.

As I pushed back suddenly a gap opened up, and there was, for a brief

moment, a five foot gap in front of me and the crowd being crushed in

front of me.

This gap quickly filled up with fans, from the sides of the gap.        I

didn't notice what was happening      on the field.   There was   a lot of

screaming and shouting going on.       I saw lads being hauled up intothe

West Stand, as I had been the previous year.      People were climbing out

of this terracing over the perimeter fence.      People were starting to

walk back out of the tunnel, and out of the ground.

After about 10 minutes I walked towards      the back of the terracingand

into pen number 4.      It was quitequiet in this area.    The fencing at

the front was all kicked in.      I left pen 4, out the open gate onto the

pitch, to look for my two friends.

I spent a few minutes walking about the field looking for__________

            I saw a person being carried past me with a blanket over

his face.     The total scene was terrible with people running

everywhere.     I met        on the pitch he was lying down on his back.

He was in shock he lay beside the big lad I had seen earlier, lying on

the terrace, without his shirt or trousers.               ras getting his

breath back I looked up and saw             I went to him and we returned

to______

The three of us went and sat down on the pitch below the North Stand,

on the half way line and I heard DALGLISH come on the Tannoy as we sat

there.

The three of us left the ground via the area between the North Stand

and Spion Kop.     There were several, ambulances present in this area.

We walked all the way to the same Sheffield railway station for our
        train heme.     I got back to Lime St, Liverpool about 7.30 pn (1930).    I

        phoned my parents from there.




        As a result of this disaster I lost about #5 cash, a #5 note.     My

        injuries were a painful back, I had bruises on my back.    M[y feet had

        been badly stamped on.




        On match day I was wearing a                  jacket, blue jeans, white

        trainers, a blue                     I am a white male,




                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     PC
                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250589                                                          (SIGNED)



        At about 12.30pm (1230) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I left my

        heme in           to go to the match at Hillsborough in Sheffield.

           I had a ticket for the terraces in Leppings Lane which I paid #6 for

        which I obtained from Anfield ground.

           I left with two of my friends in a private car their names are




        We went along the motorway M63, and turned off at Stockport, and we

        went along the 'Snake Pass' towards Sheffield.

        The traffic was heavy on the motorway thats why we turned off and we

        never stopped on the way until we arrived in Sheffield at about 2.10pm

        (1410). After getting lost a few times on route, we ended up ccming

        past the Notts Forest end of the ground.

        I saw fans drinking outside Pubs on the way but no fighting or signs

        of drunkeness.

        We drove along the A61 and was directed by Police on traffic duty off

        the main road and we parked on a new housing estate somewhere near to

        Birley Carr.
                                                                         2

It was about 20 minutes walk to the ground and there were no fans

causing trouble on the way.   I couldn't see any pubs open either on

the way there.

I arrived with my friends at the ground at about 2.30 -2.35pm (1430-

1435) without any police escort or directions on route to the ground.

We were able to move easily until we got to the entrance and then we

were pestered by people asking for tickets outside the main crowd.

There were about three or four Police on horseback trying to step the

crowds pushing outside the gates, but I don't remember seeing any

outside the turnstiles or any Stewards. There was a group of Police

over to my left near to the turnstiles for the stands.

I went into the crowd outside the terrace turnstiles and I was pushed

around with the crowd and at one time I was lifted off my feet 1' with

the force of the crowd.

At one time I was near to the right hand barrier and my friends were

split up from me at this time and they were going around the comer,

the back of the terrace turnstiles.

I stopped where I was and I thought I 'd wait it out because if I lost

my place I'd never get in.

I could see people climbing over the top of the turnstiles and the

crowd cheered because they were getting in for free.

     called to me to carte with him and I stayed. The gate opened at

the side and the crowd went through.

I didn't actually see it open but I eventually went through the

turnstile and into the ground and my ticket was taken.

I got into the ground and met up with my other two friends, they still

had their tickets complete and they showed them to me.

We made our way towards the tunnel in front of us. At one time______

suggested we could have got into the stands because there was no one
__________________________________                                       3


on duty.

I didn't see any signs directing you to either side of the ground, all

I could see was the green in front of me, so I headed for that.

There was a Steward and Policeman inside but they were not directing

the crowds, they were standing near to the stands entrance I could

move freely down the tunnel until about three quarters of the

way down and then it was full and the crowd was going gradually

forward I didn't remember seeing any Police or Stewards inside the

tunnel all three of us stopped about half way down in the middle of

Pen 4, near to a barrier.

My back was against the barrier and I was trying to look at the play

on the pitch over the hands of the crowds.

There was a roar from the crowd, this must have been when BEARDSLEY

hit the bar with a shot, I was then pushed backwards into the barrier.

The crowd got tighter and tighter and I tried to push backwards but I

couldn't manage it.

There was a gap all of a sudden and then a girl was pushed towards me

and her head ended up crushed into my chest.

     was there trying to pull me back away from the barrier but the

pressure was too much, the gap had closed all of a sudden and it was

virtually impossible to move.

     caught hold of my jacket and pulled me sideways and he was able

to move me away slowly.

My jeans got caught on the support of the barrier and with

pulling me, it ripjped them.

I was pulled past the barrier and fell into the gap at the end of the

barrier.

Even though I was away from the barrier I was aware I was being pushed

forward, probably with the force of more people caning in
behind.

I was split up from        at this point and I went forward to my right

towards the pitch.

I was unable to go forward any more and I must have been close to the

fence because I tried to grab hold of it.

There were people climbing over my head towards the fence and I

remember walking over people underneath me. Everyone around was

screaming and shouting and there was shouts to push back but this was

impossible.

I made towards the gate which was opened inwards, there were hands

caning in trying to pull people out through the gap.

It was a mass of hands and bodies.

There was a man trapped behind the gate and the fence, he was in his

middle twenties.

There was a big man stuck bent over the step onto the pitch through

gate and there was another one trapped underneath him.

I remember pulling at his belt trying to free him but it was

impossible to move him. I don't think he was moved for seme time.

This man on top    of the other man was wearing aredtee-shirt, trousers

and a black belt. He had a large beer belly and he looked   to

me to be dead.

I managed to put my arm around the gate to try and get out. A

Policeman grabbed hold of my jacket and pulled it off. I managed to

get my leg around and then I was pulled free.

The Policeman who pulled me out was an Officer with a flat cap and

braids.

I was pushed onto the pitch and tried to recover and gain my breath. I

was sick on the    grass and was bent over.

All I could see    was arms and legs everywhere.
I saw someone trying to pull the netting down from the goals and I saw

a Policeman hitting him, he must have thought he was an hooligan, but

it was to make easy access to the fence. People were being thrown into

this and getting tangled up in it.

I came around and met up with a few friends on the pitch about 20

minutes after I got onto the pitch.

There was trouble with everyone around then, because of the situation

because of the cameras and photographers on the pitch.

I saw a camera taken from one of them, it was a T.V. camera and he had

a partner with him. The Police came and moved him off.

I helped carrying some of the fans back to the gymnasium on the news

hoardings.

I carried two bodies one was a man who I didn't look at directly, the

other was a young lad about 11 years old, he had a light shirt jeans

and trainers and he had a scarf tied around his wrist, he had blonde

spikey hair and freckles on his face.

I remember him because he fell off the board and I had to push him

back on.

I didn't recognise him but I described him to a friend later and his

mother was a friend of my mother.

I didn't ask what his name was but if necessary, I could find out.

He was in several newspaper pictures later I found out.I had enough

after this and I started looking around for my friends.

I tried everywhere and gave their names and descriptions and stopped

there until I found      at about 6pm (1800).

We went back to the car and eventually found        , we all stopped

there until about 9pm (2100).

We all phoned heme and we were directed to the Boy Club next to the

Police Station and were given tea and sandwiches by the people there.
                                                                        6


We all got hone about 10.15pm (2215).

I can appreciate why the fences at the ground are there, which is to

keep the fans off the pitch, but there could have been more

understanding from the majority of the Police.

They most have understood what was going on, people were being dragged

onto the pitch unconscious and they were being laid on their

back. Police were standing around. They could have been placed in a

recovery position by them, it was all done by the fans.

It seemed to me there was chaos inside and outside on the pitch.

It seemed to me that most of the Police seemed to be just interested

in any fans causing trouble.

I went to the ground last year for the semi-final and there was Police

checking tickets and filtering the crowd outside the ground. There

seemed a total lack of concern by the Police this year.

All want to know is why we were given the same end of the ground this

year after the crowds last year.

I would like to praise the first aiders and the ground staff for what

they did.

The Football Association should be held responsible partly for the

match allocation and the allocation of tickets.

There was a total lack of comminication before and after the match and

more information should have been given to the fans trying to find

their missing friends.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   250589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           POL PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                          (SIGNED)



        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended the FA Cup semi-final at

        Hillsborough.      I am a Liverpool supporter.   I travelled to the game

       with a group of friends in a van owned by

        purchased my ticket for the game from Anfield itself and paid #6.00

           for the standing area of the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough.

           I travelled to the game with ___________________________________




       On route to the game we didn't step anywhere.       The only delay we

           suffered was a road accident at the beginning of the M62.   We didn't

       drink on route to the ground, nor did I see any other supporters

       consuming alcohol.

       We arrived in Sheffield at about 2pm (1400) and parked the van in

        a road I believe was called Park Rd which is near Sheffield train station.

       As we walked from the van to the ground I saw approximately thirty police

       officers spread a good distance along the roads.       They weren't directing
                                                                            2

or escorting us, they seemed just to be concerned with protecting shops

and pubs and preventing fighting.     No one was fighting or drunk so the

police were just stood watching people walk by.

We arrived at the entrance to the ground at about 2.30pm (1430).

There was utter chaos around the turnstiles.      I would say there was a

couple of thousand fans around the turnstiles.     They were still

arriving in coaches as we were walking up to the ground.      These mass

of people were just trying to get in through the turnstiles.     The

only police officers I saw there were about 6 to 8 mounted police

officers.     They were trying to get the crowd into seme sort of order.

They were shouting at the crowd trying to get seme to get into the

part for the seated area.     Very few of the crowd were able to do

this, only a few who were at the back not in the crush, and same that

peeled off went to these turnstiles as directed.      I didn't see any

stewards at all.     Due to the mass of crowd I wasn't able to see where

exactly the turnstile I wanted was.      I just joined the mass of people

that I thought were for the standing area.     It wasn't until I got

close to the turnstiles that I realised it was for the seating area.

I then had to turn round and join the crowd and push my way through to

get through to the turnstile for the standing area.     By this time all

of us had still managed to stay together.     The only gates I saw open

were the turnstiles and I didn't witness any other gates being opened.

I didn't see anyone trying to climb into the ground, those without

tickets.    All I saw was people who were in the crush outside the

turnstiles climbing up on the wall and fencing to get out of the

crush.     Seme of these actually climbed up onto the roof of the

turnstiles and were helping others up.

Once I got inside the ground after handing my ticket in at the

turnstile I didn't see any signs to my match viewing point.      I walked
__________________________                                                   3


straight from the turnstile down the tunnel which was clear and stood

at the end watching the match which had just started, the players were

actually on the pitch.     I was trying to get my bearings at the end of

the tunnel trying to sort out where I was eventually going to stand.

I saw no police officers or stewards at all at this point in the

ground.     No one was fighting or causing trouble and I didn't see

anyone drinking.     All I can say is as soon as I entered the stand I

irrrnediately noticed that the stand was particularly packed.      The

crowd never seented to be still.    They seented to be pushing and

shoving one another trying to sort themselves out.      I did not see or

was I aware that a barrier in the stand I was stood had broke.

I must have entered from the tunnel at about 3pm (1500) I was there

only a very short time when all of a sudden there was a surge from

behind me from the tunnel.     I don't know what caused the surge but it

most have been people coming from behind from the tunnel.        From the

position I was stood just by the tunnel in pen three.      I was pushed

down the stand to position on your grid 4B.     At that point I was just

in a mass of people, I couldn't move my arms or my legs.        By this

time I'd lost track of where my friends were.     I was stood with

people I don't know.     I was in the crush for about three or four

minutes when a man stood directly in front of me tripped or just fell

and ended up on the floor.    A younger man of about 20 years who was

stood to my left bent over and tried to pull the other man up.       As he

bent over I was pushed forward and I nearly fell on top of them both

because by now the younger man had also been pushed over onto the

floor.    The only way I stopped myself was to push myself back with my

foot.     I actually had to push against the two men who were on the

floor.    There was nothing else I could do because I knew that if I

fell on the floor I also would be in trouble.     As I pushed back I
                                                                              4


slipped through to the left and the crowd was closed over the two

people on the floor.    I don't think these two men had any chance of

surviving with that crowd on top of them.

I can only describe the 20 year old as having black hair and was

wearing a black leather jacket.     The other man who I would say was

about 45-50 years, he was wearing a dark coloured, possibly blue,

nylon parker style coat.      His hair was going grey and he was wearing

gold rimmed tinted glasses.

All the time the crush just seemed to be constant.      Police officers

stood on the touch line were trying to get people to push back.          It

was quite obvious to me that people were being killed and injured,

however Police officers all seemed to be confused, didn't seem to be

able to assist.   I could see a small gate at the front of the fence

but none of the officers opened the gate to allow people out.        By

this time people were climbing over one another trying to get out of

the crush and seme were climbing over the fence at the front.        I

don't know how long I was stood in this stand being crushed, I don't

know why I was able to but I managed to fight my way through the crowd

back to the tunnel.

When I reached the tunnel it was clear there were a few people still

stood right at the entrance to the tunnel just seeming to be watching

what was going on.     Very few people were making their way back

through the tunnel from the terraces to relieve the crush there.          I

walked up the tunnel, I was not obstructed in any way.      I did not see

any signs of any persons injured or dying in the tunnel.      I walk

round to the left and took a position in pen one.      I climbed up onto

a wall and watched what was happening in the terraces.      By now

hundreds of people seemed to be climbing over the fences to get out.

By now I could see that the front gate in pen three was open but due
__________________________                                                  5


to the crush no one seemed to be coming out.     Eventually people

started being pulled and dragged out.      I stood on the wall then

watching as people were dragged out and tended to on the pitch.

There was a public announcement that there would be no more football.

I waited a few minutes and left the ground at about 4.15pm (1615) and

made my way back to the van.      I didn't witness anything that I would

consider to be a   criminal offence.    All I can say about how the

incident was handled is that there seemed to be a great delay in

getting the gates open at the front.     Also that mounted officers who

were outside the turnstiles had at one stage formed a line across

trying to control the crowd trying to stop more people getting into

the crush.   The horses were being pushed out the way.       One officer I

don't know what his rank was then directed the rest of the mounted

officers to back off which they did.     If they had of stayed in their

position they may have stopped sane of the crush.

Last year I attended the same semi-final    at the ground.   At this game

there was a cordon of   police officers in Leppings Lane.    They were

stopping everyone and   not letting people through withouta ticket.

They were controlling   the flow of people through to theturnstiles

which made things more orderly.     This did not happen at this year's

game.

As a result of the crush I received bruises to both my legs.      They

were not severe and I have not received any medical treatment.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC
                                                                     1/89 STATION

                GRAHAM
                KELLY

ADDRESS:        16, LANCASTER GATE
                LONDON, LONDON, W23IW

Affi / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION: CHIEF EXECUTIVE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION



           I, Graham KELLY of the Football Association, 16 Lancaster Gate, London

           W2 will say as follows:

           PERSONAL DETAILS:

           1.   I am the Chief Executive of the Football Association Limited

           ("FA").   I have held that post for 3 months having succeeded Mr E A

           CROKER on his retirement in February 1989.     I was previously

           Secretary of the Football League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the

           League in 1968 and progressed through the post of assistant

           secretary frcm 1973(000073) to 1979(000079).

           2.   I have already made a statement about events at Hillsborough on 15

           April 1989 (150489) and have, I hope, made clear my feelings

           about what happened.     In this statement I deal with further

           matters possibly material to the first phase of the Inquiry, the

           functions of the FA and the allocation by the FA of the match to

           Hillsborough.   The FA wish to put in considerable further evidence

           to the second phase of the Inquiry dealing with the wider issues.

           THE FA.

           3.   The FA is a company limited by shares, most of which are held by

            representatives of associations with football clubs in England

           and Wales.    The share capital consists of   100 divided into 2,000

           shares of 5p each.     A shareholder is not entitled to any dividend,

           bonus or profit.     The FA acts through its Council and Ccmnittees. The

           Inquiry will have been provided with the FA Handbook which is
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                            2

amended and re-printed every year and contains amongst other

material the Memorandum, Articles of Association and Rules of the FA,

Standing Orders, Powers and Duties of Coninittees, Laws of the Game and

Rules of the FA Cup.

THE FA'S ACTIVITIES

4.   The FA is the governing body of the game of Association

Football in England and Wales and has been established as such

since 1863.   It sanctions, directly or through one or more of its

affiliated County Football Associations, in excess of 2,000 leagues

and competitions. Best known of these is the Football League.      The

Football Association is governed by a Council, which is made up of

nominees and elected representatives of various bodies involved in the

 game including those Clubs in full membership of the Football

Association, County Football Assoications and the Management Gcwmittee

of the Football League.    All major decisions including those involving

policy are made by the Council, which meets approximately 6 times a

year.

5.   The FA's major object is to promote the sport of Association

Football in the UK in all its various aspects.    It aims to ensure that

the game is played to the highest possible standards, both in terms of

skill and behaviour, by the greatest number of people and tries at all

times to present the game to the public in the best possible light.

It is concerned with raising standards through the organisation of

coaching and other educational activities and encourages early

participation by children in football through grants and loans.

6.   We organise 6 national competitions, including the Football

Assoication Challenge Cup ("FA Cup") and an annual charity match

called the Football Association Charity Shield Match, played at the

beginning of the football year between the FA Cup Winners and the
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                              3


Football League champions for the previous year.

7.    The FA is responsible for all arrangements concerning teams

representing England at all levels, (senior, "B", under 21, semi-

professional and youth). It is responsible through the County

Football Associations for the recruitment and promotion of referees

and operates a referee training programme within its coaching

activities.    It enforces the Laws of the Game.   In conjunction with

the Football League it controls the broadcasting of all football

matches in England.

8.    The main income of the FA derives from revenues generated from

international matches and competitions, from interests in investments,

from royalties received from the Pool Promoters Association and other

organisations and from fees paid by broadcasting organisations, in

particular television.    This income is put back into football.

9.    Because of problems of crowd safety and control both here and

abroad, the FA now employs three experienced ex-policemen;

                                and          , as consultants who visit

matches thought likely to cause problems and advise generally.

        attended the 1988 semi-final at Hillsborough between Liverpool

and Nottingham Forest. His report is at pages 1 to 3 attached and as

can be seen he reported that the tie went well.     The identical 1989

tie was not regarded as a "problem" match and the three consultants

were deployed elsewhere.

THE FA CUP

10.     Briefly, the FA Cup is a knock-out competition in which opposing

teams are decided by a draw in every round and (prior to the semi­

final) the matches are played on the grounds of the teams whose names

are drawn first.    The FA can order a tie to be played elsewhere. The

major teams (the Football League First and Second Division teams) are
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                               4


brought into the competition only in the Third Round.     At later stages

there may be smaller "non-League" clubs or Third or Fourth Division

Clubs which have survived.      There are therefore on occasion ties in

which a large established club must play a very small one on the small

club's ground.    The contest between the smaller and larger

clubs (with the chance of the smaller winning on the day) is widely

held to be one of the main attractions of the FA Cup.

11.     The final of the FA Cup is played at Wembley Stadium in London.

Semi-finals are played on neutral grounds (ie not on the ground of

either contestant).

12.     Most Cup ties are keenly followed by the fans of the clubs

involved and semi-finals are big occasions in the football year often

with a great demand for tickets.

THE COMPETITIONS DEPARTMENT AT THE FA

13.     This Department consists of the competitions Secretary, Mr Steve

CLARK, with one assistant.      He has held this position for 6 years.

Prior to this Adrian TITGQMBE held the position for 10 years and now

supervises Mr CLARK's Department, among others.      They liaise closely,

and Mr CLARK draws on Mr TITCQMBE's considerable experience. I have

spoken to both Adrian TITCQMBE and Steve CLARK and the information

contained in this section is either derived from my own knowledge or

from matters I have learnt from documents or in my discussions with

them.

14.     Mr CLARK deals with the mechanics of organisation of the various

FA competitions including the FA cup, under the direction of Mr

TITCQMBE, the Chief Executive or* the appropriate Cup Committee.       In

the case of the FA Cup semi-finals this includes establishing which of

the clubs whose grounds are likely to be suitable are willing to stage

a tie and gathering necessary data about those grounds.      He then
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                               5


liaises as may be necessary with the clubs involved.    He has little

involvement once the grounds have been selected for the two ties.

15.   The staging of an FA Cup semi-final must obviously take account

of all the problems usually associated with staging a major football

match in modem conditions, but each semi-final tie will or should

have been allocated to the ground of a staging club familiar with such

problems.    The main problem in modem times has been the necesssity to

segregate rival supporters both at the match and while coming to and

departing from the ground, and this requires substantial planning and

co-operation with the local police.

16.     The FA, therefore, having chosen two staging clubs (and clubs for

possible replays) does not seek to control the direct organisation of

a semi-final tie (in the sense of police provision, crowd control,

medical support, etc.) which are dealt with by the staging club.       We

are not equipped in terms of staff and local knowledge to deal with

these matters, and I think it would be unwise, and would only

cause confusion, if the FA became involved in them.    We appoint

the match officials and are involved with arrangements for press

and television.     We also print a booklet entitled "FA Challenge

Cup Semi-Final Arrangements" sent to the carpeting and staging

clubs which is up-dated every year.     A copy of the booklet sent

out for this year's semi-finals is attached at pages 4 to 11.

17.     Accordingly the FA is not normally invited to or involved in

planning meetings between the staging club and the relevant

authorities and is not copied with resulting documents, for instance

Police Operations Orders for the ties.     We did not attend meetings or

receive documents for Hi1lsborough this year.     However, after the 1988

semi-final venue had been chosen as Hillsborough, for the Liverpool

Nottingham Forest tie, Mr TITCQMBE did attend a meeting there between
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                             6


representatives of Sheffield Wednesday, Liverpool, Nottingham Forest

and the police at which Liverpool sought unsuccessfully to persuade

the police to reverse their decision on allocation of ends of the

ground.    Liverpool's position was that they as the club with greater

support were being allocated fewer tickets because of the allocation

of ends and other parts of the ground.     The FA would have been content

if this attempt had succeeded.

18.     I should perhaps add that the organisation of the Cup Final at

Wembley Stadium is different because there is no "staging Club" and

the FA is involved in meetings with the company which owns the stadium

and which organises events there both for Cup Finals and International

Matches (as well as many non-football events).

TICKET ALLOCATION

19.     The purpose of Rule 26(b) of FA Challenge and Cup Rules, which

provides that subject of variation by the FA each carpeting club

should have 50%    of the tickets sold, is that there should not be a

"home ground" atmosphere for one club from obtaining a markedly

greater number of tickets.      In practice the allocation to carpeting

clubs is now dictated by the need for segregation and the capacity of

the sections of the ground allocated to each club's supporters on

police advice to the staging club, which will be dictated by the

configuration of the stands and terraces. Both at Hillsborough and at

Villa Park this results in an imbalance of about 4,000 tickets between

the two clubs.

20.     Accordingly, the staging clubs consult the police in the usual

way, accept their advice on allocation of ends and then liaise direct

with the competing clubs. They also print the tickets for the tie and

distribute them to the two clubs (after reservation of some tickets

for the FA and for themselves).      Hie two clubs would then have sold
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                               7


those tickets.    Unless there is a particular problem which cannot be

resolved the FA is not consulted during this process.

PROCEDURE FOR SELECTING VENUE

21.     A list of grounds at which semi-finals have been staged over the

last twenty years has been prepared and is at page 12 attached.       It

will be seen that excluding this year, Hillsborough had staged 13 ties

and Villa Park (at Aston Villa in Birmingham) 12 with 5 replays.      The

F.A. Challenge Cup Committee decides venue.    The Committee members

when deciding the venue in 1989(000089) did have amongst their papers

for another item a sheet which sets out venues and attendances for

the last 10 years.

22.     There was an incident at Hillsborough at the 1981(000081) semi­

final between Spurs and Wolves which appears to have involved a crowd

surge with some 38 injuries requiring medical treatment.    I learned

about this but not the detail of it from Glen KIRTGN, the Head of

External affairs at the F.A. on Sunday 16 April(160489).    I now refer

to the letter from the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to my

predecessor, Mr CROKER dated 3 June 1981(030681) at pages 13-15 for

details. The crowd capacity was different then because considerable

changes have been made to the ground between 1981-9(000081)-(000089)

This incident appeared to have had its origin in fans being able to

buy tickets allocated to their rivals.    It coincided with a campaign

by local residents and the local MP to stop semi-finals being held at

Hillsborough.    No semi-finals were played there for seme years.     In

1986 (000086), Hillsborough was selected for a possible semi final

replay which was not needed.    In 1987(000087), Hillsborough appeared

convenient for the semi-final between Leeds United and Coventry City

and was again selected.

23.     Mr CLARK followed normal procedure this year.   A letter in
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                               8


standard form was sent to 13 clubs on 24 February 1989(240289) (pages

16-17) and replies were received from all of than of which those from

the two selected staging clubs Sheffield Wednesday and Aston Villa

are included at pages 18-21 and are fairly typical.     A list was

compiled on the basis of the replies giving relevant details of the 13

grounds (page 22).    We do sometimes get representations from a club

asking to be considered, since it is a matter of prestige and

financial benefit to stage a semi-final tie.

24.     The draw for the semi-final ties was made on BBC TV and radio at

7.45am (0745) on Monday 20 March 1989 (200389).     Liverpool were drawn

to play Nottingham Forest.      Everton were drawn to play the winners of

a replay between Norwich and West Ham.

25.      The decision as to venue was to be taken by the FA Challenge Cup

Committee at a meeting at 11.30am (1130) on the same day, there being

a sub- committee meeting concerned with artificial pitches at 11am

( 1100 ) .

26.      I consider that as Chief Executive I should have a

recommendation for the Ccmnittee on matters such as this. I had

discussed grounds with Mr TITCOMBE and Mr CLARK on the previous Friday

and I again discussed the matter with Mr CLARK after the draw but

before the Ccjnnittee meeting.     We came to a provisional view that the

Everton tie should go to Villa Park and the Liverpool tie should be a

repeat of the previous year at Hillsborough which had gone well.      I

was told by Mr CLARK later that morning of a telephone call made to

him by Mr Peter ROBINSON of Liverpool FC concerning the possible

selection of Hillsborough for their tie asking for the Penistone Rd

End of the ground and not the Leppings Lane end (ie reversing the

allocations for the previous year, which Liverpool had complained gave

them a lesser allocation of tickets).      As I understood it, Mr ROBINSON
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                              9


was pointing out that we could expect complaints frcm Liverpool

supporters if they got less tickets for the second year running when

Liverpool were known to have the larger support, and that this would

be raised in the press and we should realise this. Mr CLARK had

telephoned Mr MACKRELL at Sheffield Wednesday to see if the police

would allow allocation of the Penistone Road End to Liverpool.      Just

before llam(llOO) the return call from Mr MACKRELL (who had spoken to

the police) indicated that the police would require the allocation to

remain as last year in order to avoid a clash of rival supporters

approaching or leaving the ground.     On matters like this the staging

club and the FA are really bound to accept the view of the police.

27.     We did not feel that Liverpool's point outweighed the reasons

for staging the tie at Hillsborough.     The factors on which I would

place weight in deciding venue, and which I understand frcm FA staff

and ccjnnittee members are considered significant, are as follows (not

in any order of importance):

(i)     Geography, not only of the two clubs but of travel routes

(hooliganism en route can be a problem)

(ii)    Capacity.   This tie needed a big ground and Hillsborough is one

of the largest, holding 6,000 more than Villa Park.

(iii) Experience as a staging club.     Obviously Sheffield Wednesday are

very experienced.

(iv)    Security at the ground.   Mr EVANS' report had been favourable in

the previous year.

(v)     Whether the club was playing at hcrne in the League on the day of

the tie and would have to postpone the League match.     This is not of

any great weight, and indeed Aston Villa, Sheffield Wednesday and

Manchester United were all playing at hone.

 (vi)   The feeling that it was better not to play a tie in the hone
KELLY                  GRAHAM                                             10


city of one of the competing clubs, eg. a tie involving Liverpool at

Everton.    It gives "heme advantage" from a travelling point of view,

and the last three instances (Wolves-Spurs replay at Highbury

(Arsenal) in 1981(000081), Liverpool-Manchester United at Goodison

Park (Everton) in 1985(000085) and the same tie replay at Maine Rd

(Manchester City in 1985(000085)) all involved crowd trouble with, in

two of the ties, damage to local residential areas.

28.     I knew that Mr Jack WISEMAN would attend the meeting and that

the Ccnmittee would seek his advice.     He is Chairman of the Match and

Grounds Ccmnittee (since 1980(000080)) and has great experience.        I am

told that his recommendation is usually adopted.     I spoke to him a

few moments before the meeting began at 11.30. (1130) He told me he

favoured Villa Park and Hillsborough because last year had gone well.

I told him about the point raised by Liverpool that they would again

get less tickets.     He indicated that this did not change his view.

29.     At 11.30am (1130) the Challenge Cup Ccnmittee met with Mr Ernest

BRCWN in the chair.    A copy of relevant parts of the agenda and

Minutes is at pages 23-29.      Apart from the agenda the committee would

have no other relevant documents before than.

30.     It is difficult for me to recollect exactly what points were

raised.    Mr WISEMAN'S advice was sought, and Villa Park was

inmnediately agreed for the Everton tie.     One member raised Manchester,

 and on request Mr CLARK indicated that it was the turn of Manchester

United of the two Manchester clubs.      I believe that the main point

which prevailed with members, seme of whom I believe had attended

Hillsborough in 1988(000088), was that the identical tie had been well

handled    then.   There was no dissent to allocation of the tie to

Hillsborough and the replay to Old Trafford.      Neither I nor Jack

WISEMAN mentioned the call from Mr ROBINSON in the Ccnmittee meeting.
          KELLY                  GRAHAM                                               11



 *        31.     Iirmediately afterwards Mr CLARK was instructed to contact the

          clubs involved as soon as possible, which I understand he did.      He

          later sent the arrangements booklet for 1988/9(000088)/(000089) in the

          normal way.    As I have said the FA did not participate in any meetings

          about the arrangements at Hillsborough (or Villa Park) and were not

          copied with documents concerning arrangements.

          32.     Since the tragedy I have heard criticism of the choice of

          Hillsborough for the tie.       In view of what has happened, I do not want

          to speak of "right" or "wrong" choices, but I do think that it was

          natural to allocate the tie to Hillsborough as a repeat of the

          previous year.    It is particularly shocking for me and I believe many

          people involved in organising major football matches that this should

          have occurred at an all-ticket match on a ground where so many

          previous big matches had been played.

          GRAHAM KELLY
                                                                             SIGNED

  STATEMENT TAKEN
            PLACE:

            TIME:              DATE:

  WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

"^fcpFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                           829
Incident    102      250790 OP4909         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER      S1198

                                                                       1/89     Station

Surname              KIRTON

Forenames            GLEN

Age                                           Date of birth

Address               16, LANCASTER GATE
                      LONDON W2

Occupation            HEAD OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Telephone

IC                   Height                   Build

Hair colour

H^p" type

Eyes                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                170589                                                      Signed


           I GLEN KIRTON of the Football Association, 16 Lancaster Gate London W2

           WILL SAY as follows

           I am employed by The Football Association and my title is "Head of

           External Affairs."     I carry responsibility for Hie Football

           Association's Commercial and Public Relations activities.          I have been

           employed by Hie Football Association for seventeen and a half years.

           In my first two years, I was Competitions Secretary.        I have attended

           one or more F.A. Cup semi-finals in all but one of my years as an F.A.

           employee.

           1.     I travelled to Hillsborough on the morning of the match with my

           son,                   , and arrived at the ground at 10.35 a.m. (1035)

           2.     I immediately made contact with Graham Mackrell the Club's Chief

           Executive and handed to him, on behalf of the Competitions Department,

           the few tickets that remained in our possession.        We then
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S1198

went for a quick walk round the V.I.P.     accommodation and the dressing

rocm area so that I could familiarise myself once more with

the layout of the ground.    Vfe had a brief look at the pitch at this

stage.

3.   At 12 noon (1200) I went with          to the official lunch which

started late at around 12.45 p.m. (1245) and I left the lunch at

around 2.10 p.m. (1410)     I p u t i n     the guest lounge and went

with Arthur McMullen the F.A. 's Vice Chairman to see Ray Lewis in the

referees rocm.   Vfe stayed there for no more than five minutes wishing

the officials the best of luck on behalf of The Football

Association.   Arthur McMullen then returned, I believe to the Board

Room, and I stayed in the dressing rocm area.

4.   At around 2.40 p.m. (1440) I was on the perimeter track by the

player's tunnel with Graham Mackrell looking round the ground.    It was

clearly nowhere near full at this stage.    Graham told me that there

were 20,000 still outside.    Calling to mind the 1987 semi-finals at

Villa Park and Hillsborough when the kick-off of both had been delayed

at the request of the Police, I asked Graham whether, on this

occasion the Police wanted a delay.    His answer was that they did not,

because pulling back the kick-off produced all sorts of

organisational problems at the end of the game.    I would stress that

at this stage I was completely unaware of any danger to spectators and,

to the best of my knowledge, Graham Mackrell had also not been

informed of any such danger. At around this time I returned to the

Guest Room and took          to his seat in the Director's Box,

returning immediately to the tunnel area.    I remained there until kick-

off time, principally because there was a great amount of press

interest in Brian Clough who had been banned frcm sitting on the bench

for the rest of the season but was allowed for this match to sit in

the seats immediately behind the substitute bench.    I was in this area




                                                                               829B
                                                                   PAGE       3
                                                                   S1198

at the time the players came onto the field, I believe the Liverpool

team first, followed around thirty seconds later by the Nottingham

Forest team.     Shortly before the kick-off, Brian Clough came out and

went iirmediately to his seat.    At this stage, with the match about to

kick- off I returned to my seat in the Director's Box.

5.    Shortly after the start of the game I was aware of movement

amongst the spectators at the Leppings Lane end and my immediate

thought was that there was seme form of hooligan disturbance, as the

Police appeared to be attempting to contain a movement of supporters.

I was aware at the same time that Liverpool were attacking the

Nottingham Forest goal and that an incident had taken place in the

Nottingham Forest goalmouth.           told me that Peter Beardsley had

hit the bar from a comer.      Nottingham Forest then took the play down

into the Liverpool half and I was aware that the disturbance behind

the goal at the Leppings Lane end was becoming more serious with

people caning over the fence onto the perimeter and much Police

activity.   I did see people being pulled up into the stand above.        I

saw one police officer wrestling with someone trying to get over the

fence.   A Police Officer ran onto the pitch and waved to Ray Lewis to

stop the game.    I iirmediately went fron the Director's Box to the

pitch by the player's tunnel and found Graham Kelly already there.        A

lot of people began to mill about the area.    There were Police

Officers, seme supporters, photographers, St. John Ambulance personnel

and the officials of both clubs.    Almost immediately Ray Lewis brought

the teams off the pitch.    I asked him how much of the match had gone

by.   He told me approximately six minutes.   At this stage one youth

ran fron the Liverpool end of the ground and stood in front of the

Forest supporters on the Kop making obscene gestures to them.      This

evoked an angry response and, when the youth was chased and brought to

the ground by a Police Officer a huge roar of approval went up fron




                                                                                  a?9C
                                                                  PAGE      4
                                                                  S1198
the Forest supporters.

6.      I found a Police Sergeant who was clearly under seme pressure, and

asked him to put us in touch iirmediately with the Police Officer in

charge of the event for the purpose of information.     At this stage

John Smith, the Chairman of Liverpool, began to make demands himself

for The Football Association to call the match off.     I explained to

him that we had requested advice from the Police as to whether or not

the match should be abandoned or suspended for a period.     It was at

about 3.15 p.m. (1515) that it became apparent to us for the first time

that there might well be fatalities.     Graham Kelly and I then went

immediately with Graham Mackrell to the Police Control Room and spoke

to the Officer in charge, Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield told us that a gate had been forced

and there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters that had caused

casualties.    He pointed to one of the TV Monitors to show the gate.

He was not clear at that stage as to tow many dead and injured there

were.    He stated that in his view the match must be abandoned, but

that he did not want such an announcement made for the moment as he

had "a lot of angry people" and he feared disturbances if such an

announcement was made.    He also wished to have time for the emergency

vehicles to clear away the casualties from the area.    Vfe asked that we

be informed immediately an announcement could be made and left the

Control Room as it was extremely cramped.    I should remark that it was

clear to me from the scenes in front of me that many people were

dead and injured and whatever action was being taken to help these

people was haphazard.    By this I mean that there appeared to be no

central organisation or control in directing the people on the pitch.

I should also add that Graham Kelly, who was recognised by the

Liverpool supporters in the Leppings Lane end was loudly abused by

these supporters who clearly felt that the incident was in some way
                                                                  PAGE    5
                                                                  S1198

the responsibility of The Football Association.    Throughout the day,

many Liverpool supporters who passed within ray hearing made the

comment that they blamed The Football Association's ticket allocation.

7.   On leaving the Control Room, Graham Kelly called a meeting of all

interested parties including representatives of the clubs, the referee

and the Police Commander.   The Police Commander explained at this time

that he had withheld the decision about an abandonment as he felt that

it might be necessary for security reasons to have the match

continued.    I spent much of the time between the end of this meeting

and 4.00 p.m. fending off newsmen who were looking for comment.    I

premised them that there would be a full statanent by The Football

Association as soon as the immediate needs of the situation had been

dealt with.

8.   At 4.00 p.m. ,(1600) approximately, I was informed that Nottingham

Forest were becoming restless and threatening to leave the Stadium.

Graham Kelly went immediately to the dressing room to sort out the

situation and I went to the Control Room to ascertain at what stage

the final decision was likely to be made.   While I was in the Control

Room waiting to speak to the Commander, a uniformed person whom I took

to be a Fire Officer came in and asked for the ambulance liaison man.

The Police Commander stated that he had asked for one but had not been

provided with one.   While I was waiting, the decision was made that

the match could now be abandoned.    I left the Control Box to convey

this information to various interested parties, but before I could get

back to the Board Room area an announcement was made over the tannoy.

As I recall the substance of this announcement was that the match had

been abandoned; spectators were asked to stay where they were for a

few minutes and remain calm to allow the emergency services to clear

the casualties; and persons should hold their ticket stubs pending an

announcement of a possible replay.   The announcanent was greeted with
                                                                    PAGE       6
                                                                    S1198

a round of applause from the supporters above and around me in the

main Stand.    I do not know what the reaction of the supporters on the

terraces was as I could not see from the position I was in.

9.    Once all of the relevant persons had been informed of the

abandonment I began to organise the passing of the necessary

information on to the media.    Graham Kelly conducted interviews with

t.v., radio and the written press.     At around this stage, I met Rogan

Taylor, Chairman of the F.S.A. in the dressing rocm area.      He

complained to me in strong terms about the actions of the police.         In

particular, he repeated what I had overheard stated by several

supporters during the afternoon, which was that the gates had not been

forced but had been opened at the direction of the police and that

supporters had been admitted to the ground without tickets being

checked.

10.   I then gave my attention to attempting to reach people outside

the ground by telephone to inform them of what had happened as we knew

it and the action that was being taken.     Richard Faulkner the Vice

Chairman at the Football Trust assisted me with some telephone numbers

in attempting to reach Colin Moyniham.    I also spoke to

an employee of the F.A. who was on Saturday phone duty for The

Football Association and who was being swamped by calls that he was

unable to give any meaningful answers to.     Among the calls he had

received was one from                             of Manchester United

concerning the possible reply on Wednesday.     It was decided by Graham

Kelly that the match could not take place and I asked          to pass

this message on to                 I also asked him to phone my wife

           to let her know that both        and I were safe.

11.   The attention of the press was now turned to the Police who,

according to the press, had made no statanent on the situation.      At

first a rumour spread that the Police Commander was to give a
                                                                     PAGE    7
                                                                     S1198

conference in the old gymnasium at the club at 6.00 p.m. (1800) This

was refuted by a Police Press Officer who knew nothing about any such

plans.   At about 6.00 p.m. (1800) a high ranking Police Officer

announced that there would be a Press Conference given by South

Yorkshire Police at the Central Police Station in town at 6.45 p.m.

(1800)   It was agreed that Graham Kelly would remain at the ground and

that I should attend the Press Conference.     It was also decided and

announced at seme stage during the proceedings that The Football

Association would be making no decisions on the possible reply of the

game in the next forty-eight hours, but that a press conference would

be held at Lancaster Gate at 3.00 p.m. (1500) the following day.

While driving to the Police Station, I attempted to phone .

         the F.A.'s caretaker to ask him to open the office for this

conference.     There was no answer from The Football Association.

Immediately aftemwards,              managed to contact me on my mobile

phone and we agreed that she would attempt to contact

and that she would arrange for the office to be opened at 9.00 a.m.

(0900) on Sunday morning. 12.     I attended the press conference which

was given by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr Peter Wright.

He was half an hour late arriving and was clearly very ill-informed

about what had happened.    He announced that ninety-three were dead,

two hundred injured of which eight-three had been detained.     He said

he could not say what was the cause of these deaths.     He said there

had been pressure on the outside turnstiles by 3-4,000 people arriving

no earlier than five minute before the kick-off.     He was not aware of

any non-ticket holders trying to get in.     He said that there was room

in the stand.    He then responded to some very aggressive questioning.

He said that a gate had been opened with Police permission, in fact

at Police direction, he knew who had opened the gate but he was not

able to divulge the name.    He said the gate had been opened because of




                                                                                 829G   i
                                                                    PAGE    8
                                                                    S1198

the danger to life outside the ground.      In response to a question as

to how many officers were on duty he said eight hundred, of which

fifteen were mounted officers outside the ground.      He went on to refer

to another gate which he said had been shut to avoid crushing and

that this gate had been forced open.      After fifteen minutes or so he

said he could answer no further questions and attempts to elicit any

more answers from the Police were resisted angrily by one of Mr.

Wright's colleagues.      At 7.45 p.m., (1945) I returned to Hillsborough

with Andy Williamson of The Football League who had also been at the

press conference and briefed Graham Kelly on what had been said.        I

left Hi 1lsborouogh at 8.00 p.m. (2000) and collected my son who had

been taken to the home of Graham Mackrell by Graham Mackrell's

girlfriend. 13.     I drove back to London and arrived home at midnight.

14.     I should add that I have been interviewed on 9th May 1989

(090589) in the presence of the FA's solicitor by Superintendent

Fancott and Chief Superintendent Baker, of the West Midlands Police

Force who are gathering evidence for the judicial inquiry.      I was

asked questions which are contained in a questionnaire for selected

persons and I should now deal with those matters not covered so far

that are raised in the questionnaire.

      i) I did attended the same fixture last year,

  ii) I drove to the ground,

 iii)     I did not witness any disorder or consumption of alcohol in the

         streets around the ground,

  iv) I did not witness any crowd build-up or crushing at the Leppings

         Lane entrance.    I did not see any of the other entrances.    I did

         not witness any unauthorised entry into any part of the ground,

  v) I did not witness alcohol being brought into the ground or

         being consumed inside the ground and did not witness any

         situation which I thought at the time was disorderly except
                                                                  PAGE       9
                                                                  S1198

        that I did see one supporter who ran onto the pitch and made

        obscene gestures at the Nottingham Forest fans which took up

        the attention of two to three police officers.

  Vi)   I did have a good view of the West Stand and clearly saw the

        standing area.   I did not see any incident in that area which I

        believe could have contributed to the disaster.

 vii)   I did not see anything which I believe was directly concerned

        with the breaking of a barrier in Pen 3.

viii)   I took up my match viewing position just before kick-off.

  ix)   I did not see any unusual crowd surge either in Pen 3 or Pen 4.

   x)   I did not witness the death of any person.   I did not assist any

        of the deceased or injured.

  xi)   The only act I witnessed by supporters which obstructed either

        police, stewards or medical persons was the chap I have

        mentioned who ran onto the pitch.

 xii)   I was not personally subjected to any threats or violence.       I

        did not witness anything that I considered to be a criminal act

        by any person.

xiii)   I have never been present or had any experience of any other

        football tragedy.

xiv)    Nothing was brought to my attention which was significantly

        different frcm last year's match which would in my view be a

        contributory factor to the disaster.

 xv)    I have one comment to make as to the way the disaster was

        controlled following the recognition of the incident.    In my

        view it was a long time between the incident and when the final

        decision was taken by the police to abandon the match.    The

        Public was not kept fully informed as to what was happening.
                                             PAGE
                                             S1198


                                GLEN KIRTON SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:        DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                           82 9J
Incident    102     050390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER S1327

                                                                              Station

Surname              CLARK

Forenames            STEPHEN   RICHARD

Age                   37                      Date of birth

Address              16, LANCASTER GATE
                     LONDON W2

Occupation

Telephone

 IC                 Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

t.
Facial hair
                                              Complexion



Glasses             Use                       Accent

Number of Pages 5

 Dated                                                              S R Clark Signed


           I, STEPHEN RICHARD CLARK OF 16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2, WILL SAY AS

           FOLLOWS:



           1.     I am 37 years old and have worked for the football Association

           (FA) for the last 20 years.       Since 1982 (000082) I have held the

           position as Competition Secretary at the FA and one of my jobs is to

           deal with the organisation for the FA Challenge Cup.       In particular, I

           have responsibility for organising the semi-final arrangements for

           the Challenge Cup.       Adrian Titcombe did this job before me.

           2.     In about February each year I send out an invitation to various

           clubs as to whether they are prepared to hold semi-final of the FA

           Challenge Cup and consider their replies.       Liverpool Football Club

           was on the list until last year when it replied to my letter to the

           effect that it did not want to hold a semi-final because of the
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S1327

reduction in capacity of its ground.   Liverpool had installed more

seats and as result the standing rocm of one end was reduced to 3,000.

At the other end 20,000 could stand.   Such an unequal distribution of

standing roan made the ground impractical for a semi-final match.

Arsenal felt that the state of its pitch was unsuitable for a semi­

final, Tottenham was carrying out rebuilding work [they had reduced

the capacity to 33,000] and Leeds did not want to cancel a Football

League match.

3.   Apart from the correspondence with the clubs there was one

telephone call which Adrian Titcombe received on Thursday 16 March

1989 (160389) from Bernard Halford the Secretary of Manchester City.

I understand that Mr Halford asked whether a semi-final match could

be played at his club and had confirmed that the police would be

happy for this to happen even if Manchester United were involved in

the match.   At that time Liverpool, Everton, Manchester United and

Nottingham Forest were all still in the draw.   Mr Titconbe and I

discussed the position and agreed that I should telephone Everton to

ask for its views about playing at Manchester I then telephoned Jim

Greenwood the secretary at Everton on Friday 17 March.     Mr Greenwood

indicated that Everton were loath to play at Manchester.

4.   Mr Titcombe and I had a brief discussion with Graham Kelly the

Chief Executive of the FA later on the morning of 17 March (170389)

about venues for the semi-finals matches.   Mr Titcombe was going to be

out of the office the following Monday when the draw would be made

and there were seme details he wanted to sort with Mr Kelly.      One of

the points was the fact that there was no London Club prepared or able

to stage a semi-final match and Brentford, West Ham, Wimbledon and

Norwich were still left in the draw.   We also told Mr Kelly about the

telephone call from Manchester City and Everton's reaction.

Hillsborough and Villa Park were also mentioned as possible venues.
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S1327

The meeting lasted altogether about 15-20 minutes.



5.   This year the draw for the semi-final was made at 7.45 am (0745)

on Monday 20 March (200389).   At about 10 o'clock (1000) on 20 March

(200389) I received a telephone call from Peter Robinson of

Liverpool.   I was expecting Sheffield Wednesday would be chosen for

the Liverpool tie because of the discussions on Friday.   I cannot now

recall exactly what Mr Robinson said during this telephone

conversation and I did not make any contemporaneous notes.    However, I

think that he also thought that the match was likely to be played at

Hillsborough and he was asking me whether it would be possible to

swap ends from those that were used last year.   Last year Liverpool

had been allocated the Leppings Lane end rather than the Penistone

Lane end.    I knew that the reason for the request was that the

Leppings Lane end resulted in Liverpool getting 4,000 less tickets

than Nottingham Forest and bearing in mind the size of the support for

the two clubs, Liverpool had been unhappy about the allocation last

year.   I do not remember Mr Robinson asking for a venue other than

Hillsborough.    In my mind Hillsborough was the likely venue in view of

the draw.    This was because last year's semi- final had been staged

there and it had been very successful with no complaints as far as I

am aware.

6.   I immediately rang Graham Mackrell, the secretary at Sheffield

Wednesday club, to tell him about the call I had had from Mr Robinson

and to ask him to speak to the police on the likely allocation of

tickets if Hillsborough were selected for the Liverpool tie.       The

reason for making this call was that I knew that only if the police

agreed could there by any change in the end that was allocated to

Liverpool.    I suspected that looking at the geographical location of

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in relation to Hillsborough that the
                                                                    PAGE    4
                                                                    S1327

police would not be minded to change their views from last year.      The

police views on which end should be allocated to which club are the

decisive factor for the staging club for obvious reasons. Shortly

after that call I spoke to Mr Kelly about the arrangements for the

Challenge Cup Committee meeting and mentioned to him the call that I

had had from Mr Robinson mentioning about the likely allocation of

ends if Hillsborough were chosen.

7.   Shortly before 11 o'clock (1100) I received a telephone call from

Mr Mackrell to say that if Hillsborough were chosen for the Liverpool

tie then the police would allocate the Leppings Lane end to Liverpool

in accordance with last seasons arrangement.    The reason for this was

to avoid a clash of supporters approaching and leaving the ground.

There was a Challenge Cup sub-committee meeting at 11 o'clock (1100)

and I mentioned to Mr Kelly at that meeting about the call I had

recieved from Mr Mackrell. The purpose of the sub-committee meeting

was to deal with artificial pitches and had nothing to do with the

selection of venues for the semi final matches.

8.   The sub-committee meeting finished before 11.30 am (1130) and I

think that I went with Mr Kelly to the general office where we

discussed the matter further.   Mr Kelly asked me about what had

happened last year at Hillsborough and I told him there had not been

any problems that I was aware of and certainly no complaints had been

received as far as I was aware.     Mr Kelly was interested in my

recorrmendation as to venue and I told him that I thought that Mr

Robinson's phone call should not alter the reconmendation that the

match should be played at Hillsborough.     The only alternative venue

would have been Manchester. My own feeling was that the fact that

Liverpool would have gained & larger allocation of tickets by going to

Manchester was not a sufficiently strong reason for altering the venue

from Hillsborough where the match had been so successfully run last
                                                                  PAGE    5
                                                                  S1327

year.    I also thought perhaps Manchester was rather close to Liverpool

for a tie between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

9.    I then went into the Challenge Cup committee meeting with Mr

Kelly.    One of the items on the agenda was the venues for the semi­

final matches. There were no papers for this item but in relation to

another item there was a list of the venues for the semi-final matches

for the past 10 years.    Mr Wiseman, the Chairman of the Matches and

Grounds Conmitte, recorrmended that the match between Everton and West

Ham/Norwich should be at Villa Park and that the one between Liverpool

and Nottingham Forest should be at Hillsborough.     Villa Park was

accepted without any debate the manbers of the Conmittee.    There was a

suggestion made that the other match should be at Manchester.     There

was the briefest of discussions and the committee accepted Mr

Wiseman's recorrmendation that the Liverpool match should be at

Hillsborough.    There was no reference during the committee meeting to

the phone call that I had had with Mr Robinson.    I did not consider it

necessary for me to raise it as I had mentioned it to Mr Kelly.

10.     The meeting finished at about 12.30 pm (1230) and at about 1

o'clock (1300) I phoned both Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park

formally asking them whether they would be prepared to stage the semi­

finals . They both confirmed that they were happy to do so and I

therefore told them to go ahead with the usual arrangements and to

contact the police concerning segregation of supporters.     I then

telephoned Liverpool and Nottingham Forest briefly out of courtesy to

tell them of the decision.     I think I spoke to Sheffield Wednesday and

Villa Park on the telephone later in the afternoon about save of the

administrative details.

11.     On 21 March (210389) I received a telephone call from Mr Robinson

in the morning to tell me that Liverpool were going to make public

their disapproval of the choice of venue of Hillsborough as they would
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S1327

be receiving less tickets than Nottingham Forest. I understood the

call to be by way of information to say that Liverpool would be

making these carments rather than as a formal complaint. If I had

thought that Mr Robinson was in any way making a formal complaint then

in accordance with standard practice I would have asked him to put it

in writing or to speak to Mr Kelly direct.    Mr Robinson thought that

the FA might also be receiving critical telephone calls or letters

from Liverpool supporters who were unable to get tickets.    There has

been seme press carment recently regarding Liverpool's criticism of

the choice of Hillsborough but so far as I am aware no such calls or

letters were received from any Liverpool supporters until after the

disaster and nothing was received in writing from Liverpool Football

Club.     I was also unaware of any media carment at the time criticising

the choice of Hillsborough.

12.     It was my practice for the semi-final arrangements to be typed up

into the blue booklet which sets out all the details of the

organisation required as well as the telephone numbers of the clubs

and other contact points.     On 20 or 21 March, (200389) (210389) I

faxed to Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park the details concerning

the matches which had not at that stage been printed.    The booklet

was printed by the 22 March (220389) by the print department at the

FA.     The booklet was in substantially the same form as that for

previous years and was sent to the staging and competing clubs,

members of the Challenge Cup Ccnmittee and match officials.     Basically

the FA's policy is to leave the staging clubs to deal with the

organisation required.     They are generally familiar with what is

needed for these matches and also have the advantage of the contracts

with the police which are always rieeded for these occasions.    I was in

touch with Mr Mackrell from time to time but basically my job was to

ensure that the FA received the appropriate number of tickets and that
                                                                        PAGE    7
                                                                        S1327

         they were appropriately distributed as required.   The tickets are

         printed by the club and so the FA allocation was sent to me once the

         tickets were ready and I arranged for their distribution.




         Stephen Clarke



         (10623LL)




                                                                       SIGNED

^^ATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACEJ

          TIME:             DATE;

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    836
Incident     102   050390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S2525

                                                                          Station

 Surname            ROBINSON

 Forenames          PETER    BECKETT

 Age                21    100              Date of birth

 Address           LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB & ATHLETIC GROUNDS PLC


 Occupation        CHIEF EXECUTIVE & COMPANY SECRETARY

 Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

 Hair colour

^ptir type

 Eyes                                      Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses            Use                    Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated              120689                                                  Signed


           I am Chief Executive and Company Secretary of Liverpool Football

           Club & Athletic Grounds PLC.

           I took up my appointment as Secretary to the Club in June, 1965

           (000665) having previously served as Office Junior/Assistant Secretary

           at Stockport County between 1954/58 (000054/000058) and Secretary at

           Crewe Alexandra between 1958/60 (000058/000060), Scunthorpe United

           1960/64 (000060/000064)and Brighton & Hove Albion Football Club

           1964/65 (000064/000065)t I therefore have experience of the

           administration of football in all four Divisions over a period of 35

           years. On Monday, 20th March 1989 (200389) I observed on the

           Breakfast Television that we had drawn Nottingham Forest in the Semi-

           Final of the F.A. Cup. We had also drawn them as Semi-Finalists in the

           previous year. Upon arrival at the Club, I telephoned Steve Clark,

           the Competitions Secretary of the Football Association, to enquire as
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                S2525

to whether a choice of ground had been made. He told me that this

would be considered later in the morning and I asked him to take into

account our experience in the previous year.   I reminded him that

there had been much criticism that Nottingham Forest had been given a

larger allocation of tickets than us although their average gate and

support was much smaller.   I informed him that my Club felt very

strongly that Hillsborough should not be chosen as the value if a

different ticket allocation could not be arranged to give Liverpool a

more equitable share.

We had no complaint about the general facilities at the ground, but

firmly believed another venue must be chosen if last year's ticket

allocation could not be altered.

He premised that he would advise the Comnittee of my Club's views when

the decision was being made.

Later that morning he telephoned me to say that the Cormittee had

selected Hillsborough.   He said the Police would not agree to the

allocation being altered and that was the end of the matter.

I informed him that I would therefore have to go public with my

criticism of the Football Association.

There were press present at the club at the time and I invited them in

and made a statement, which was widely reported.

I criticised the F.A. over their Cup Semi-Final ticket plans, saying

"They appear to be living in an ivory tower showing complete disregard

for the fans who are the life blood of the game.   Their decision is

unjust and it means that many of our loyal supporters are going to

miss out."   I pointed out that our average attendance at Anfield was

almost 38,000.   This was more than 17,000 higher than Nottingham

Forest.

For the second consecutive year the allocation provided for Nottingham

to receive approximately 4,500 more tickets than Liverpool.
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S2525

I also checked that the Manchester United Ground was available and

stated that, in the circumstances, it would have been fairer to use

that ground for the Semi-Final.

The press contacted Steve Clark about my comments and he claimed that

Manchester United was the wrong location geographically.   This is

ludicrous, particularly as that ground was selected as the re-play

ground at the same time as Hillsborough was chosen.

In 1988 (000089), the Sheffield Wednesday Secretary, Graham Mackrell,

had called a planning meeting prior to the game.    I attended with a

representative from Nottingham Forest and the Football Association.

The intention was to meet the Police and discuss arrangements.    On

that occasion I pointed out the risks as to safety that could occur

from the allocation.    Nottingham Forest might have surplus tickets

which could end up on the 'black market' and thereby into the hands of

Liverpool supporters.

This would affect the segregation arrangements at the other end and I

stated that Liverpool was not prepared to accept responsibility if

these arrangements broke down.

No planning meeting was sunmoned by Sheffield Wednesday in 1989

(000089). I produce a copy of a notice inserted in the Daily Post and

Liverpool Echo showing the manner in which tickets were initially

allocated to Season Ticket holders.    Not all Season Ticket holders

took up their allocation and a small balance was eventually sold to

the general public.

I attended the Semi-Final tie on Saturday, 15th April (150489), having

a seat in the Directors' Box.

After the game had started I noticed spectators coming onto the

running track at the Leppings Lane end.    I could see that it appeared

that the centre area was over-populated although there seemed to be

room on both sides.
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S2525

It was also clear to me that the problem was not one of misbehaviour

as the spectators were careful not to encroach onto the pitch although

there was little rocm for them between the barriers and the pitch.

After the game had been stopped for some minutes I decided to go down

onto the pitch to investigate.

I was accompanied by one of our Directors, Tony Ensor, who is a

Solicitor, and had been involved with me in the investigations of the

Heysel Stadium.   We came out of the Players' Tunnel onto the pitch and

as we walked towards the goal mouth, I was accosted by a number of

Liverpool spectators complaining angrily that the Police had opened an

exit gate and allowed a large number of people to get through into the

ground.   They showed me their tickets which had not been tom.

I proceeded towards the goal area where it became apparent that many

spectators were injured.    Some were lying motionless on the ground

while others were being attended to.    Some appeared unconscious and as

one young boy was being carried away on a make-shift stretcher, a coat

was placed over his head.    This confirmed to me that he was dead and I

was told that other dead bodies were evident.

Although there were numerous Police Officers around, there appeared to

be no one in charge.     I could not see any Ranking Officers.

The impression I got was that the Police were mainly concerned about

a pitch invasion and problems of law and order.

I believe I was on the pitch for no more than 10 minutes.

I then returned to the Players' Dressing Rocm to inform the Trainers

and Players that deaths had occurred and that the match could

obviously not proceed.

I was then called to a meeting by Graham Kelly of the F.A. in the

Board Room.   This meeting was attended by one or two F.A. Council

Members, Mr. Smith and Mr. Ensor from Liverpool Football Club,

Mr. Rowarth, the Chairman of Nottingham Forest and Mr. McGee and
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S2525

Mr. Mackrell, the Chairman and Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday.

Mr. Kelly had asked for the Chief Superintendent of Police to attend

for a report upon the situation.

We had to wait for seme short time for the arrival of the Chief

Superintendent.   When he arrived his main concern appeared to be to

prevent an outbreak of disorder between the opposing supporters.

He was not agreeable to a public address announcement being made at

that stage as he felt it would hinder the arrival of the emergency

services.   He wished to keep the spectators in their place.

When asked what was the cause of the disaster, his response was that

the Liverpool supporters had failed to heed the Police warning to

arrive early and so had caused additional congestion and pressure on

the approach to the ground.   The Chief Superintendent remained at the

meeting for only a short pjeriod.

I continued to persuade the authorities to make a public address

announcement although Nottingham Forest supporters were for seme

considerable time unaware of the nature of the tragedy and were

taunting Liverpool supjporters. I spent some of this time in the Club

Room Foyer and I also returned to the Directors' Box where I heard the

Manager, Kenny Dalglish, make a public announcement requesting

co-op)eration from the fans in the difficulties which had arisen.    At

this stage the impression I had from various sources was that our fans

had forced open a gate.

I was anxious to investigate this allegation and so, with Mr. Ensor, I

made a careful investigation of the Leppings Lane end.   By this time,

most of the spectators had left although there were still seme there

who were anxious to tell me that the Police had opened the gate.     They

showed me the gate and I could see that it was of the concertina type

which would be difficult, if not impossible for fans to force open

from the outside.
                                                                PAGE
                                                                S2525

I also examined the tunnel leading to the central penned area behind

the goal, where the tragedy occurred.

I noted the broken crash barrier and the limited means of gaining

access from the ground onto the pitch.

At Anfield, before the fences were removed following the Hillsborough

Tragedy, there were no gates, but gap® at intervals to enable escape

to be made in emergencies.

Finally, I observed the location of the close circuit television

cameras, which should have enabled Police Officers to observe closely

the state of packing of that area and any discomfort which spectators

might experience.



LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL

LIVERPOOL V NOTTINGHAM FOREST

AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD

SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)



This semi-final tie is an ALL TICKET game.    The ticket allocation and

distribution is as follows:-



SHAREHOLDERS



 1 - 9   shares                 1 Ground Ticket @   6.00

10 - 39 shares                  1 Stand Ticket @    14.00

40 - 59 shares                  2 Stand Tickets @    14.00

60 - 89 shares                  3 Stand Tickets @    14.00

90 shares and over              4 Stand Tickets @    14.00



STAND SEASON TICKET HOLDERS (MAIN STAND AND KEMLYN ROAD)
                                                                  PAGE    7
                                                                  S2525



MAIN STAND AND KEMLYN ROAD STAND SEASON TICKET HOLDERS whose stand

season ticket serial number (not seat number) ends with a 0, 1, 2 , 3,

4 or 5 s-



1 Stand Ticket @    14.00 for each appropriate book held.



MAIN STAND AND KEMLYN ROAD SEASON TICKET HOLDERS whose stand season

serial number (not seat number) ends with a 6 s-



1 Ground Ticket @    6.00 for each appropriate book held.



It is regretted that an allocation cannot be made to MAIN STAND AND

KEMLYN ROAD SEASON TICKET HOLDERS whose stand season ticket serial

number ends with a 7, 8 or 9.



PADDOCK AND ANFIELD ROAD MATCH BOOK HOLDERS



PADDOCK AND ANFIELD ROAD MATCH BOOK HOLDERS whose match book ticket

serial number (not seat number) ends with a 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5s-



1 Stand Ticket @    12.00 for each appropriate match book held.



PADDOCK AND ANFIELD ROAD MATCH BOOK HOLDERS whose match book ticket

serial number (not seat number) ends with a 6s-



1 Ground Ticket @ 6.00ifor each appropriate book held.



It is regretted that an allocation cannot be made to PADDOCK AND

ANFIELD ROAD MATCH BOOK HOLDERS whose match book ticket serial number
                                                                PAGE    8
                                                                S2525

ends with a 7, 8 or 9.



SPION KOP SEASON TICKET HOLDERS



SPION KOP SEASON TICKET HOLDERS whose Spion Kop season ticket serial

number ends with a 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7:-



1 Ground Ticket @   6.00 for each appropriate book held.



It is regretted that an allocation cannot be made to SPION KOP SEASON

TICKET HOLDERS whose season ticket serial number ends with an 8 or 9.



SELLING ARRANGEMENTS



All the above tickets will be sold by personal application at Anfield

as follows



SHAREHOLDERS - Main Ticket Office (Inner Window via Main Entrance)



SEASON TICKET AND MATCH BOOK HOLDERS who are allocated a stand seat

can obtain their ticket from the Main Ticket Office and those

allocated a ground ticket can obtain them from the Match Day Ticket

Office adjacent to the Shankly Gates, as under:-



Selling Dates



Monday and Tuesday, 3rd and 4th April 1989 (030489) (040489) between

9.30am (0930) and 6.30pn (1830).



Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, 5th, 6th and 7th April 1989 (050489)
                                                                         PAGE    9
                                                                         S2525

        (060489) (070489) between 9.30am (0930) and 5.00pm (1700).



        Stand and Ground Season Ticket Holders and Match Book Holders will be

        required to tender spare voucher No 38.



        POSTAL APPLICATIONS



        Postal applications will be accepted from Shareholders, Season Ticket

        and Match Book Holders who reside outside the Merseyside postal area

        and should be received by Wednesday 5th April 1989 (050489).    Vfe would

        stress that we cannot accept liability for non-arrival of postal

        applications.   Hie envelope should be addressed to the Secretary,

        Liverpool FC, Anfield Rd, Liverpool, L40TH and should be marked 'Semi-

        Final' in the top left hand comer.    Applications MUST include a

        stamped addressed envelope with first class stamp, spare voucher No 38

        and appropriate remittance.



        Cheques will only be accepted if a Banker's card is produced.



        IT IS REGRETTED THAT NO OTHER ALLOCATIONS WILL BE POSSIBLE FOR THIS

        GAME.




                                                          P B ROBINSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident    102     050390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S1134

                                                                         Station

Surname             MOLE

Forenames           BRIAN LEONARD

Age                  21    100              Date of birth

Address             DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS,
                    CHURCHFIELD, BARNSLEY

Occupation          POL CS

Telephone

IC                  Height                  Build

Hair colour

       type

Eyes                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses              Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                      Signed


           I am a Chief Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police and am

           currently the Divisional Corrmander of the Barnsley Division of the

           Force.

           I was appointed a Constable in the Sheffield City Police in October

           1963 (001063) and served in Uniform and CID Duties as Constable and

           Detective Sergeant, until 1974 (000074) when I was promoted to the

           rank of Inspector. For a period of two years I served as Staff Officer

           to the then Chief Constables and during that time had responsibility

           for the planning of major events in the form of Royal visits, in

           liaison with the Lord Lieutenant of the County and had a particular

           responsibility for War Duties.

           In 1976 (000076) I was promoted to Chief Inspector and posted as

           Deputy Sub Divisional Commander to the Sheffield Centred Division (D1

           Sub Division) where I remained in post until 1979 (000079).   During my
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S1134

time in the Sheffield Central Division, I was responsible for the

policing of football matches at Sheffield United Football Ground and

for the planning and arrangement of various marches and

demonstrations associated with normal City life.

In 1979 (000079) I again transferred to the Research & Development

Department with particular responsibility for planning public order

training and policy.

In the October of that year (001079) I was promoted to Superintendent

and appointed as head of the newly formed Operations Division.

Almost irrmediately upon appointment the Steel Strike commenced and I

was responsible for Police operations and planning in connection with

that matter.   During that time I had particular involvement at the

Hatfields Steel Works which was the scene of much disorder and heavy

picketting.

In December 1981 (001281), I transferred from the Operations Division

and returned to the Sheffield Central Sub Division as Sub Divisional

Commander and again had seme responsibility for football matches and

marches and demonstrations in the City Centre.

In the March of 1982 (000382), I took up the post of Detective

Superintendent in charge of the Criminal Investigation Department in

the Sheffield North Division.   However, within 3 months I as appointed

the Deputy Divisional Contender of that Division.

I remained as the Deputy Divisional Commander until October 1985
                                      I
(001085) when I was promoted to the rank of Chief Superintendent and

appointed Divisional Commander of the Division where I remained until

the 27 March 1989 (270389), when I was transferred as Divisional

Commander to the Barnsley Division.

During my time in the Sheffield North Division, as Deputy Divisional

Commander and Divisional Commander, I was deeply involved in the

planning and command of operations associated with Sheffield Wednesday
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S1134

Football club and in fact in 1987 (000087) was the Officer commanding

the semi final between Coventry City and Leeds United and in 1988

(000088) the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. In

addition, in 1984 (000084) during the Miners dispite, I was involved

in the policing of picket lines in Nottinghamshire, Qrgreave,

Doncaster and Barnsley and at times took control of the Force Control

Room dealing with the deployment of personnel to picketting

situations. So far as both the 1987 (000087) and 1988 (000088) semi

finals are concerned, I was directly responsible for the planning and

liaison with the management of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and

the Football Association.   On both occasions negotiations were

entered into concerning the allocation of seating areas to opposing

fans and the decision was taken that one team would be allocated the

South Side and the Kop and the other team the North Side and the West

Side and Leppings Lane Terraces.   This decision was based on the

geographical location of the Stadium and was in an effort to ensure

complete segregation of supporters to prevent confrontation and

public disorder. Consideration was given to other methods of

deployment, but on balance it was felt that this was the most

appropriate separation.

In connection with both the semi final in 1987 (000087) and 1988

(000088), this policy as followed and the operations were successful.

In 1989 (000089) during the week prior to Monday 20 March 1989

(200389, I was approached by Mr Graham ICKRELL the Secretary of

the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, who indicated that once

again he might be asked to stage the semi final, possibly between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. He asked if I would be able to

confirm that we could Police such an event and I indicated that we

would receive any proposal in a favourable manner should the situation

arise.   I again indicated that if we did stage that event, I would ask
                                                                PAGE     4
                                                                S1134

that the same segregation procedures were utilised as in previous

years and that Liverpool would be allocated the North Stand, West

Stand and Leppings Lane Terraces and Nottingham Forest the Kop and

South Stand as in the previous year.

On Monday 20 March 1989 (200389), I was again contacted by Mr MCKRELL

who confirmed that he had been asked by the Football Association to

stage the semi final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.   He did

say that the Football Association had asked if the allocation of

seats could be reversed in that they would like more facilities for

Liverpool fans.   I once again pointed out the reasons for the decision

taken the previous year and after confirmation of the ACC

(Operations) Mr W W JACKS®, I confirmed that there was no possibility

of change and that that was the only manner in which I would be

prepared to Police such an event. Mr MCKRELL indicated that he would

have to take the matter back to the Football Association before the

final decision was reached.

I believe it was later that same day that Mr MCKRELL contacted me and

said that the Football Association had accepted the position and that

we would be asked to Police the semi final on the 15 April 1989

(150489) and that the ticket allocations would be in accordance with

our plans of the previous year.

As a consequence of this information I spoke to Superintendent MURRAY

and Inspector SEWELL at Hammerton Road Police Station and at 3pm

(1500) that day made arrangements for a meeting to be called for

Wednesday 22 March 1989 (220389) in order that early planning

discussions for the event could take place.

Conscious of the fact that I was scheduled to take command of a new

Division on the 27 March 1989 (270389), I called upon the proposed new

Divisional Commander, Chief Superintendent D G DUCKENFIELD, to attend

that noting in order that continuity might remain and he could
                                                                 PAGE      5
                                                                 S1134

continue with the planning which would be in his domain.   The

meeting took place   at 10am (1000) on 22 March 1989 (220389) at

Hammerton Road Police Station and involved all interested parties,

including the heads of Operations and Traffic Division, the Senior

Officers who would be involved in the operation, the Support Staff

responsible for preparing the Operational Order and representatives of

British Rail, Public Transport and the Highways Authority of the

County Council.

At that meeting initial plans were made concerning action to be taken

and in particular consideration was given to the mode of travel of

supporters and representation was made by the British Rail

representatives for Liverpool to be brought into the Midland Station

in the City Centre and Nottinghamshire to the Wadsley Bridge Station

in the North of Sheffield.   Such action would defeat the segregation

plans in that supporters would be crossing each other and I indicated

that this would not be acceptable and asked the British Rail to

reconsider the matter.   The reasons for their request were based upon

management difficulties in routing and time scheduling trains.     It was

further agreed at that meeting that the Operations and Traffic

Division would take responsibility for all traffic matters

affecting the City and that 'D' Division, the Central Division, would

be responsible for policing their own area leaving the match itself

to be the responsibility of the Divisional Commander of the Sheffield

North Division.   The meeting closed at 11am (1100) and I took no

further part in the planning meetings concerning this matter.

Following upon the meeting I spoke to Superintendent MURRAY and

Inspector SEWELL concerning the manpower levels used at the

previous years's event and asked them to examine the position

for this year and to determine if any reductions or increases were

appropriate, taking into account our findings the previous year.     The
                                                                  PAGE    6
                                                                  S1134

findings the previous year indicated that some officers

were under employed and I was conscious of the need not to repeat such

a situation if that was the case and if there were no other factors

which might dictate their need for this future match.   Hie only other

action I took concerning this matter was to maintain liaison

with Mr MCKRELL during the next few days and in particular to make

reference to the need for clear indications of tickets by colour

coding and appropriate colour coded systems on turnstiles to ensure

easily recognisable access to the stadium.

In the knowledge that Mr DUCKENFIELD would be commanding this event,

I personally selected the Sector Corrmanders who would be working to

him and as in the previous year utilised the system of using three

sectors, those being the Ground, the Liverpool supporters outside the

ground the Nottingham supporters outside the ground.    In this

connection I selected Superintendent GREENWOOD as the Ground

Controller, Superintendent MARSHALL to be responsible for the

Liverpool supporters and Superintendent CHAPMAN to be responsible for

the Nottingham supporters. All three officers had a wide experience

in policing football matches and in fact had been Sector Ccnmanders at

the Semi final the previous year.   The only difference was that Mr

MARSHALL and Mr GREENWOOD reversed roles and this was because

Mr MARSHALL, having been my Deputy for seme time, had a better

knowledge of the visiting supporters end of the ground, ie leppings

Lane, than Mr Greenwood, who had been away from the Division for seme

time all be it for many years he had policed matches at Hillsborough.

In addition, Superintendent MURRAY was identified as the Officer in

charge of the ground control communications and this Officer was in

fact the man who regularly took up that position at First Division

matches throughout the season.

Prior to my departure from 'F' Division I met with Chief
                                                                  PAGE    7
                                                                  S1134

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and discussed with him in general the

problems on Division.   During that discussion the semi final was

touched upon and I appraised him of the staff selected and the fact

that Mr MURRAY was examining the manpower situation.

On the day of the semi final, Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I had

no role to play in the operation and was policing my own Division at

Barnsley.

At approxiamtely 3.30pm (1530) that day I was en route on the Ml

motorway from Barnsley to Sheffield when, on local radio, I heard of

difficulties at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.   The reporter did

not seem unduly concerned and spoke of a delay in the match due to a

pitch invasion.   As my journey progressed, it became clear from the

radio reports that the incident was more serious and there was sane

indication of possible fatalities.   Calls were being made for doctors

to attend at the Stadium and a short time later I heard an

appeal for Police Officers to respond to Hartmerton Road Police

Station. It was approximately 4pn (1600) at this time and I

imnediately responded to Hartmerton Road Police Station, arriving at

approximately 4. 20pm (1640).

On arrival, I saw numerous uniformed Police Officers in the Station

area, including Chief Inspector MCROBBIE. I immediately went to the

Control Room and contacted Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD in the

Police Control Room at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club via the

internal telephone system.   I asked Mr DUCKENFIELD if I could be of

any assistance to him and he asked if I could deploy uniformed

Officers into the Leppings Lane area on foot and in an effort to calm

supporters leaving the ground and show compassion for their apparent

feelings of distress.

I immediately went to the Canteen at Hartmerton Road Police Station

with Chief Inspector MCROBBIE and organised units of men in serials
                                                                   PAGE        8
                                                                   S1134

under the command of Sergeants and briefed them as to the information

in my possession concerning the current situation.       I then deployed

Units to locations in and around Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground

and Chief Inspector MCROBBIE dealt with the notation of deployment.

At this time also present was Superintendent MDRDEW and after

deployment I obtained transport and together with Superintendent

MDRDEW attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, approaching

from Middlewood Road into Leppings Lane.    On reaching Parkside Road I

saw that Leppings Lane was heavily congested by football supporters

and a large number of fire engines.   I alighted from the car and began

on foot towards the stadium and there met Chief Inspector WARING.

The crowd was dense and I would generally describe the attitude of

supporters as hostile towards the Police.

I spoke briefly to Chief Inspector WARING and he confirmed that he had

little or no difficulty at that location and the crowds were gradually

dispersing.

Together with Superintendent MDRDEW, I then turned into the private

road leading to the back of the South Stand and on entering that area

through the gates I saw an area of sheeted rails adjacent to the

riverside and noted a number of bodies laid out in that location.          I

was approached by Detective Inspector WEBSTER who informed me in fact

that there were eleven bodies at that location and he further informed

me that there were a further 74 in the Gymnasium.

Prior to this point the magnitude of the situation had not been known

to me and I inmediately made my way through 'C' Gate into the West

stand enclosure and into the Police Control Room where, on arrival, I
                                                     I


found Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) Mr JACKSON, Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD,   Superintendent MARSHALL, Superintendent

MURRAY, Police Sergeant GODDARD, Police Constable RYAN and Police

Constable BISHARD.   At this point I noted that the ground was
                                                                 PAGE     9
                                                                 S1134

relatively empty, with the exception of a few supporters in and around

the Leppings Lane end, Press in the Press Box and officials on the

playing area.

I noted that messages were being received on the radio and were being

dealt with by the Control Sergeant and PC and in general they related

to outbreaks of disorder and sporadic fighting in and around the

Stadium.   My attention was particularly drawn to Superintendent

MARSHALL and Superintendent MURRAY, who both seemed to be extremely

distressed. ACC Mr JACKSON was attempting to speak to Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and Superintendent MARSHALL and at same

point a telephone call was received and was answered by Mr JACKSON.

From the nature of the conversation, I formed the opinion that it was

a call from the Chief Constable.    Mr JACKSON was attempting to ask

questions of Mr DUCKENFIELD and Mr MARSHALL and related them down the

telephone.   I remained in the Control Rocm and listened to what was

taking place through the messages and noted that the main

communications handset was not being utilised, but that personal

radios were being used on talk-through facility. At about 5.15pn

(1715) Mr JACKSON indicated he was to go to Headquarters with

Mr DUCKENFIELD and Mr MARSHALL and informed me that he had made

arrangements for Det Chief Superintendent ALOIS to deal with mortuary

arrangements in the Gymnasium and had given certain instructions to

Chief Superintendent NESBIT concerning the welfare of Officers and

their stand-down arrangements.     He asked that I remain at the Ground

with a view to finalising any outstanding matters and to eventually

close down the operation.     Throughout this time we were visited by

Fire and Ambulance Senior Officers and I recall Mr Don PAGE, the Chief

Ambulance Officer, and Mr Harry WRIGHT and Chief Fire Officer, both

calling at the Control Box.

I noticed that a Fire Officer was infact standing at the top of the
                                                                 PAGE 10
                                                                 S1134

steps leading to the Control Roan overseeing the lappings Lane

Terraces.    Mr JACKSON and Mr DUCKENFIELD and Mr MARSHALL then left the

Control Roan and I immediately asked for an update fron the Sector

Commanders in the form of Superintendent CHAPMAN at the Nottingham

side of the stadium and Chief Inspector WARING at the lappings Lane

area of the Stadium.    It was clear that there was sane disorder and

no doubt as a consequence of the attitude of supporters and I

instructed that all personnel remain on duty and that the mobile units,

named Tango Units, remain ready and available.

Responses were given to numerous incidents of fighting, but in the

fullness of time calm was restored.

I recall that trains had left the area, as had coaches which were

released fran their coach parks and whilst I have no real recollection

of time, I recall that when the situation was calm I made my way to

the Gymnasium, leaving Sergeant GODDARD in the Control Roan and there

examined the temporary Mortuary facilities accanmodating sane 85

bodies.     There was sane natural confusion, but in general things were

in order and Detective Chief Superintendent ADDIS was controlling the

Mortuary aspect.     I spoke to a number of Officers who were clearly in

shock and were distressed by events which they had experienced.     I

noted that the temporary Mortuary was located in the Gymnasium, which

was separated into three sections, the first section containing the

bodies, the second section being a relative sterile area where Police

Officers were accommodated and the third section had been set up for

identification purposes and statement taking by CID Officers . A

separate section had been created for identification purposes and this

was adjacent to a separate office where relatives could view bodies in

relative privacey.

I formed the opinion that arrangements were well organised and that

temporary Mortuary facilities were well in hand.     During this tune I
                                                                 PAGE 11
                                                                 S1134

did meet Det Superintendent MCKAY and noted that he too was in seme

way distressed by the events.

Following the visit to the Gymnasium, I checked the remainder of the

Stadium and made my way to the Directors area of the Sheffield

Wednesday Club situate in the underside of the South Stand, and there

saw Graham MCKRELL the Club Secretary.   Some members of the staff were

clearly distressed and I advised Mr MCKRELL regarding counselling

facilities for junior members and the need to ensure that medical

facilities were available.

During these conversations Mr MCKRELL informed me that he had details

of the computer print-outs regarding turnstile figures at 3pn (1500)

and that he had seized them and placed them in his safe (drawer).

Having satisfied myself that things were in order in the Stadium, I

resumed duty the Control Box and then sought security of the terrace

subject of the disaster.

Through Superintendent MDRDEW I arranged for Officers to be deployed

to security of the central pens with the intention of 1) preserving

evidence and 2) recovering property subject of those who had been

injured or who were deceased.

I noted that numerous Officers were assembling in the North Stand

ready for debrief and because of their general condition authorised

Superintendent MDRDEW and Superintendent BROOKFIELD, who had also

attended the scene, to debrief Officers and ensure that Serial

Sergeants could confirm that all their Officers were accounted for and

to note their whereabouts during the events.   In addition, some

Officers who had responded to Operation Support were in the locality

and having consulted with 'D' Division, the Central Division of the

Force, I armaged for two Sergeants and 20 Constables to be organised

for deployment to 'D' Division who were suffering some potential

disorder scenes.
                                                                 PAGE 12
                                                                 S1134

Once debrief facilities had been dealt with, I instructed

Superintendent MDRDEW to stand down those Officers who were no longer

required.

Having yet again assessed the situation in the vicinity of the ground,

I instructed that Tango Units, the mobile units on public order

duties, should remain on patrol and also liaise with Inspector HAND-

DAVIS, the Mounted Inspector, that his Officers should remain on

patrol in pairs in an around the Ground.

I was informed that relatives were in the vicinity of the Ground with

a view to identification and was advised that accomodation and

planning had been put into being for identification of the deceased.

Having experienced the stress placed upon Officers and families in and

around the temporary Mortuary, I was conscious of the considerable

stress placed upon Officers and arranged for the Force Welfare

Officer,                    to be called out for counselling reasons.

I was conscious of the fact that Social Workers and members of the

Church and Salvation Army had been requested to attend at the scene to

assist with the counselling of relatives.

I was of the opinion that there would be sane considerable delay in

the identification of bodies and in the retention on duty of Officers

who were allocated to each body foridentification purposes.      In view

of this, I caused feeding arrangements to be put in hand for those

Officers who were to be retained, pending identification of individual

deceased persons.

At approximately 9.30pm (2130)   the Chief Constable, Mr Peter WRIOfT,

attended at the scene and I met him and toured the area of the

disaster with him.   I was informed that    at approximately 10.15pm

(2215) that night Mr Colin MDNAGHAN, the Minister of State for Sport,

was scheduled to arrived by helicopter at the Stadium and arrangements

were being made for him to be met.
                                                                   PAGE 13
                                                                   S1134

Ify recollection is that at approximately 10.30pm (2230) the Minister

arrived, accompanied by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.   Together

with the Chief Constable and other Officers, I showed Mr MDNAGHAN the

scene and described to him the facilities at Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club.

Shortly after this, an impromptu press conference took place on the

pitch with television and other media representatives and Mr MDYNAGHAN

was then taken to the Gymnasium where he spoke to Officers concerning

their involvement in the day's event.   He later left the scene.

At approximately midnight (0000) the staff of the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club departed from the stadium and I arranged for Security of

the Gymnasium area to protect the temporary Mortuary facilities.

Arrangements were made for the reception of relatives for

identification purposes and social workers and members of the Church

were briefed to expect relatives attending in distressed situations.

These representatives were readily available throughout the night and

in fact met numerous relatives and remained with them throughout the

identification procedures. I remained in the vicinity of the Gymnasium

throughout the night and was present through many identifications of

deceased persons and noted many extremely harrowing situations

regarding grieving relatives and the effects upon Police involved.

Throughout these procedures Inspector John CHARLES, Detective

Policewoman Sandra LEWYN, Police Constable Jean SHELTON, maintained

records of the deceased persons and liaised constantly with

Superintendent TORR in charge of the casualty bureau arrangements.

Throughout these events I noted that the Ambulance Liaison Officer was

present in the temporary Mortuary and at one stage I asked if he could

increase the number of mobile stretchers available to speed up the

identification process. The Ambulance Liaison Officer was most helpful

in this connection and was extremely professional in his duties.       The
                                                                 PAGE 14
                                                                 S1134

process of   identification continued until approximately Sam (0500),

when arrangements were made for the remainder of the bodies to be

removed to the City Mortuary where the process would be continued

later in the day.

During the course of events during the evening, the Coroner, Mr Stefan

POPPER, attended the scene together with Professor Alan USHER, who

both viewed arrangements and confirmed the location of bodies at the

Sheffield City Mortuary.

At approximately 5.30am (0530) I left the Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club and returned to Hammerton Road Police Station,    where I confirmed

that all Officers involved in the operation other than those

connected with the deceased persons, had been stood down and were

accounted for.

I retired from duty at approximately 6am (0600) and resumed duty at

8am (0800) that same day at Police Headquarters.

I wish to place on record my considerable appreciation of the efforts

of all individuals involved in this matter, and in particular the

efforts of the Officers involved in dealing with the traumatic events

of dealing with identification of families of deceased persons, the

Social Services and Church representatives and the Ambulance Service

who maintained a presence throughout the night.

I am satisfied that every effort was made to project the

professionalism of all the Emergency Services and from my experiences

have no reservation in confirming their dedication to service to the

Community.




Chief Superintedent.




                                                      B. L. MOLE SIGNED
                                                                          STATION

^ME:           BRIAN LEONARD
               MOLE

ADDRESS:       DIVISIONAL COMMANDER
               BARNSLEY PSTN

AGE / DATE 3F BIRIH: 21 100

OCCUPATIONS    POL CS


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 260490                                                   B L M3LE (SIGNED)



           In 1981 (000081) I was a Police Superintendent in charge of Uniform

           Operations for South Yorkshire Police.    This entailed knowledge of all

           Operational aspects for the force with particular emphasis on major

           football and public order events.

           As a result I was well aware of the 1981 (000081) crushing problem at

           Hillsborough at the FA Cup Semi final.    My deputy attended the de­

           brief which followed the event because I was at the Police Staff

           College.   As a result I was well aware of the action taken by South

^          Yorkshire Police and other agencies resulting in the introduction of

           the radial fences.

           Hie de-brief minutes were placed onto a Headquarters Police file

           specifically relating to football.

           Fran June 1982 (000682) I was posted to F Division and involved in the

           Policing of matches at Hillsborough.     It was the policy of that

           Division to retain a Divisional football working file which I have

           today shown to Det Chief Supt FOSTER.    This file commenced in December

           1979 (001279) and in Volume II which suggests a previous file is in

           existence.




                                                                                      859A
MX3                  BRIAN    LEONARD                                     2


This file contains a copy of the de-brief minutes from the 1981

(003081) incident and was thus available for any Divisional, Deputy or

Sub Divisional Ccnmander to view.    The file is actually retained by

the Divisional football liaison officer.

Because of my knowledge of the 1981 (000081) incident by the time of

the 1987 (000087) and 1988 (000088) semi finals when I was Chief

Superintendent of the Division, the 1981 (000081) incident did not

feature in my planning.     The reason was that I was aware the problem

had been addressed by the addition of the radial fences creating the

then three separate pens.     It was also therefore not a subject I would

have passed on to any new match Caimander coming to my Division.

Following the semi finals in 1987 (000087) and 1988 (000088) de-briefs

were held.

The de-brief system is as follows, firstly once,a serial is stood down

the serial sergeant is required to complete a des-brief document.    This

docjment known as a sheet contains information as to any incidents

that have occurred during the operation such as arrests, persons

injored, use of truncheon by Police Officers or any course of conduct

outside the normal scope of the Operation.        ;

The de-brief sheet is then immediately passed by the Sergeant to the

logistics team who review each de-brief sheet before releasing the

serial.

My own supervisory officer de-brief then took place seme three to four

days after each semi final.     It is right to say,this de-brief extended

to include representatives of every Division or,Department involved.

I can state that in both 1987 (000087) and in 1988 (000088) the de­

briefs did not disclose any suggestion that supporters had been

injured due to overcrowding or crushing.     In addition, I cannot recall

any other agency reporting to me such a problem.
                            BRIAN   LEONARD                                     3


       As regards the tunnel being closed in 1988 (000088) by Police Officers

       that is the sort of incident I would have expected to have been on a

       de-orief sheet.   I was not made aware of the problem in 1988 (000088)

       and as a result my planning for 1989 (000089) was not influenced.

       Other aspects of my planning did change because of the result of the

        1983 (000088) de-brief including the removal of Air cover and the

       removal of one serial from Hillsborough precinct.

        It was this that resulted in my view that 1988 (000088) was a success

       and formed a sound base for the 1989 (000089) match.

       B Mole

                                                               B MOLE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME              DATE:    260490

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE       M FOOTER D CH SUPT 6930




                                                                                    85 9 C
Incident     102   050390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER    S416

                                                                            Station

 Surname           JACKSON

 Forenames         WALTER

 Age                                        Date of birth

 Address           POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

 Occupation        POL ACC

 Telephone

 IC                Height                   Build

 Hair colour

^^tir type

 Eyes                                       Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages 10

 Dated                                                           W JACKSON Signed


           I was promoted to the rank of Assistant Chief Constable, Operations,

           in the South Yorkshire Police on 1 May 1985 (010585) and have played

           a major part in the pre-planning and overseeing of operational police

           work.

           In 1988 (000088), Hillsborough Football Ground staged the semi-final

           between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool and a planning team was set

           up under the ccmnand of the Divisional Cotmander, Chief Superintendent

           MDLE. Following consultations with all interested parties, which

           included the Football Association, the Club, Fire and Emergency

           Services, Transport Representatives and Traffic Management, and the

           examination of available intelligence, the manpower level and

           operational plan was produced for the semi-final and the manpower for

           policing was determined and set at 940 officers for the Hillsborough

           Operation. The event took place with little or no difficulty and was
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S416

described as a successful operation.

On 20 March 1989 (200389), South Yorkshire Police were approached by

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Secretary with a view to the semi­

final being staged at the Hillsborough Ground on 15 April 1989

(150489) with the same teams being involved.   Bearing in mind the

previous year's experience, it was agreed that the event would be

staged in the same way.   Approaches were made for the Clubs involved

to be given alternative ends of the ground to the 1988 (000088) semi­

final. In relation to this, approaches to the Kop and the South Stand

are from the South, the area where the vast majority of

Nottinghamshire supporters would travel, and the West Stand and

Terrace, and North Stand, are approached from the North, the area from

which the vast majority of Liverpool supporters would travel.    These

areas were therefore allocated on this basis and any alteration would

have resulted in opposing fans crossing each other, therefore,

increasing the likelihood of disorder and, in addition, excessive

disruption to the residents of Sheffield, causing traffic problems

before and after the event.

This decision was in accord with the reconmendations of the

Popplewell Report, regarding the need for opposing fans to have a

clear differentiation of spacial separation and physical containment

of opposing groups.

This decision was accepted by the FA, the Clubs and other interested

parties.

Mr DUCKENFIELD, at that time, was Deputy Divisional Commander on

D Division and was due to take over responsibility from Chief

Superintendent M3LE on 27 March 1989 (270389).   He had considerable

experience in policing major events and his division included

Sheffield United Football Ground.   I was extremely confident regarding

his ability to police the semi-final.   In the initial stages; Chief


                                                                             861
                                                                PAGE
                                                                S416

Superintendent MOLE reviewed the planning arrangements with the

previous year's Police Planning Team and, so as to ensure (continuity,

a meeting was arranged on 22 March 1989 (220389), similar to last

year's meeting with both Chief Superintendent MOLE and Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, and the previous year's Planning Team

present.   The meeting also included Chief Superintendent NESBIT,

Operations and Traffic, who was to take full responsibility for the

traffic arrangements.

The planning then continued through division by Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD and the same Police Planning team as the previous year.

Chief Superintendent NESBIT, Ops & Traffic, liaised with the division

concerning manpower requirements and both officers kept me updated

regarding developments. During the planning period I was informed by

Chief Superintendent NESBIT that it was necessary to look for mutual

aid in respect of horses and dogs.   It was therefore decided to

utilise mounted officers frcm Nottinghamshire and Merseyside as they

would have a thorough working knowledge of the supporters in their

respective areas. Arrangements were made for 12 mounted police

officers from Merseyside and 8 from Nottinghamshire to be supplied

and work under the supervision of the Inspector in charge of the

South Yorkshire Mounted Police Section.   TVjelve dog handlers frcm

West Yorkshire and 8 from Nottinghamshire were requested and worked

double manned with South Yorkshire Officers, that is 2 officers in

each vehicle.

The method of raising manpower for events such as the semi-final and

all other operational matters within South Yorkshire is based on the

policy which reflects that the division upon which the event is to

take place should identify the manpower it can raise and then inform

Operations Division at Force Headquarters of the additional manpower

which is required.   The additional manpower is then raised frcm


                                                                         862
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S416

across the Force area from duty and off-duty time officers and is

notified to the host division for an allocation of duties and in

terms of the operational order this is submitted to me as Assistant

Chief Constable (Operations). This procedure took place.

The determination of manpower levels in connection with any

operational event is of necessity to be based on information

available and the intention of any plan made in this connection is to

ensure flexibility in the deployment of resources.   In this respect

the manpower involves that utilised in policing the actual events at

Hillsborough under the command of the Divisional Officer, and may

include other available resources, for example, traffic patrol

officers assigned to semi-final duties and those officers from D

Division who were assigned transportation/escort duties of fans from

the city centre.

Following previous experience it was decided two years ago that the

Divisional Ccmmander responsible for Hillsborough could be more

effective if he did not have to be concerned with the logistics of

directing traffic and escorting it to the ground.    In view of this

the Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic Division, took on

this task and prepared his own plans.   These duties were undertaken

in this way in 1988 (000088) and 1989 (000089).

In addition the staging of the event at Hillsborough of necessity

affects the city centre and once again the role of the Hillsborough

Commander cannot be diverted to take control of this aspect.     As a

consequence a separate plan is prepared for dealing with city centre

problems associated with the semi-final, and this action was embarked

upon in both 1988 (000088) and 1989 (000089) .

The three areas of command maintain contact through radio and land

line communications and through this method flexibility for re­

deployment is adequately catered for.


                                                                        863
An example of the flexibility of the plan can be drawn from the fact

that in the D Division Order officers are allocated to escort duties of

public transport vehicles travelling frcm the Midland Station to the

Hillsborough Ground and the contingency plan is that when these

officers have completed their allocated task they remain available for

re-deployment at the ground as an additional resource at the ground

gymnasium.    On completion of the match the officers are again used for

escort duties back to the railway station in the city centre.

An examination of the 1989 (000089) requirements having regard to the

Operation in 1988 (000088) revealed that a reduction in manpower on

the peripheral areas could be carried out and these are shown on

Appendix A.    It will be noted that the reduction at the ground is

relatively small and absolutely minimal at the Leppings Lane

turnstiles and terraces. Appendix B.

Taking into account the three aspects of policing - Traffic, D

Division and Hillsborough - the total manpower available for

deployment was as follows:-

                   1988 (000088)       1173

                   1989 (000089)       1133.

To ensure that football supporters were made aware of the

arrangements, letters were sent to the Chief Constable of Merseyside

and Nottinghamshire requesting the widest possible circulation

(Appendix C).

Letters were also sent to the person responsible for preparing match

prograirmes (Appendix D).

Letters were sent to the Chief Ambulance Officer and Chief Fire

Brigade Officer (Appendix E).

When all the planning was completed I received a copy of the F

Division Hillsborough Order and I was satisfied with the

arrangements made.
                                                                 PAGE      6
                                                                 S416

At 08.45 am (0845) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), as Senior

Officer on weekend cover, I attended at Police Headquarters and went

to my office.

I updated myself about the previous night's work and dealt with the

morning mail and correspondence.

Sanetime during the morning I spoke to Chief Superintendent NESBIT

I/C Operations and discussed the traffic flow to the Notts Forest/

Liverpool football match being staged at Hillsborough Football

Ground, kick off at 3.00 pm (1500).    Everything was going to plan and

he agreed to pick me up about 1.00 pm (1300) to go to the football

ground.

About 1.00 pn (1300), I went into the Incident Room at Force

Headquarters handling the match information and spoke to

Superintendent ANDERSON.    Everything seemed to be going well - the

traffic flow was busy which was to be expected on such an occasion.

About half an hour after that Chief Superintendent NESBIT arrived at

Police Headquarters and took me to Hillsborough Football Stadium via

Penistone Road.    This road was still busy at this time and we stopped

so that Chief Superintendent NESBIT could encourage vehicles to use

two lanes inwards to the ground.    We then continued our journey and

he dropped me off at the Directors' car park entrance on Penistone

Road.     I walked through the Directors' car park to the far end of the

ground and went through the gate up to the Police Control Roan.

There was nothing unusual and I took the view everything was going to

plan.

In the Control Roan I met Chief Inspector MCROBBIE and the officers

manning the video and radios.     There was a cordial exchange and

little else when I noticed Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, the

o ffic e r in charge of the operation, and Superintendent MURRAY cane up

to the terrace to join me in the Control Roan - this would be just



                                                                               865
                                                                   PAGE    1
                                                                   S416

after 2.00 pn (1400).    Mr DUCKENFIELD said that he had been to see

the referee to discuss police procedures and a general discussion

took place about the operation which was progressing satisfactorily.

I recall a comment being made about the Notts Forest fans coming

early and there was still a lot of people to enter the North Stand

for Liverpool Supporters.     It was considered that there was plenty of

time to get the supporters in.     I left the Control Room and went to

the Directors Lobby where I saw the Club Secretary, Mr MACKRELL.       I

made comment about the Liverpool fans ccming later than the Notts

Forest fans and he said that the gates had been opened at 12 midday

(1200) to let them in.    I then went to the Director's box and sat in

the seat reserved for the police.

The North. Stand seemed to be filling up very well towards the start

of play, tut there still looked as if there was seme room when the

players ran out on to the field prior to the ccnrnencement of the game.

Just after the game started I had occasion to look towards the West

Terrace and saw a number of fans had ccme out on to the pitch.      More

fans came on and I immediately went to the Police Control Rocm Where

I saw Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.     He was unable to say what

had happened at that stage and I recollect the game had been stopped.

I decided to go down on to the pitch to see what the problem was and

on getting there I saw Superintendent GREENWOOD who informed me that

he was dealing with the situation and he said we had injuries.      The

crowd had got bigger on the pitch and I rein back up to the Control

Room to make use of communications - a fleet of ambulances had been

requested (3.07 pm) (1507).    Because of the seriousness of the

situation and together with Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD we gave

instructions to the Control Rocm Staff for implementation of the

major disaster plan.     There would be considerable pressure on our

controller at this tine - but I knew we were being monitored by our


                                                                               866
                                                                 PAGE      8
                                                                 S416

Force Incident Rocm dealing with the natch to link to the major

incident and I remember being asked to confirm operation support

(3.10 pn)(1510).

In the meantime rescue operations were taking place on the pitch and

I specifically requested that Superintendent TORR be requested to

take charge of the Casualty Bureau and Detective Chief Superintendent

ADDIS, Head of CID, to attend to see me so that the cause of the

incident could be investigated.    Me DUCKENFIELD was continuing to

deal with other natters with our radio controller and we requested

that he broadcast for people to leave the pitch and keep calm so that

we could deal with the injured.

A request was nade later for Mr DUCKENFIELD to attend the Board Rocm

and something was mentioned about the game being abandoned - it was

important not to make any announcement until we dealt with the

casualties so that we could get them to hospital whilst it was clear

outside.

I went to the Board Roam and Superintendent MURRAY was left in charge

of the Control Rocm.    Mr DUCKENFIELD spoke to them - I reinforced the

need to get the casulaties away before any announcement was made and

we returned to the Police Control Rocm.

At about 3.35 pm (1535), Detective Chief Superintendent ADDIS made

contact via telephone at the Control Rocm and I briefed him regarding

the situation at the football ground and requested him to attend and

see me.

We were made aware that there were fatalities and a temporary
                                        »
mortuary was arranged in the gymnasium.

The managers of Notts Forest - Mr CLOUGH, and Liverpool - Mr

DALGLISH, came into the Police Control Box and asked Whether the game

was postponed.     They were told it would be, but an announcement

should not be made.     Mr DALGLISH asked if there was anything he could


                                                                               867
                                                                    PAGE   9
                                                                    S416

do and he was requested to make an announcement for the Liverpool

fans to keep calm so the Police could deal with the situation.      He

did so and both managers left the Control Room.

Some time after this I went to the pitch and spoke to Chief

Superintendent NESBIT who had been involved in the rescue operation.

At that time there was a lot of shouting at the Lappings Lane end

and restlessness creeping round the ground.   Ws decided that it would

be helpful to calm everyone by making an announcement that the game

had been abandoned and ask the fans to remain where they were until

all the casualities were taken away from the ground.   We then made a

request via the Police Control Rocm for this to be done.

I then returned to the Police Control Roan.   Detective Chief

Superintendent ADDIS arrived and I briefed him regarding the enquiry

into the events to commence and to ensure that the temporary mortuary

and casualty bureau were functioning.

All the casualties were cleared and then at approximately 4.45 pm

(1645), Chief Superintendent MOLE came to the Control Rocm.     I

briefed him regarding the situation and requested him to control and

co-ordinate remaining matters at the ground so that I could go to

Police Headquarters to continue enquiries and brief the Deputy Chief

and Chief Constable.

I left the Police Control Box with Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

and Superintendent MARSHALL who had joined us and walked across the

pitch to the Police Rocm.   We met Mr BARRON, a Director of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club, on the pitch and he said the police had done

an excellent job.   He was clearly upset and crying.

About 5.15 pm (1715), Superintendent MARSHALL, Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD, and myself went to Police Headquarters.   I spoke to the

Deputy Chief Constable and later, because of the amount of manpower

that had been used, began making arrangements to ensure sufficient


                                                                               868
                                                                       PAGE    10
                                                                       S416

         cover for the following day.

         Because of the impending visit of the Minister of Sport at 9.00 pm

         (2100) I liaised with our operational staff to ensure that

        appropriate arrangements were made and also ensured that appropriate

         staffing arrangements were available for temporary mortuary staff -

        casualty bureau and that relatives of deceased and injured would be

         sympathetically dealt with by counselling.

         I retired from duty about 0245 am (0245).




                                                            W JACKSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME:             DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                     I




                                                                                    869
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     TRAFFIC ENGINEER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 150589                                                          (SK2JED)



           I am employed as a Traffic Engineer for Sheffield City Council.   I

       have been employed in this capacity since 1982 (000082).       Firstly for

       the now abolished South Yorkshire Council and since then for the

       newly formed Sheffield City Council.

       As Traffic Engineer it is my responsibility to be aware of and control

       the road network of Sheffield City Council area in respect of road

       works and road closures.

       On 22nd March 1989 (220389) I attended a meeting at Hammerton Road

       Police Station together with police officers from vaious police

       departments, representatives from the Fire Brigade, bus companies,

       British Rail and the ambulance authority.       The meeting was organised

       by South Yorkshire Police.

       During the meeting I was advised by police officers of the intended

       route for fans attending the FA Cup Semi Final to be held at

       Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, on Saturday 15th April 1989

           (150489).

           I was asked to clear the following routes into Sheffield of all road
                           i
       works and closures, the A616, A6102, A61, Herries Road, A629, Parkway
                                                                        2


and the A6109 through Attercliffe.   I also checked on roadworks in

and around Hillsborough as well.

By Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I had cleared all roadworks and

road closures on the proposed routes, with the exception of road works

at Firvale on the A6102 Owler Lane, which was on the route to be used

by Nottingham Forest fans.

I made arrangements with the traffic division of South Yorkshire

Police for officers to patrol these roadworks.   These arrangements

were made on 22nd March 1989 (220389) at the meeting they were long

term roadworks and I knew at the time of the meeting that they would

not be completed by 15th April 1989 (150489).

To my knowledge these arrangements were carried out on the day of the

semi-final and no traffic hold ups occurred to my knowledge.

Since the 15th April 1989 (150489) I have received no reports of any

problems for traffic entering Sheffield on the day of the semi-final.

I was also employed in the same capacity for the FA Cup semi-final.

Between the same two teams at Hillsborough last year, as far as I am

concerned the arrangements made between the police and the other

emergency and transport authorities and ourselves at Sheffield City

Council were a carbon copy of this year again no traffic problems

existed on the day of last years game.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   150589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                  872
                                                                        STATION
^pME:

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     HIGHWAY ENGINEER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030589                                                          (SIGNED)



        I am employed by                                 in the capacity of a

        Highway Engineer, and have been thus engaged for the last 2 years.

        One of my responsibilities is to be aware of the various roadworks

        effecting the Greater Manchester motorways.

        With regard to the road works in the vacinity of the M62/M63, I can

        say that no roadworks were taking place on the M62 from the Cheshire

        boundry and junction 12, which is the junction with the M63 for traffic

        traveling along the M63.   From junction 12 via Stockport major

        road works were taking place between junction 3 and junction 6.

        These commenced at the beginning of 1988 (000088) and are scheduled to

        be completed towards the end of 1989 (000089).     These roadworks are

        widening of the motorway from 2 lanes to 3 lane.    Approaching junction

        12 on the M62 from the Liverpool direction, there are signs advising

        motorists of roadworks taking place on the M63.     It is probably best

        to say that the approach to junction 3 of the M63 from M62 is a 3 lane

        motorway, this section having been widened from 2 lanes a few years

        ago. From my records I can say that between junction 2 and 3 of the

        M63 Stockport bound side, the carriageway was reduced to 2 lanes to
get the traffic into a suitable configuration prior to running in

2 narrow lanes in a contra flow situation between junctions 3 and 6.

Whilst this contra flow was in operation,     the opposite carriageway

would have been closed in it's entirety, for a distance of about 3-4

kilometres. I would point out that between junctions 14 and 17 of the

M62 in an east bound direction roadworks were being carried out to

repair the central reserve crash barriers.     This required the closure

of the third lane for a distance of 1 kilometre in the vicinity of

junction 15.   This work was started on Saturday, 15/4/89 (150489) and

was expected to be carried out between 8.30am (0830) and 3.30 pm

(1530) and were expected to be repeated again the next day.       These

particular roadworks were started on the 15/5/89 (150589) weekend

because, this length of motorway is considered too busy during the

weekdays to close off any lanes.     Barrier repairs such as this would

not normally cause any significant delays to    traffic and I am not

aware of any caused by these works.    The only other roadworks

effecting the M62 were those taking place between Junctions 21 and 22

in the region of Rakewood Viaduct.    This is a major scheme that

started in May 1988 (000588) and was completed at the end of April,

1989 (000489). This we had required a contra flow system on the

eastbound carriageway and covered a distance of about 2 kilometers at

most. Of the 3 roadworks discussed 2 were obviously major schemes and

the one was required to be completed over the weekend 15/ 16th April,

1989 (150489/160489) but that one didn't cause a traffic flow problem.

I can produce a copy of the Lane Closure Bulletin which I published

on 13/4/89 (130489) the copy of which is attached (Ref N o | ( E x

No     ).




                                                                           874
                                             SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   030589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     G MDRRICE INSP2237




                                                      875
                                                                           STATION
^M E:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                                             (SIGNED)



        I am a married man living at the above address with my wife,




        On Saturday the 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the F.A.Cup Send

        Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest being held at

        Hillsborough football ground Sheffield.     I am a Liverpool supporter

        and have been for thirty five years.     I obtained my ticket from my

        brother in law,                                              who is an

        agent for Liverpool football club.     I paid #12 for my ticket to go

        into the West Stand.

        I arranged to go to the game with three pals frcm work,

                                and                   who works in

        telephone no.                  I don't know their addresses but they

        can be contacted at work.   We went by car,      _______ was driving.       I

        was picked up at 11am (1100) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) from

        my hone, the other three lads were already in the car.       We travelled

        from Liverpool to Sheffield.   We were held up in several places by

        the volume of traffic at the second turn off on the M63 and in
Stockport, also tfottram Road, Manchester.

We stopped at a pub about six miles outside Sheffield,we had apint

and seme sandwiches.     There were other Liverpool supporters in the

pub having a beer.     Near to the pub there were Police Officers

checking certain vehicles, mainly vans and other large vehicles.

Checking for beer or cans, which they did last year when I went to

the same match.    I find this ironic because people simply go to off

licences near the ground and supermarkets to get the beer.      They

check all the coaches and the vans etc. and close the pubs near to the

ground but leave the off licences and supermarkets      open.

We arrived in Sheffield around 2pm (1400), near to      the     groundatthe

Forest end, parked the car in or around Penistone Road,

and                gent to the South Stand, we split up and arranged to

meet back at the comer of the ground near to junction Bastock Road

and Penistone Road.    I went with       down towards Leppings Lane.     I

did not see any fighting or disorder, there was lots of chanting and

singing.    I could see seme fans drinking out of cans of beer. I did

not see a lot of this. One of my mates has since made a comment

about this, in the Supermarkets they were making the lads buy 4 cans

of beer or lager, even though you only wanted one, they had to buy

them in packs of four.

      and I turned the comer of a road, I think it was Parkside, it

was the main road into Leppings Lane, the first thing that struck me

was the amount of people outside in the roadway leading to turnstiles

North Stand, West Stand and Terraces turnstiles A - C.    There was no

orderly queues, people were just a mass.

The time now was about twenty past to twenty five past two (1420) to

(1425).    There is a junction there Middlewood Road, Leppings Lane and

Catchbar Lane, people were coming down all the roads towards the
ground all going in different directions.             and I had to push our

way through the crowds to get towards the turnstiles.       I had got a U19

on ray ticket so I was trying to find the entrance.      I did not see a

Police Officer or a steward outside the ground giving directions from

where we parked the car to the ground.

I did see Police but they were on the comer of Parkside and

Permistone Road in a group of about ten.      They were checking for

anyone carrying cans of beer.      I did see than tell a few Forest

Supporters to put the cans down.      When we got near to the turnstiles

in Leppings Lane I again saw some more policemen at the junction of

Vere Road and leppings Lane, others were in the North Stand gateway

entrance near to a sweet shop, they were sitting in a large blue riot

van.   I can not tell you how many were in there.     There was only two

on horseback, they were both in the Terraces turnstile entrance

between the metal gates and the turnstiles.      There were other

policemen on the two sides, they were passing kids over the walls, I

don't know why.           and I then decided to split up, he had a ground

ticket to go into Leppings Lane terrace turnstile.

As I said earlier I was trying to find entrance U19 but the turnstile

notices were poor.            «ent in through the large metal gates

nearest to the offside wall facing the turnstiles from Leppings Lane.

I intended to go along the wall past the turnstiles to try and find

my entrance.    I saw a sign ABC in the middle turnstile area.      There

was a mass of people outside the large metal gates and the

turnstiles.    I would estimate 3,000 plus.   Outside the metal gates

it was not a crush.      I left      at this stage.   I told him I had

ccme in the wrong place.      I wanted to go to the right but the crush

of the people pushing in behind me pushed me over towards the wall

on ray left hand side.    I tried to get out of it but I could not
move.    After a couple of minutes of getting in through the metal

gateway I was completely stuck, unable to move.    There was a

Policeman on a horse on my left, I remember the Policeman had a

 'tash, nothing else; as we got near to the horse there appeared to be

seme space around him, everyone was shouting at the Policeman to do

sanething "ease the crush", "close the gates", that's the metal

gates behind us, and to put the game back because we knew there was

no way we were going to get in in time.    It was about twenty to

three (1440) at this time.   We weren't moving as you normally do in a

queue.   The Policeman on the horse was shouting to the crowd behind

me to move back.    I did not notice if he had a radio or not. The

horse was moving backwards towards the metal gates.

By this time I had had enough.    I was not worried about getting in

the ground, I was very frightened because of the crush, it was

uncontrollable.    I felt a lot of pressure, physical on me.   I was

being squashed from all sides.   As the horse backed up he seemed to

get stuck then.    I noticed a wall on my nearside, people were

climbing over the wall and railings at this point to get out of the

crush.   I would have done the same if I could have.   After a couple

of minutes I found myself facing the wall with my left shoulder

facing Leppings Lane, my hands were against the wall for safety.       I

inched my way along the wall towards Leppings Lane.    Hie Police horse

had by this time moved towards the middle of the crowd.   He seemed

to be stuck.

I would like to say that by the time the amount of people had

entered this area there was nothing anyone could have done.      50

Policemen would not have stopped the crush except by pulling people

out from the back, it was terrible.

Where the wall ended by the West Stand seating turnstiles, a fellow
put his hands against the wall and allowed me to duck under, once I

ducted under I then went into the West Stand seating turnstiles,

although this was the wrong entrance I did not really know there

was a bit of pushing in this entrance but nothing like the crush

in the next area.

I went into the ground.     I stood for a few minutes to recover,

about 8 yards (8yds) away I saw a line of Police Officers on the steps

leading up from West Stand turnstiles, they were about three

steps up, they were checking that you had a ticket before you

were allowed any further.    I said to one of the Policemen, "You'

are in the wrong place, it's murder outside".     Hie Policeman made

no reply.   This Policeman had a radio.

I don't think he realised how bad it was.     There are two sets of

steps up to get to the West Stand.    I heard the roar then for the

teams ccming out of the tunnel, it was about 2.55pm (1455).

I went up the next set of steps and that's where I saw the first

steward, the first steward all day.    I asked him where my seat

was, he pointed up the top somewhere, I noticed two Policemen at

the entrance to the West Stand as well.     On my travels from the

turnstiles I did not see anyone drinking a can of beer or lager

or any fighting at all.

I did not see any gates opening other than the turnstiles.     I had

my ticket taken off me at the turnstiles.     I did not see any

signs directing me to my area.    I did not use the tunnel at all

to pens 3 and 4.

Once I was on my way to my seat the first thing I noticed was

people climbing over the railings behind the goal out of pens 3 &

4, they were climbing out of all sides.     I could see that there

was a bad crush going on.    I could see that there was plenty of
space in pens 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 mostly pen 6 was the emptiest, peqple

could not understand what the crush was because it was empty in

pens 6/7.

I was seated about ten steps from the entrance that I came up.         I

could see all the front behind the goal but I could not see at

the back where the tunnel came in.      As the game started there

seemed to be a lot more climbing over the fence at the front,

there was about ten policemen trying to step the fans from

climbing over the fence behind the goal.     Hie policemen were

pushing the fans back into the pen.      To me the situation seemed

to be getting worse, there was about 50 people climbing over or

had got o v e r the fence.   Then I noticed a Policeman running onto

the pitch from behind the Liverpool goal which was by pens 3/4,

the Policeman ran to the referee who was in the penalty area.

The Policeman was talking to the referee and pointing behind the

goal.

We were all standing up then in our stand.      I noticed a fan lying

on the floor behind the goal with two people pumping his heart.

What struck me was that the Police were not doing anything,

just looking at the fans.     Then there was a hell of a lot of

people climbing over the fence.

I did not see the barrier collapse or what caused the crush in

pens 3/4.

An ambulance had come onto the ground by then the players and

officials had left the field.

I noticed one particular Liverpool fan running to the Kop end,

the Nottingham Forest end and start gesturing and bating the

Nottingham Fans, this caused a reaction from the Forest fans, two

policemen brought the fan down with a rugby tackle, there was a
__________________________                                               7


 big cheer from the Liverpool fans and that's when the police

marched on in two lines from the Forest end, they marched down

the track at the side to the half way line and went across the

pitch.     They stretched the whole width of the pitch, by then

there were hundreds of fans from the Liverpool end on the pitch.

I could not believe the Police Officers, they were doing this

when all those fans were dead or needed treatment.     I realise

that they thought there was going to be scroe crowd trouble but

there was obviously a breakdown in camunication.      By this time

the small gate at the front was opened and Policemen were trying

to tear (town the fencing with their bare hands, even when

Liverpool fans and sane policemen were carrying out the rtead or

the injured on the advertising boards the police were still

standing on the halfway line not moving.     I could not understand

it.   By now it twenty past three (1520) and we were getting angry

because the Police were doing nothing but standing there at the

centre circle and they must have known what was going on even if there

was a breakdown in camiunications. There was still no tannqy messages

and no one knew what was going on.     The loudspeakers are not loud

enough at games and you can not hear them above the noise of the

crowd.     This is a fault at all football grounds.

The Forest Fans were making seme comments or taunts, they did not

know what was going on; because of the taunts, about 200 Liverpool

Fans ran down the pitch to the Forest End and were stopped by a

line of Policemen.    The police at the centre circle had left the

pitch to deal with fighting in the North Stands, it was fighting or

sane problem because I could see a corrmotion.   The Liverpool fans

who had run down the pitch returned to their end.     There was no

trouble.
                                                                          8

The point I'm trying to make is that if the loudspeakers had been

used and the ccmmunication was better and loud enough then that

incident would not have happened.

I saw other things and many dead bodies afterwards, but nothing

relevant.

I went to this same match in 1988 (000088).     I went to the same West

Stand. The main difference was that there seemed to be more police at

that match, especially in Leppings Lane.

Outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane the main gates last year there

was a line of police checking your tickets before you even got near

the turnstiles, this seemed to take a lot of the crush away.     There

was still some crushing but not half as bad as this year.

Last year we got to the ground later, we got there at 2.50pm (1450)

and we were in the ground in five minutes, there were a lot more

stewards last year, this year I only seen one.

In my opinion where I saw it went wrong on April 15th 1989 (150489),

was that if there had been more Police outside the main gates to the

turnstiles in Leppings Lane and the people had been put into queue,

which they are used to at Liverpool, then the crush would not have

happened. I also think that for a Cup Semi final there was not

enough turnstiles although they were all open.    There should have

been better signs where to go.     I don't know how many people were in

that area of the crush who should not have been there, I was one,

because of the poor signposting.
                                     SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           PS

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                         STATION
^M E:           NEIL MICHAEL
                SAVAGE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                                N M SAVAGE (SIGNED)



           I am Neil Michael SAVAGE, I live at

        Liverpool.     I am a married man and have two children aged

        yrs.    I have lived in Liverpool for 26 years and have supported

        Liverpool football team for as long as I can remember I go to most of

        the heme games and the important away games.     I usually go with a

        group of friends but I'm not a member of the supporters club.

        On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I decided to go to the

        Liverpool v Nottingham Forrest football match which was an away game

        held at Hillsborough football ground in Sheffield.

        The day before the match Friday 29th of April 1989 (290489) I bought a

        ticket from Liverpool football ground for the Leppings Lane terraces,

        it cost me #6.

        On the Saturday I met four friends in the grenadier pub, Camberly

        drive, Halewood, they were,                   , of

                                 of

                                      and

                     I am unsure of the house numbers of those addresses.

        At the pub we had one pint of beer to drink, and visited the local
 SAVAGE               NEIL MICHAEL


off licence and bought about 12 cans of lager between us.    This all

took about half an hour and we left for the match about 1100 hrs.      We

went by car, a Cortina Mk 4, which belonged to               |,

________Irove it.   We went to Sheffield on the M56 to the end of the

M63, we found the journey slow as there was bad traffic congestion on

the M63, this was due to road works I think, we then continued on the

Snake Pass, into Sheffield.    We didn't stop on the journey at all but

drank the cans of beer on the way, I had two of those cans which

amounts to about a pint of beer.   On the way I didn't see any other

supporters, drinking or stopped off at pubs.

We arrived at Sheffield about 1400 hrs and parked the car about 1

mile frcm the leppings Lane end of Sheffield.    From there we walked

towards the ground and stopped off at a Hot dog stand for about five

minutes for something to eat, we didnt have anything else to drink,

neither did I see any other supporters drinking or appear drunk.      As

we approached the ground there were policeman spaced out making it

obvious which way to go and we were directed by that way to the

Leppings Lane entrances.

At 1430 when we arrived in Leppings Lane there were loads of people

outside the gates which were closed, these gates were situated

in front of the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.    It was at this point we

all split up and joined the mass of people as it was impossible to

stay together.   There was no fighting or trouble around this area,

but just too many people.   At the gates were 5 policemen or more and

they were letting people through the gates at about forty or fifty a

time, and when they had cleared through the turnstiles they opened

them again and did the same.   In front of the gate I was at, which was

the terraces turnstiles was a mounted policeman.   His horse stood on

my foot and I had to push the horse out of the way.   I tried to
SAVAGE                 NEIL MICHAEL                                         a

attract his attention by shouting to him as I was in agony with half a

tonne of horse on my foot.     He didn't appear to hear me.

His actions, appeared agressive to me, leaning over his horse and

pointing at people and pushing.     The fans surrounding him were getting

angry with him and shouting abuse at him.     His actions made me feel

aggressive towards him as well.     I don't know if what he was doing

was right as he seemed to be panicing and not in control of the

situation.

I was pushed forward until I was right up against the gate, it was

uncomfortable but I didn't feel endangered.     I saw a policeman open

the gate and I went through in a big surge of people towards the

turnstiles.    I was in front of the turnstiles ready to go in when I

heard from the crowd around me that a gate to the right of me

opposite the River Don, had been opened, I pushed my way to the

right and saw about 5 or 6 bobbies stood by the gate.     I think the

gate was a slidding one.     I saw it was open and saw about 10-15

supporters going through.    As I approached it, the Police closed it

and I showed my ticket but they told me to go around back where I had

cone from.    I went back to the turnstiles and as I got around the

comer, I saw a the gate to my left open, I think this was a swing gate.

The main flow of people went for this gate and I was nearly taken

with them but I thought, because I've got a ticket I might as well go

through the turnstiles.     I went through the turnstile and had my

ticket ripped by the gateman.     In front of me were only a handful of

supporters and I had a clear view of the tunnel in front of me. I

could not see any policemen or stewards at the tunnel or any

indication of where to go or not to go.    On the perimeter walls behind

me were people/supporters sat on the wall.    I didn't see anyone

actually climb over.   I'm not quite sure where the supporters came
 SAVAGE                NEIL MICHAEL                                          4


 from in the next few seconds but as I made ray way to the tunnel I was

 joined by masses of people, I was walking but then I was forced to

walk fast by the crowds behind.     It was like a surge of people, I was

a bit worried but didn't feel endangered thinking it would sort itself

out further on.    As I went on the tunnel wasn't crowded but the main

bulk seemed to be behind me.     As I looked forward I could see the game

had already started.    I think I was still walking fast, but as I

entered the pen area I realised it was really full.      I've never seen a

stand that full.    I was pushed to the right into pen 3 and

uimediatley I entered I wanted to get out, it wasn't just

uncomfortable anymore but frightening.     I looted to the right and saw

that what I now realise was pen 2 was not full at all and looted very

empty.    I tried to make ray way over to the right.   I couldn't get

there, I was forced down towards the front I couldn't breath propely

and people around me were obviously distressed, as I got pushed

forward I saw a girl about 14 years old with mousey to fair coloured

hair to ray left and slightly behind, I think she was wearing a beige

pullover or sweater, she was low down and on the floor, her hands were

streached up as if she was trying to pull herself up and she was

shouting help, help.   As I went past I tried to reach her but was

forced forward, I seemed like ten minutes but it was probably only a

minute, until I forced ray way back to her, I managed to get hold of

her hand and I tried to pull her up but it seemed as if her feet were

trapped, she wasn't shouting at this stage, and her head was forward

and the rest of her body was limp.    Someone else helped me next and

managed to get her up above us, ray position through out this all was

just in front of the barrier that broke.    I saw her pushed and passed

over the fence in front of us.

I was then pushed forward again and about two people in depth before
 SAVAGE                  NEIL MICHAEL                                          5


 the barrier I looked to ray left and saw a man, slimped over, he was

 about late thirties and had dark hair which was greying, he didn't

 have any facial hair, the style of his hair was short, but not

cropped, a bit like short b a ck and sides.     I saw that his face was

blue and his lips almost scarlet, he looted dead.       Hie people in front

of me were doubled over the barrier.     Hie pressure at this stage was

unbelievable, the only way I didn't go down was by fighting for

breath by lifting ray head up for air. I then saw the barrier in front

of me bend forward and I got pushed forward again in front of the

barrier there were bodies on the floor.       If the barrier hadn't have

broken I don't think I would be hear to tell this.      I was forced

slightly right of the barrier and arrived at the fence at the front of

the pen.     I part climbed the fence and was pushed from behind, I was

pulled over the fence by a policeman and supporters.

I went onto the pitch and was so stunned I just sat there.      All

around me were people lying on the floor and been given the kiss of

life but it didn't really register I was to stunned.      At this time

the match had been stopped I think it was probably 1520 hrs.

After a while I must have came to and realised what was going on so I

got up and with other supporters ran and ripped up the advert boards

and took them to the St Johns ambulance man who were lying bodies on

them.     I then thought I had seen ray mate being passed over the fence

and tried to find him, looking all on the pitch.      I went towards a

line of bodies but turned back, frightened that he might there.        While

I was looking for him I remember seeing the g^tes on the perimeter

fencing of pens 3 and 4 were open but they were so narrow it was of

little use.

I remember hearing an announcement over the loud speakers system for

people to remain in the ground so I stayed there and helped pass
        SAVAGE                     NEIL MICHAEL                                     £


        drinks into people who were in the pens 3 & 4 area, the crowd had

        gone down at this stage and there was no longer a crush.

        I then found two of ray mates on the pitch and went into pen 3 to look

        for ray other mates and saw three Liverpool supporters they appeared to

        be accusing another person of taking something and a small scuffle

        broke out, but it was over in a few seconds.

        I then saw a photographer taking pictures and same supporters went up

        to him and one went to hit him but a uniform policeman came along and

        explained in time, that he was a police photographer.        I can also

        remember seeing football supporters hitting press photographers who

        were taking photographs of bodies and people.

        I then located my other mates in another pen and arranged to meet than

        outside the ground.        I then left when I saw people filling out from

        the pitch, I joined than and went out of an exit in the South Stand.

        I met my friends outside and we went straight to the car and we all

        left.

        I didn't receive any injury as a result of what happened in the

        ground or go to hospital.

        (Sgd)     N M SAVAGE

        (Sgd)             |PC.



                                                                N M SAVAGE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:                  DATE:    300489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      PC!
                                                                           STATION

^M E:           BRIAN   JOSEPH
                DOYLE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


 DATED: 010589                                              BRIAN J DOYLE (SIGNED)



           I am Brian Joseph DOYLE of the above address where I live with ray

           mother.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Liverpool -v-

           Nottingham Forest Semi-Final at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.       I

           got ray ticket for 6 pounds off ray brother who went with me.    There

           were in fact five of us in one car.                   ray brother,

                                                       md                  I don't

           know where the last three live.   There was in fact another car load

           from one family,
                                                                    We started of

           at about 11 am (1100).

           I don't know the names of the roads we travelled on but as we came

           towards the end of the motorway there was a buildup of traffic which

           delayed us about half, three-quarters of an hour.     When we eventually

           got to the end, we went to a service station for some petrol.        When we

           eventually left the petrol station we got to Sheffield at about

           1.20 pm (1320) that afternoon.    I can't recall where we actually parked

           the car but it was at the top of a hill by a school by a housing
DOYLE                   BEHAN   JOSEPH                                      2


estate, it was a good 15-20 minutes walk.     As we made our way to the

ground ,1 called into a shop for cigarettes.     We tried to find a place

for a drink and walked out of one that had no glasses.     It took us a

fair while to find a place for a drink.     We eventually got a drink

but only had the one.

Having had our drink we made our way to the ground.     Before we left

the pub we saw a man selling cans of beer from his car boot on the

pub car park.     The fans were drinking than on the car park.     As we

approached the ground there were several police officers about but no-

ore told us which way to go.     There was no disorderly behaviour only

the expected semi-final good humour.

It was about 2.25 pm (1425) when we arrived at the ground, there was

a steady stream of people coming frcm both directions and a big

crowd of supporters ware gathering at the turnstiles we needed to

get through.     It was a huge disorganised mass of people pushing and

shoving at each other causing squashing.     People were crying in pain

unable to breath and panicking.     I saw two police horses by the blue

gates before the turnstiles and between 8 or 10 standing by the wall

to the right of the turnstiles.     They were doing nothing.   There was

no queues and no order whatsoever. I could not see any match

stewards either, none were in sight.     Because I'd been to the match

the previous year, I knew where I should get in but because of the

crowd I couldn't.    Although I tried to queue up it was no good,

people were just pushing and shoving.     I joined the crowd frcm the

side and found myself by a railing fence.     I could see people

pushing under.    My brother lifted two boys 8-10 yrs old, who were

crying, he passed them to the police officer who put them through a

side gate.     I could see people, lads being lifted up onto the wall

opposite me, sane of them ware trying to get out of the crush.       Seme
 DOYLE                 BEHAN   JOSEPH


of them I saw jumping down into the ground and I saw about 8 or 10

thrown out of the side gate.

After my brother passed the two boys to police officer who was trying

to help, scmeone was saying they ware opening the side gate.        I was

able to move towards it and eventually scmeone opened it and pulled

me through.    I fell through this gate and a number of other people

got through as well.    I don't know exactly how many but it could have

been about 200, but I was actually on the floor.       I picked myself up

and made my way towards the stand.      I didn't pass through any fence

but made my way straight to the tunnel where I could see the ground,

with me at this time was                 my brother,       and

              We'd got separated frcm the rest.   When we got to the end

of the tunnel the crowd in front of us was really tight, usually you

can at least move your body in sane way but not here.      We were only

there for about a minute when suddenly we felt a surge.      That would

be about 2.50 (1450) to 2.55 (1455) possibly 3 pm (1500).            who

is 15, had hold of my collar and I had hold of him so we wouldn't lose

each other.   Frcm where we were first standing at the top of the

compound we moved quickly to almost the bottom.     As this surge

stopped, there seemed to be a break in the crowd so I just pulled

after me, ducked under two barriers past people's feet and came out

right in the corner at the bottom of the compound, the right-hand

comer.

As the surge took place I could hear people screaming and crying,

people were being sick and starting to panic.     I think I panicked at

first, but it later turned into hatred towards those who weren't doing

enough.

Having got to the corner I helped         over the fence, scmeone

climbed over me and I helped to push scmeone else out.      I tried to lift
DOYLE                   BRIAN   JOSEPH                                         4


the old man out but he was stuck.        I would say he was about 58 to 63

years old with a full head of grey hair.       Because he was stuck I

couldn't lift him.     I think I then used his shoulder to climb out of

the pen into next one, the right-hand pen.       I ran over to a policeman

who was walking along in front of the fence and shouted to him, 'What

the tell are you getting paid for, are you going to do anything for

these people here.' He just walked past as though he never heard me.

I then ran over to a gate that leads onto the pitch, a police officer

was standing there.     I said to him, 'There's people throwing fits

over there, they're getting crushed, are you going to do anything.'

He only told me to get back to my place.       I then just pushed the gate

open and ran past him to the fence.       I could see out of the corner of

my eye other police coming towards me.       I jumped onto the fence to

try to get people out but couldn't.       I got down and the police were

telling me to get back off the pitch.       I got hold of a policewoman

and pulled her towards the fence to show her what was happening.         She

just went to pieces.     I jumped back on the fence a little bit left of

the goal and tried to pull people out but they were packed too

tight.     I had hold of a wcman who was crying for her sister.       I had

hold of ter hand trying to pull ter out and scmeone was sick over us.

I think I was about the first one to climb onto the fence.          I could

see people's faces turning red and purple.       They were frothing at the

mouth and their tongues were hanging out.       I saw them dying.    I

c6uldn't get them out, they were being trampled on and forced down

and down, there were loads and loads of people reaching out for help

and I couldn't.    I could hear someone in the crowd calling, 'Hey

DOYLE'Y go stop the match.'     I wasn't listening to this.    I was trying

to help.    This all happened very quickly, perhaps a minute or two but

it seemed like an hour.
 DOYLE                  BEHAN   JOSEPH


At this point          the young lad, came over onto the fence with me.

We leaned over quite a way, if ___ had have leaned over any more he

could have gone himself and I might not have got him back.       We had

hold of this skinny fella's hands and was trying to pull him out, he

was crying and screaming but there was no room, no freedom to pull

him out.     This policeman came over and pulled him off the fence, he

told         to get back to his place, he was making matters worse.

         tarted swearing at him to leave him alone.         was moving

away and the policeman was following him, it seemed as though he was

going to arrest         so I went over and pushed him away.    I said

something like, 'Have you seen what's going on in there, leave the

lad alone, he's upset.'

I, by this time, could see other people running over trying to lift

people out of the pens over the fence but because of the overhang

of the fence I knew it was no good, you just couldn't get enough

reach or lift to get people out so I started trying to pull at the

wire mesh.    Otter police were now trying what I'd been doing and were

trying to lift people out.      I continued to pull at the fence.   I

could see it moving.    I thought it might give way but it didn't.          I

shouted to the police that they would have to get something to cut

the fence.    I tried what I could do but it was no good.     I went and

sat down at the side of the pitch, by this time otter people were

being pulled out and taken to the pitch side.      I can remember feeling

numb and wondering what the hell I could do, knowing that frcm where

we were and with the fence there, there was little we could do.         I

felt helpless.

I remember seeing a man with a kid 13 yrs old, blonde hair, the man
                            \
had black hair and a moustache, he was screaming for help.      I don't

know if it was St Johns or Police who started to try to revive him, I
 DOYLE                  BRIAN    JOSEPH


 don't knew how they managed.      I thought after 15 minutes they got a

 heart beat, the crowd cheered in the stands and clapped.       The people

 who tried to help them tried to move the lad but I don't think they

 had any success.    There was masses of fans ripping at all the

 hoarding carrying injured people to where ever they went.       I think it

 was the players entrance.      Eventually the ambulances started to

 arrive and take people away.     Police and fans were trying to revive

 people, seine of the police were great but others didn't know what to

 do, they could have been in a state of stock, they are only human

 after all.   After a bit I can remember sane women handing out drinks

of water to sane of the injured and shocked.        Then I remsmber a line

of police caning onto the pitch frcm the direction of the players

entrance.     I saw one of them take a drink of water off the girls,

he'd only just cane on the ground.        I helped with the pulling down of

the hoardings and took them over to the penalty anm       and getting

people to take the injured away.      I saw people trying to revive a big

fella, they removed his jeans to try to let him breath but he'd

messed himself, at that point I couldn't go on.       I went and sat down

on the end of the pitch by the South Stand.       By this time seme of the

others had found me.    At about 4.40 (1640) I left the ground with the

others, we made our way out the hole that had been cut in the fence.

We made our way out of the ground where I saw a line of about twenty

policemen.    I recognised one on the end as one who had opened the

gate that I'd ccnte through, he'd pulled me up, there were quite a few

fans saying things like they would have to live with what they'd

done.    I don't suppose it was them alone but it was the whole

organisation, everyone at the top.

I got lost frcm my friends later but            called me, at that time I

was heading towards the train station lost.       We eventually got hone
          DOYLE               BRIAN JOSEPH                                         7


          at 7 pm (1900)




                                             B Doyle




                                                       BRIAN JOSEPH DOYLE SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

            TIME:           DATE:   010589

^ T N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 POL PC




                                                                                       897
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                                          (SIGNED)



        I am                     of the above address where I live with my

       family.

       On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Livepool and

       Nottingham Forrest Semi Cup Final at Hillsborough in Sheffield.       I did

       not go in an organised party but with two friends                     r I

       can't recall his address his telephone number is                   and a

                        of                                        I got my

       ticket frcm the Anfield ground it cost six pounds for the Leppings

       Lane Standing area.     We left heme at about 11am (1100) that morning in

       my car. As we made our way to Sheffield we travelled along the M63,

       at the end of this motorway the three lanes changed into two and

       because of the volume of traffic this started to cause a tail back.

       After this there was a large hold up at a traffic island at Stockport,

       the traffic did start to move at a steady pace.      We didn't stop until

       we arrived at seme side street off a dual carriageway not far from

       the ground.     When we stopped we went into a pub to use the toilets,

       we didn't have a drink but I did see there were quite a few Liverpool

       fans inside.     I can't say how many there were.   As we made our way
towards the ground,   I did see people carrying cans of beer and

drinking , no one was really misbehaving.   We actually arrived at

Sheffield at about 2.10pm (1410) that afternoon.     Police were evident

on route to the ground but we actually knew our own way and didn't

need any direction. As we arrived at the ground I saw that the

crowds were gathering.   I could see about three mounted Police,

because I already knew where to enter the ground myself and

went towards turnstiles B at those turnstiles the crowd was really

dense.   Everyone appeared to be trying to get to the turnstiles

together there was no orderly queue whatsoever.    As we made our way

along the wall to our left lads were being lifted up on top of the

wall to get out of a crush which was getting tighter.     A young lad 8

or 9 became seperated frcm his father I pushed myself from the wall to

let them pair up again. The lad was very upset crying.     I lost contact

with my f r i e n d a n d    eventually got to turnstile one how I did

it I don't know people were pushing and shoving crying and shouting

about the pressure. My shirt was ruttoed against the wall and tom.

When I got through the turnstile it was a great relief.     I eventually

met up with my friend and we went to the raised standing aT*=»a I

believe Pen 7.   I didn't see any gate opened. I didn't see any

people enter the ground without tickets but there were lads on the top

of that wall. My ticket was for the Leppings Lane Standing Area 2

but because I know the ground I went to Pen Seven.    As I made my way

to my place to see the match I did not see any Stewards or Police.      I

did not see any Stewards outside the ground.   I actually got to my

place at about 2.55pm 2.57pm (1455) (1457) and left at 3.50pm 4pm

(1550) (1600).   Between those times I could see the Pens 3 and

4 becoming too crowded and then people climbing over the fences I

thought it was a bit of overcrowding I didn't know how bad it was
           until later with people lying covered on the pitch, others trying to

           revive people and I eventually left of my own accord.

           I didn't actually know I was in the wrong Pen or what number it was

           until later.



                                                                        SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

             TIME:           DATE:   300489

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

^ F I C E R S SIGNATURE:
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          ROBERT BRIAN
A              WHITE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 028 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                             Robert White (SIGNED)



            I am a single man and live at the above address with my parents.

           Further to the questionnaire which I have answered today, Sunday May

           7th 1989 (070589), I wish to add the following about my knowledge of

        previous matches, and the incidents at Hillsborough on Saturday 15th

        April 1989 (150489).

           I am making this statement as scmeone who has been a regular football

           supporter for many years, I have a season ticket for the Spion Kop at

        Anfield, and during my three years as a student at Nottingham

        University, I travelled to many away matches, particularly in the

        Midlands and London, to watch Liverpool play.      I therefore have

        experience of visiting a number of different football grounds and on

        many of these occasions they were filled to capacity.      On seme

        occasions the turnstiles had to be shut to prevent more people from

        entering.

           In particular, this year's Semi-Final was my third visit to

        Hillsborough in the past twelve months.      The other two visits were

           for the Sheffield Wednesday versus Liverpool league match in January

        and the 1988 Liverpool versus Nottingham Forrest F A Cup Semi-Final.
WHITE                  ROBERT BRIAN                                       2


At the previous semi final I had stood in the centre section of the

Leppings Lane terrace and in the league match I had sat in the West

Stand which is also reached via the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane

end. On 15th April (150489) this year, ray ticket was again for the

standing area of the Lepping Ln terrace.

I had intended to arrive at the ground this year at about 2.00pm

(1400) as I did at the semi final last year, but a series of traffic

hold ups along the M62 motorway had meant that the journey from

Liverpool had taken longer than anticipated.

I was travelling with a colleague from work and he suggested a number

of alternative routes which enabled us to avoid seme of the

congestion.   When we eventually reached Sheffield there were still

many people parking their cars and many coaches just arriving at the

same time as us, so I was not too concerned that we had arrived later

than I'd hoped.     I believe that the time that we parked was probably

about 2.00pm (1400).

For seme reason, the AA recommended route to Hillsborough was

different this year compared to last year.     This may have been due to

the fact that after last years match, the direct route from Sheffield

to Manchester had been so congested that traffic was moving literally

at walking pace for miles and miles.     I therefore thought that I

would follow the different route that had been recartmended to

familiarize myself with it, particularly for the purpose of avoiding a

repeat of the congestion I had experienced the previous year on the

return journey.     I had not anticipated such delays on the way to

Sheffield though.

However, the different route meant that I had to park in an unfamiliar

area compared to previous visits, so I was not sure how far away the

ground was.   I didn't think that it could be far though, because
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                     3


there were a number of traffic policemen around showing people where

to park.

My colleague stopped off for a couple of minutes to buy himself seme

lunch but even so we thought that we still had plenty of time.     After

all, the ticket itself reccmrended taking up a position 15 minutes

before kick-off and I thought that we would certainly arrive before

then.      Even with this brief stop, I suppose we reached the ground

between about 2.20pm (1420) to 2.30pm (1430), which should have been

ample time, albeit later than we had hoped.

However, we had not anticipated the confusion that greeted us as

we approached the turnstiles.      I searched in my pocket for my ticket

to see which of the two entrances (that led frcm the street to the

actual turnstile) we needed to use, and realised that even though we

were several yards frcm the outer blue gates which led up to the

turnstiles, we in fact needed to move over to our right slightly, in

order to approach our allocated turnstiles through entrance 'B'.

There were so many people approaching the ground that it was difficult

to make even this slight change in direction.     Other people to our

right had likewise realised that they too were approaching the wrong

entrance to the turnstiles, and the result was that many people were

colliding with each other in the road as they tried to get to the

correct place.

I'm sure that at last year's semi-final there were police and stewards

directing people in the road on the approach to the turnstiles and so

this problem did not arise then.

Furthermore, this marshalling last year meant that orderly queues had

been formed, up at the turnstiles and as is the case at most grounds I

have visited, these queues were kept apart last year by policemen,

some of them mounted, moving between them and so avoiding the problem
WHITE                ROBERT    BRIAN                                     4

of the queues merging into a solid mass of people outside the ground.

I had read in the press before the game this year that the police were

issuing a warning about pick pockets operating in the queues and the

turnstiles, which had apparently been a problem at last year's Semi­

final.   I had told my colleague to be aware of this and I therefore

expected to see an even greater police presence at the turnstiles this

year to combat the problem.

I was therefore particularly surprised to see so few policemen

actually near the turnstiles considering the warning that had been

issued, and the fact that there did not seem to be any attempt being

made to form orderly queues.    This looked to me as though any pick

pockets around would find the situation even more to their liking than

the previous year.   I again warned my colleague to be particularly

careful with his ticket, because the article that I had read mentioned

that last year some people had their tickets stolen while they were

actually queuing.

If this was indeed the case it certainly seemed odd that the efficient

marshalling that existed last year was not extended further.     In

fact, this year it did not seem to exist at all.

There was a mounted policeman by the blue entrance gate that we were

approaching and he was allowing a few people at a time to pass through.

However, there were no queues in evidence at the turnstiles.     There

was just a single mass of people.      The only other policemen that I

could see were up by the turnstiles.     There was one mounted policeman

and only a few on foot.   There were none between the mounted

policeman at the blue entrance gate and the rear of the mass of people

who had passed through those gates.

The area was certainly very congested when I was allowed past by the

mounted policeman, but I did not think that it was dangerously so at
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                      5


that time.     I was of course at the back of those waiting to go

through the turnstiles, though.      Just after I went through the

mounted policeman moved so as to hold up the crowd in the street and I

could see that gradually the number of people waiting to get past him

was building up.     There did not appear to be any other assistance

being given to control the number of people still in the street

outside.     Again, I thought how much better the situation had been

with last year's marshalling.      It seemed to be taking a long time for

people to get through the turnstiles, even when they were right up to

them, because of the sheer number of people behind than.        I did not

seem to be getting any nearer the turnstiles but, nevertheless, more

people were allowed through the entrance from the street behind me, a

few at a time, to join the growing crowd at the turnstiles.

As more people were let in behind me, so I began to feel uneasy as the

whole area was becoming very crowded indeed.      Before long a crush was

developing and people were just being carried along in the general

direction of the turnstiles.       It was very difficult to move and it

seemed to take an age to reach the front - perhaps fifteen minutes, or

there abouts for a distance of only about 10 yards.      By the time I

was level with the turnstiles there was a lot of shouting and

screaming going on and many people were being hurt.      My colleague was

still behind me and slightly to the side, because it seemed as though

different parts of the mass of p)eople were moving at slightly

different speeds.      The mounted policeman near to the turnstiles was

shouting at p)eople near him to move back, but it was simply impossible

for them to move at all.     Action was required at the back.      People

needed to be moved at the back so that the pressure at the front could

be alleviated.      However, once through the outer blue entrance gate it

was not possible to move back into the street because there were so
WHITE                  ROBERT   BRIAN                                      6


many other people trying to get through.

When I reached the front I realised that people were in fact being

forced up against the walls between the turnstiles as well as up

against each other and into the wall at theside.       It was becoming

very painful and I was glad that I was nearthe turnstile.      However,

even at the front it was difficult to actually pass through the

turnstile itself because there were just so many people all trying

to do the same.    At the front the crowd were swaying from side to

side so that one minute I was facing a turnstile and the next minute a

brick wall next to it.

I looked across to the far turnstile over to my right and I noticed

that a young boy was being carried out on his back above people's

heads.     He was wearing a Liverpool FC tracksuit top.    He was passed

to a policeman who I suppose may have been on horseback because he was

clearly visible above everyone else, although he was not in the crush

himself.     He was, in fact, leaning around the end of the1
                                                           turnstile

wall in an attempt to get hold of the boy.

I have since seen television coverage which shows this boy being

helped to safety, so that film would help to indicate the approximate

time that I managed to get intothe ground because it took me a

further two or three minutes to get     in.   I would guess that it was

about 2.40pm (1440) to 2.45pn (1445) though.

It was a huge relief to get through the turnstile because the

situation outside had been deteriorating all the time.      I had to wait

another several minutes before my colleague managed to get through the

turnstile himself.     I stood inthe    area between the turnstiles and

the tunnel entrance to the centre terrace waiting for him.

When I had been outside the ground, many people in the crowd were

calling for the large 'concertina' gate to be opened because they
WHITE                 ROBERT   BRIAN                                      7


thought that there was a danger of people being hurt outside.      I

could hear these calls continuing as I stood waiting.     A number of

fans had actually climbed up on top of a wall at the side and had

walked along to a ledge directly above the turnstiles.     A number of

policemen inside the ground, between the turnstiles and the entrance

to the tunnel, looked concerned at this, so they went over to stand

just below them.     I could not hear what was said, but the fans held

up their still intact tickets and were then allowed to jump down to

the safety of the area where I was waiting.   I do not believe that

under normal circumstances this type of action would have been

permitted.

I therefore presume that the policemen who allowed it to happen were

sufficiently satisfied that the situation outside the turnstiles was

such that it warranted their use of discretion as to how best to allow

people into the ground.    Sending those people who had climbed over

the wall back outside the ground would only have added to the

confusion outside.    I believe that this fact was recognised by the

police officers inside the ground.

Then I noticed itry colleagues come through one of the turnstiles and we

then proceeded towards the tunnel directly opposite the turnstiles

which I knew from previous visits, led to the terrace.

I only recall seeing one steward at the start of the tunnel and he was

merely observing those people who were passing through the tunnel.

However, there were two stewards at the foot of the steps to my right,

which led to the seating in the West Stand and they were checking

tickets as people went past them and up the steps.      No check was made

of my ticket or to my knowledge of anyone elses entering the tunnel.

On each of my previous visits to Hillsborough I have stood in the area

between the turnstiles and the tunnel for several minutes.      Despite
WHITE                ROBERT   BRIAN                                        8



having looked around this area as I have waited each time.      I have no

recollection of any signs or stewards directing people to the

terracing at the sides.   This equally applies to my last visit on

April 15th of this year (150489).     I have to say that I did not know

that there was another way to gain access to the terracing other than

the way that I could actually see directly in front of roe - namely

through the tunnel that led to the centre section of terracing.     I did

not recall there being fencing at the sides actually on the terrace

and even if I had recalled that frcm my previous visits, as I could

not see an alternative way onto the terrace I'm sure I would have

still walked through the tunnel.      I remember that when I have visited

other grounds such as Watford and Leicester City, which also have

fencing across the terraces, gates in them have been opened to allow

people to pass through frcm one section to another.     Indeed, I recall

stewards at other matches using such a system to systematically fill

sections of the terrace as they wanted, before closing certain side

gates and then filling up another section.     This prevented any one

section from becoming too over crowded.      Such a system did not exist

at Hillsborough.   There were no gates in the side fences as far as I

could see.   The point that I am making is that despite having seen

the ground before, its layout was certainly not clear to me and in the

absence of instructions or directions I entered the terrace section by

what amounted to the only way I thought was possible.      I had time to

survey the area so I feel sure that scmeone who is in a hurry to enter

the terracing, unless they were already aware of a route to the outer

edges of the terrace, or were directed by someone, would also follow

the route that I took.

Of course, this route led to the most crowded part of the terrace,

although from anywhere other than inside the ground it would not be
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                      9


possible to actually see this.

As I started walking through the tunnel I could see daylight above

people's heads, but I could see that the far end of the tunnel was

obstructed by the sheer number of people.      Although I thought at that

moment that this was only to be expected for such a big match just

before kick-off, I remember thinking when I actually reached the far

end of the tunnel, that I was completely surprised by just how full

the area already was.

I found it difficult even getting through this wall of people on to

the start of the terrace, but as I did I soon realised that it would

be best not to try and move directly towards the goal which was

already far too packed.     It was also difficult to move to either

side, so the only direction in which I could see any hope of finding a

place to stand in any degree of comfort was to move diagonally

forward.   This is what I did.      In fact, I moved diagonally to my

right and my colleague followed behind me.

As I edged my way forward I could see that there appeared to be

slightly more room nearer the front.      In any case, I wanted to try

and get a clearer view as much as anything at this time.      I was

already aware that the area I was standing in was almost certainly

more densely populated than it had been at any stage of last year's

semi-final.    I was particularly worried about this in view of the

fact that I knew how many people were still trying to get into the

ground.    I thought that it would just not be possible to accommodate

any more people in the centre section of the terrace.      I reassured

myself, however, that there did appear to be far more spaces on the

side sections of the terracing and that, therefore, people still

trying to get in would be directed to       those areas, surely. It would

be clear, at a glance, for anyone inside the ground that this centre
WHITE                ROBERT BRIAN                                        10


section was dangerously overcrowded whereas there was still plenty of

room on the side section beyond the side fence.     This had not been

visible before I had gone through the tunnel though.      I began to wish

that I had been able to stand in the side section myself, but I could

not see anyway of getting to it.

With the match due to begin within a matter of minutes, I found myself

standing with a barrier directly in front of me.     I know frcm past

experience of capacity matches that it is usually far more comfortable

to stand with a barrier just behind rather than just in front of you.

The only direction in which I could move was forward, so I decided to

duck underneath the barrier.   A number of people did the same thing,

and so although I stood up just the other side of the barrier the

additional people who followed me caused me to be pushed further

forward and nearer to the perimeter fence.    At this stage, however,

there still appeared to be more room where I was standing than where I

had previously been standing, and I was relieved that the barrier was

no longer immediately in front of me.     There were no more barriers

between me and the perimeter fence - only people.

There is always some crowd movement during a match and I feared that I

would continually be pushed up against the barrier unless I moved.

My colleague had not ducked under the barrier.      Instead, he had

managed to move backwards slightly.     He was standing about ten feet

behind me.

Gradually I was feeling the pressure of the crowd increasing all

around and it was becoming very uncomfortable.

So I was now standing about three feet away frcm the perimeter fence

in the centre section of the terrace slightly to the right of the goal.

Even before the teams were on the pitch, people all around me, but

mainly in front of me, were calling out for scmeone to help them.
WHITE                  ROBERT   BRIAN                                    11


Sore were screaming and seme who were able to move thsnselves were

trying to climb out.      Their attempts to escape were seemingly

interpretted by the policemen on the other side of the fence as an

attempt to invade the pitch.      I could hear fans protesting as they

were being restrained on top of the fences by policemen.      Scmeone

actually called out that he thought that people at the front, by the

fence were dying but he was pushed back off the top of the fence and

onto the terrace again.     Clearly, those early warnings were not being

heeded despite the increasingly widespread pleas for assistance and

screams.

At this stage, although I could not move frcm the spot where I was

standing, I had been able to raise my arms frcm by my sides to steady

myself and so avoid falling over if the crowd began to sway.

At the time, that seemed a natural reaction although there were almost

certainly too many people already packed in to enable such a sway to

take place.

Gradually, however, the situation seemed to be getting worse and worse

and I could feel that more and more people were being allowed onto the

centre terraces despite the already dangerous overcrowding.     The

crush was getting tighter all the time.

There were now more policemen and seme St Johns ambulancemen gathering

on the other side of the fence obscuring my view of the

pitch, so I did not see when he teams actually came out onto the

pitch but I heard a roar frcm the crowd which signalled the moment

that this did take place.

I remember thinking 'God no.     Please don't bring them out now.

Things will only get worse'.

Regretably, that roar frcm the crowd coincided with an increase in

pressure on the terrace as people who had not, at that time, taken up
WHITE                  ROBERT   BRIAN                                        12


their positions, would have been alerted to the fact that the match

was about to start and they would be rushing so as not to miss

anything.     Unfortunately, my fears had been realised.

From that moment on I found myself pressed up against the person in

front of me and both my arms were pinned between other people's

bodies.     That then meant that the only part of my own body that I was

capable of moving was my head.

Although my whole body was in severe discomfort, my left am, left leg

and back were in the most pain.     In particular, a teenage girl who

had been standing next to me had her head twisted round facing me and

the side of her face was being forced up against the upper part of my

left am.      The excrutiating pain in my a m was almost unbearable and

I feared that my a m was simply going to snap under the pressure.

All I could see of the girl was her face as the rest of her body was

being smothered by other people.        She was clearly   in a great   dealof

pain.     Her head was in a vice between my arm and the     body of    another

man behind her.     It was impossible for any of us to move at all.

I could tell that the poor girl was having difficulty breathing and

she was incapable of speaking because her face was being squeezed so

tightly that it was being contorted.       Her expression did not seem to

change and her tear filled eyes were just staring straight at me,

pleading with me to help her.     Although her eyes were full of tears

it was almost as though the pressure being exerted        on her head was

preventing those tears frcm flowing down her face.

As I found myself captivated by this desperate sight next to me I

could feel a foot tapping on mine, gently at first, but soon it became

more agitated and I felt sure that it must have belonged to the girl

because it had only started when I first looked at her.        I knew that

signal meant that she needed help urgently.
WHITE                  ROBERT   BRIAN                                     -*->


I turned my head and saw a policewoman directly in front of me, so I

called out to her.     She looked at me as I started shouting so I know

that she heard roe.     I pleaded with her to do something for the girl

next to roe, either herself or to call for assistance.     She simply

looked away.

I asked myself why there were so many people on the other side of the

fence looking at the situation, but just standing still and not

actually moving?      We were the ones not able to move.   We needed to

be helped by those who could move.      Then I noticed scmeone running

towards the fence.      At last I thought someone was going to help us!

As the man reached the fence, he lifted up a camera to his face and

then just walked away in search of another picture.

The pressure of the crowd had been building up gradually to the point

where I could no longer move at all and I did think that it could not

possibly increase any more.      However, I do recall a sudden instance

when the pain became even more intense and the pressure on my body

even greater.      I remember yelling out at this moment and many other

people, particularly behind me, also called out at the same time.         I

believe that the match was still in progress because I could still

hear much of the crowd reacting to the play on the pitch with cheers

and applause, unaware of what was happening all around me.      I could

not actually see the players though, because my view was still

obstructed by the motionless people on the otherside of the fence.

 I thought that because so many other people had called out at the same

time as me, particularly in the area behind me, indicating a

widespread increase in the level of pain being endured that there must

 have been a surge at the back and that even more people were

 trying to get in.      It was the suddeness of that pain and the

 simultaneous shouts and screams that I remember vividly.
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                       14


This did seem to prompt seme action on the pitch in front of me.           The

police were beginning to look more anxiously towards the back of the

terrace, whereas before their gaze seemed to have been fixed upon

those who were suffering at the front.      Some of them actually dinted

onto the fence themselves to try and get a clear view of the rear of

the terrace.      This then created a gap in my line of vision which

enabled me to see the pitch and seme of the players.      They were

standing still.      The match appeared to have been halted.

There were quite a few people now standing on the touchline and some

were also on the pitch.      Some were policemen, seme St Johns

Ambulancemen and seme spectators who had been able to climb out.

They appeared to be arguing with each other and then they pointed at

us.

The players then turned and walked off the pitch and as this was

happening, I saw a man lying on his back in front of me, just on the

edge of the pitch.      Policemen were kneeling down next to him and

someone had taken off his shirt and pulled down his trousers and the

policemen were giving him the kiss of life.

I am sure that was the fist time that I saw someone being attended to

on the pitch because I remember it having such an impression upon me.

It only served to confirm my fears that people were in real trouble.

The man on his back did not appear to be moving at all.        He was a

large man and that showed me that even size and strength could not

save seme people frcm being crushed.       I knew that I had to try and

keep my rib cage above the crush and keep breathing.       In that

respect, my height of 6'2-6'3 was absolutely invaluable.        As attempts

to revive the man on his back continued, the number of people moving

onto the pitch steadily increased.       Fans, policemen and ambulance men

alike were carrying limp bodies onto the playing area.         Seme were
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                     15


pummeling hearts with their hands, others were giving mouth to mouth

resuscitation.

I could see that a very narrow gate in the perimeter fence, several

yards to the left of where I was standing, had been opened, and

policemen were trying to extracate those nearest to it frcm the tangle

of bodies.   Their efforts proved largely fruitless because

even when they seemed to have hold of people the sheer compression

that existed at the front of the terrace served only to thwart

attempts to release them.

This was the only gate in the fence that I could see.      There were

none near to where I was standing.       Only the people nearest to that

gate had any chance of getting through it.      Still the only thing that

I could move was my head, so I knew that there was no prospect of

being able to reach the gate myself.      A number of people behind me

had been able to raise themselves above the crush and they literally

climbed over the heads and shoulders of those still trapped around me

until they reached the perimeter fence and then jumped down on the

other side to safety.

Even at this stage many policemen were still lined up along the

touchline and were restraining some of those who had been able to

free themselves frcm encroaching onto the pitch.     Those fans would

have been aware of what was happening on the terraces where they had

just been standing, and so they seemed anxious to get onto the pitch

to help those who were lying injured.

Gradually, however, many of those policemen began to realise that

their help was needed in trying to evacuate the terrace area, rather

than preventing those who had escaped frcm walking on the pitch.

When this realisation did sink in, the trickle of people being carried

onto the pitch to receive attention soon became a flood.
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                         16


Unfortunately though, judging by the number of heads which were being

covered with discarded items of clothing, it was already far too late.

Then I noticed that an ambulance was slowly moving in front of the

perimeter fence until it reached an area just behind the goal,

slightly to my left.      It was then forced to stop because there were a

number of people lying on the ground in its path.        These people were

completely motionless.

I looked back at the girl standing next to me.        Her foot was no

longer tapping on mine and the grimace on her face had been replaced

by a ghastly vacant expression.      I realised that she had died.      Not

only were people dying up against the fence, but they were dying next

to where I was standing as well.         Although the girl was dead, the

pressure being exerted on my arm by her jaw bone was still causing me

to wince with pain.      That, combined with having to withstand the

force being exerted on the remainder of my body, was necessitating

much heavier than normal breathing and I was beginning to feel quite

exhausted.

I did not think that I would be able to cope for much longer with my

frightful predicament and I could see no sign of any forthcoming

assistance to ease my plight.

I then thought that I too would suffer the same fate as the girl on my

arm, and that, before long, I would also be dead.

Knowing that I was totally unable to help myself or, indeed, anyone

else around me, and having seen no signs of encouragement in front of

me, I had accepted the fact that soon my pain and suffering would

stop, and that I would not feel anything at all.

At that time my sense of panic seemed to disappear as it merely seemed

futile.      Instead, my thought turned to my family and my girlfriend.

I could see their faces in my mind but the images were blurred.            I
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                  1'


felt desperately sad    as I thought of how distraught they would be.   I

just wanted to be with than again so that I could say goodbye

'properly'.     I tried to bring their images into focus so that I could

be with them in spirit, but they merely faded.

Somehow I was becoming oblivious of the situation I was in and

strangely I was distancing myself frcm it as if I had played my part

in it, but that it was about to ccme to an end.

I began to feel that I was merely a bystander, watching a rather

shocking film that I could turn off anytime I wanted.     However, I

looked up at the top of the stand to my right and saw a row of

television cameras which were pointed towards us.     I then came out of

the trance that I had allowed myself to fall into and realised that I

was very much partof the horror that was going on all around.       I had

kidded myself that     I was looking through a camera at the terrible

scenes in front of me, but in fact they were trained on me as well.

There were by now large numbers of people on the pitch clustered in

small groups, attending to an ever increasing number of casualties.

Many advertisement hoardings had been ripped down and were being used

as makeshift stretchers to carry those who were injured.      Most of

these 'stretchers' that I saw were being carried by spectators rather

than ambulance men, and their faces showed clear signs of strain as

they ran towards the area below the television gantry on the right

hand side of the pitch, as I looked, before returning to carry other

injured fans.

There were many bodies lying covered all over the place but still seme

of the injured were receiving mouth to mouth resuscitation, and still

people were using their bare hands to try and force hearts to beat

again.   Eventually, I noticed that the crush seemed to be easing

 slightly behind me and I was able to move my arms for the first time
WHITE                ROBERT   BRIAN                                         18


since the initial surge had rendered than useless.     Then the person

who had been forced up against my back moved away from me slightly,

and I was able to stand upright.      Gaps started appearing in the

terrace and I was able to take a step backwards.     At that moment, I

looked down at my feet and I noticed two bodies face down, one lying

across the other, at almost the exact spot where I had been standing

all that time.

A man came over towards me and he helped me to lift up a young boy, he

was probably in his mid teens, with dark hair and I think he was

wearing a dark blue anorak, this is the body that was lying on top of

the other.   We turned him over and then I felt ill.     The boys face

was blue and his mouth was a dark shade of purple.     He had probably

been lying on the ground ever since the crush began unknown to

everyone, not that anybody would have been able to pick him up even if

they had known he was lying there.      I had to just help the man lift

his body onto the perimeter fence and two other men took him from us.

During the time that I was in a trance my recollection of events is

somewhat vague and by the time that I had ccme out of that trance and

was able to move slightly, I do not recall seeing the girl that had

died on my arm.

There was now space to move almost right up to the fence although

there were many bodies lined up against that fence, and people were

beginning to lift them too.    I managed to lift one more child's body

over the fence, who I am unable to describe, but the effects of the

crush on my arm made the grim task physically very difficult.         The

other men that were helping in the lifting operation could see that I

had been hurt and there was no way that I would have been able to lift

heavier bodies than those that I had already struggled with, so they

insisted that I was helped out of the centre terrace section myself.
WHITE                   ROBERT   BRIAN                                   19


I could not get over the perimeter fence at the front because its

height meant that even with assistance I would have needed to pull

myself up and over in order to get onto the pitch, which I would not

have been able to do.     So instead, someone helped me over the lower

fence at the side which led to the sparsely populated side terrace

section.   Even though this fence was lower than the one at the front,

I had difficulty negotiating it because of my arm and also because of

the sheer exhaustion caused by the crush had made me feel giddy.

As I jumped off the top of the fence two men tried to catch me but

only broke my fall and I actually landed on my left knee and cut it.

The injuries I sustained that day were the cut to my left knee and

severe bruising to my left arm.

I looked around the ground for my colleague but could not find him it

was only later when I returned to my carthat I met him. He had not

been injured.

In conclusion, I would stress most strongly that every action of the

fans that I had seen had been totally admirable and at times quite

heroic in response to the effects of the crush.

Also in my opinion the opening of the concertina gates was

understandable in view of the circumstances outside the ground, but

that had better comrrunication existed between all parties, the rush of

fans would have been directed away from the centre tunnel. ROBERT WHITE
        WHITE               ROBERT   BRIAN


                                             ROBERT WHITE SIOffiD
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     POL DS
Incident    102   050390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S1156

                                                                        Station

Surname           MORGAN

Forenames         JOIN

Age                                       Date of birth

Address            'F' DIVISION


Occupation        POL PS758

Telephone

 IC               Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

«u
Facial hair
                                          Complexion



Glasses            Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                       Signed


           At 9.45 a.m. (0945) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended at

           Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, in respect of the F.A. Cup

           semi-final between Liverpool PC and Nottingham Forest PC.   The pre­

           match briefing was to be held in the North Stand adjacent to the Spion

           Kop, but before attending that location I went into the gymnasium

           where I collected a radio, meal tickets and my briefing notes.

           I was in command of Serial 18 consisting of myself and two other

           police officers.   I met these on row 15 of the North Stand between

           seats 167 and 178 where I carried out a check of the personnel who

           were allocated to work with me.   All were present and the officers in

           question were Police Constable 2961 JENKINSON, Police Constable 3118

           CROOKES, Police Constable 782 HEMSWOKTH, Police Constable 1171

           HORSFIELD, Police Constable 513 FRANCIS, Police Constable 159 MARSH,

           Police Constable 1834 SCHOLEY, Police Constable 320 BRADSHAW, Police
                                                                 PAGE       2
                                                                 S1156

Constable 2960 ALEXANDER and Police Constable 3342 BLOUNT.   The

briefing was carried out by a number of senior officers including

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, Superintendent MURRAY and Inspector

SEWELL who all spoke on a dedicated public address system to the

assembled duty team.   A detailed briefing took place covering the

general aspects of crowd safety and logistical arrangements.    Further

information about individual aspects of the two groups of visiting

supporters and their behaviour was given by Detective Sergeant

CHARLESWOKTH, Divisional Crime Intelligence Officer.

I have served as a Sergeant at 'F' Division for eight years and five

months and have attended many such occasions.   I would estimate that I

have performed duty at the ground at well in excess of 150 football

matches during my service, including a number of semi-finals.      I have

been in charge of serials engaged on various duties in all parts of

the ground and have an overall wide and varied experience of all

aspects of crowd control at Hillsborough Stadium.   There is no doubt

in my mind that the system of crowd control which has evolved over

many years at the ground, is one of the most efficient and well tried

in the country.   There have been problems of public disorder which I

can personally remember over the years, but we have always coped

admirably.   After the initial briefing, I collected snack meals for my

serial from the gymnasium, returned to the North Stand and distributed

the meals to my officers.   At this point I liaised with my Sector

Commander, Inspector SYKES and arranged to rendezvous with him in the

enclosure behind the West Stand at 11.00 a.m. (1100) for a further

more detailed briefing by him regarding the specific duties of my

serial. I instructed officers under my command regarding their conduct

and individual roles during the forthcoming afternoon.

At 11.00 a.m. (1100) as arranged, I went with my serials to the

enclosure at the rear of the West Stand, where I met Inspector SYKES.
                                                                   PAGE        3
                                                                   S1156

The Officers spoke to members of this sector about the task in hand,

including evacuation procedures and their search duties at the

turnstiles.   MEy serial were responsible for turnstiles 9 to 16 of

entrances 'A' and 'C' which provide access to the North Stand and the

West Stand.   Their brief was to ensure that spectators entering the

ground did not possess items prohibited by the ground rules, such as

weapons, banners, missiles and alcohol.    They were to maintain order,

ensure orderly queues were formed and give advice and assistance to

spectators where possible.   All were provided with labels and black

plastic bin liners for property which they confiscated and plastic

dustbins were provided at each of the turnstiles for this purpose.         I

noted that there was a police property post located in a caravan in

the enclosure behind the West Stand, together with other cabins for

the sale of match programmes, souvenirs and refreshments.

Officers of Serial 18 were retained in this area initially, on

standby, prior to the build up of supporters. They were instructed on

the appearance of the tickets which would be produced at that end of

the ground, primarily brown coloured ones for the North Stand, red for

the West Stand seats and purple for the West Stand terraces. They

were deployed on their points at approximately 11.30 a.m. (1130) and

all the turnstiles were open by 12 noon (1200).

There was seme activity outside with early arrivals and I saw that

Police horses were deployed on the Leppings Lane concourse.    I

remember two coaches and a double deck South Yorkshire bus arriving

and being off-loaded.   This was apparently contrary to the planned

reception arrangements, because visiting coaches were to be unloaded
                                       I

on Penistone Road North and Halifax Road.    Nevertheless, further
                                   i
coaches, vans and double deck buses continued to arrive at leppings

Lane throughout the early afternoon.

I remember seeing several people who were the worse for drink arriving
                                                                   PAGE    4
                                                                   S1156

early at the ground.    Many asked for directions to the nearest

licensed premises, several were drinking from cans of lager and beer,

others from large plastic bottles of beer.    I personally advised a

number of people that they would not be admitted to the ground if they

were considered to be intoxicated.    The activity of the Leppings Lane

concourse became busier as the afternoon progressed.    There was a lot

of confusion regarding tickets and entry to the correct part of the

ground.     I was constantly questioned by people throughout the

afternoon about this problem.

The weather was fine and warm with bright sunshine.    There was a happy

carnival atmosphere at this stage.    People were purchasing programmes

from vendors outside and numerous people were eating and drinking as

they milled about.     I noticed that there was an inordinate volume of

litter scattered about at various locations consisting of food

wrappers, tins and empty bottles which people were discarding all over

the area.    Many people were standing about in groups waiting to meet

friends and making no effort to enter the ground.     These were being

continually dispersed by mounted and foot officers.

During the course of the early afternoon, I remember Police Constable

2902 ROBERTS arresting a ticket tout.     I am not sure of the correct

time, but believe that this occurred about 12.30 p.m (1230).       This man

was in his early twenties, tall and slim with blonde hair.     The

officer took him through concertina gate 'A' where he detained and

spoke to him.     I joined them there prior to the officer taking the man

to the Police Rocm.     I saw that P.C. ROBERTS had taken a large amount

of money from him and eleven or twelve tickets for the Liverpool end

of the ground. These were all the purple coloured ones for the

terraces and seme discussion took place with a Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club Official in that vicinity, as to whether they were

forgeries.     I returned to the turnstiles and rejoined my serial after
                                                                   PAGE     5
                                                                   S1156

about ten minutes.

I witnessed several people having intoxicating liquor confiscated fro m

them by Inspector SYKES and other officers.    These containers of

alcohol were placed in the dustbins adjacent to the turnstiles.

C.I.D. officers were present on the concourse on covert observations

for pick-pockets. I was approached by numerous people asking for

directions.   It was evident that several Liverpool supporters had

acquired tickets for the Spion Kop terrace and were asking whether

they would be admitted there.   It was pointed out that a section of

that end of the ground had been reserved for that eventuality.

The volume of people entering the ground through the turnstiles which

I was supervising was moderate until approximately 2.10 p.m.

(1410) when I was called away temporarily.    At that time I was

approached by an off- duty police officer from Lincolnshire

Constabulary and three friends of his, two males and a female.       That

officer stated that his wallet containing     #40.00 cash and four

football tickets had been stolen from his rear trouser pocket.       I

informed Inspector SYKES about the incident and conducted the

Lincolnshire Officer to the gymnasium in order that he could report

the theft to C.I.D. personnel. I waited at that location until this

had been done and then escorted him and his friends back to the rear

of the West Stand where I gained them admission to the terraces.

As I walked along the corridor beneath the North Stand, making my way

back to the West Stand and turnstiles, I distinctly remember hearing

a message on talk-through, made by Inspector SYKES.     There was a lot

of background noise, but I heard him ask for more men to be sent to

Leppings Lane urgently.   I only heard the message being passed once

and there was other radio traffic being passed constantly at that

time.   I had changed my radio battery in the gymnasium whilst I was

there, because I was having trouble receiving the signals from Police
                                                                 PAGE        6
                                                                 S1156

Control.    I believe there was a fault, because I noted that whenever

they tried to use the radio themselves, the transmission was broken

and the operator's voice was spasmodic.    Messages from officers on the

ground were loud and clear on the talk-through facility.    At about the

same time as this message was passed, I saw Inspector WHITE and

another officer escorting a prisoner along the corridor which I was

using, back towards the Police Rocin and I acknowledged the officers.

On arrival back there, at about 2.30 p.m. (1430), I was confronted

with an alarming situation.    The crowd had obviously built up and

there was serious congestion outside the turnstiles.    I saw several

youths climbing over the walls into the enclosure and this was a new

experience which I had never before seen.    Police Officers were

attempting to discourage this and attempting to remove them fran the

walls.     I looked through the turnstile gates 'A' to 'G' of entrance

'B' where I saw a crush of people outside.    Many were distressed and

shouting for assistance. They were screaming for help and many

appeared to be injured, amongst them women and teenage youths.      I

climbed on to one turnstile gate and encouraged them not to push.        I

remember youths having their legs pushed with cons iderable force

against the bars of the turnstiles and they were obviously in great

pain.    There was a pandemonium of noise and together with other

officers, amongst whcm was Inspector BENNETT, I attempted to calm the

situation inside the enclosure. I was approached by several men who

were clearly angry, they began to jostle me and grabbed hold of my

uniform anorak shouting into my face.     'Do something, people are

getting crushed out there. Open the gates.' As they spoke I became

aware of the concertina gate to my left being opened by stewards.
                     I


This was gate 'C', 'I believe, around the side of the enclosure,

immediately adjacent to the car park driveway and river.     There were a

couple of horses outside who were attempting to regulate the flow of
                                                                    PAGE     7
                                                                    S1156

people being pushed through the opening.    The mood of these

people appeared to be quite aggressive and it was obvious that many

were intoxicated.   I could smell drink on their breath.    I stood in

their path and attempted to push in the opposite direction, shouting

for order and discouraging their headlong surge but without success.

I was thrown aside and saw several people lose their feet, being

trampled by the crowd.     I do not recall any injured being left in that

location after the surge had subsided.     This was not a dramatic influx

of people but I believe no more that 200 entered at this time.       I

forced my way outside after the initial onslaught, where I joined

colleagues by the side of turnstiles at entrance B.

There was an extremely large crowd of people, densely packed into the

area in front of the turnstiles.     I would estimate in excess of 4,000.

This area is enclosed by railings and gates at the entrance, a sheet

steel fence and concertina gate 'B' on the left, turnstile walls in

front and a continuous steel bar on the right with supports spaced at

regular intervals along its length.    Together with Inspector WHITE and

Inspector PURDY, I went to the side of this bar and began pulling

people underneath in order to relieve the pressure. I also saw

Inspector DELANEY at that location.    We moved dozens of people in this

manner, pushing them under the bar by their heads.    Women and youths

in considerable distress were pulled from the crowd.     Some men

resisted our attempts to rescue them, fearing that they would lose

their places in the crowd and be denied entry.     Many were the worse

for drink and unruly, failing to obey instructions not to push.       As

the people repeatedly surged forwards, chanting and shouting, I heard

cries of pain as people were crushed against the bar and walls of the

turnstiles.   Mounted officers in the middle of this were just pushed

about in the throng.     At one stage, I saw a horse go down at the back

end, obviously lifted frcm its feet by the pressure of bodies.       There
                                                                  PAGE     8
                                                                  S1156

was a very real danger of serious injury or even death being caused in

this area.

I recall that youths continued to climb the walls and fences over into

the enclosure at the back of the West Stand, and at this stage I also

saw Inspector BENNETT on top of one of the turnstile walls trying to

present this practice.

I saw concertina gate 'B' being opened and after the number of people

had built up on the driveway where I was standing, together with other

officers I took these people through concertina gate 'C' which was

opened a second time.    I must point out that people appeared to be

aggressive and in a state of haste, obviously concerned that the game

was about to start before they were able to gain entry.     I am quite

satisfied that the decision to open the gates in order to ease the

congestion outside was soundly based and was necessary in the

circumstances.   There was imminent danger of various injury to

supporters throughout that time.

As the crush of people dispersed, there was a lull in the situation

outside and I was able to rejoin officers of my serial.    The majority

of these were distressed and had obviously been crushed against the

turnstile walls themselves by the sudden influx of supporters. There

was still a great many people standing in groups in Leppings Lane on

the bridge and at various positions on the concourse.     A lot of these

looked dejected as though they were resigned to missing the game.

Suddenly I heard a radio message being passed by Police Control, which

was repeated several times.    The voice on the radio was that of Police

Sergeant GODDARD and from his tone I gained the impression that he was

upset about something.    He said; 'All available assistance onto the

perimeter track.   People are invading the pitch.' I believe he

repeated this message several times.

I immediately alerted members of my serial, who were all present and
                                                                   PAGE      9
                                                                   S1156

together outside the turnstiles where they had been working.      We all

ran inside through one of the turnstiles and made our way round to the

gate at the rear of the Police Control Box.    I remember that a man

had climbed onto this gate and he was pulled down bodily to facilitate

the opening of the gate.   He caught the sleeve of the denim jacket

which he wore on one of the spiked railings and damaged the material,

at which point he began complaining vehemently.    He was pushed aside

and together with the other police officers I ran down the first

gangway of the South Stand open seated section on my left.       As I did

so I saw Superintendent MURRAY walking towards me. His face was ashen

and he was obviously deeply shocked.    He said, 'Do what you can.' I

made my way over the wall onto the perimeter track in front of

Leppings Lane terraces.    I witnessed an horrific scene, which I shall

never forget.   People were being pressed up bodily against the netting

of the pen fence at this location.     The pen was bulging under the

pressure which was being exerted by the crush.     I could see

women and male youths with their eyes open, tongues extended through

their mouths, their skin was (cyanoxed) and there were blue coloured

arms, faces and necks pressed against the netting.     Seme had blood

seeping from their mouths and noses which were bubbling with mucus.

Officers were frantic in their efforts to pull people over the fence

and I saw several people escaping by this means. Others were being

pulled onto the track through a small gate in the fence. I saw people

climbing up into the West Stand sealed area above the central pen.          It

was obvious to me that the people pressed against the fence at this

particular section were, in the majority of cases, already deceased.

Although they apparently appeared to be standing against the fence,

their position was being maintained upright by the unrelenting

pressure of the spectators behind them.     There were numerous police

officers gathered on the pitch and track.     Some were giving first aid,
                                                                   PAGE 10
                                                                   S1156

others attempting to rescue spectators.   I saw seme spectators

climbing over the dividing railings into the adjacent pens or being

pulled over bodily by other people.   There was panic and utter chaos

at that end of the ground.   The situation was very confused, but many

officers responded individually to identified needs, rendering

assistance wherever they could.

I remained there only a few seconds and during that time lost contact

with manbers of my serial, the majority of whom were busying

themselves tending the injured.    I quickly realised that I would be

able to achieve very little if I remained on the track.    A lot of

officers were standing looking at the scene in stunned disbelief and I

attempted to motivate sane of them.    I approached several and ordered

them to follow me.    Roughly six or seven responded, although it was

difficult to comnunicate above the din.     I noted that the main crush

was in the southern section of the central pen and I decided to enter

that pen from the tunnel at the rear, in an effort to disperse the

fans by that route.    I ran back the way I had cone and went

immediately to the rear of the West Stand.     I saw that it was

practically deserted in the enclosure behind the Stand at this time

and I entered the tunnel which runs beneath the Stand giving access to

the central pen of the terraces. The situation was calm inside the

tunnel and there was no egress of people.    The ones at the back were

not pushing, but merely trying to look over the tops of heads in

front.   Three police officers were standing at the back of the crowd,

two females and a male, who were totally unaware of the incident in

progress.   I shouted for them to begin evacuation as a means of

relieving the pressure on the bodies at the front.     I said, 'There are

dead bodies in there.'    I entered the crowd to the right of the

central dividing railings and began moving individuals back down the

tunnel behind.   I was obliged to grab each person and haul them
                                                                    PAGE 11
                                                                    S1156

backwards, just shouting 'Get out' to each one as I progressed towards

the front.   Many were in deep shock and resisted me, pulling away and

refusing to co-operate.     The crowd was not densely packed and I was

able to move quite freely.    A large number were the worse for drink.

I was kicked about the legs, punched to the body and spat upon during

this period of time.     I remember liquid being poured from the West

Stand above me, being showered about.     I continued to move

forwards and was aware of the other officers supporting me, also

struggling with the crowd.    Among these were P.C. 1171 HDRSFIELD who I

saw immediately behind me.    A number of young men were aggressive and

I remember several shouting 'Murderers' and comments such as 'You've

got this one wrong you bastards' and 'You've caused all this, its your

fault.' I remember seeing Superintendent GREENWOOD standing on the

hoardings on the perimter track with a loud hailer, shouting for

people to move back and giving a pushing motion towards me with his

hands over the top of the fence.

I eventually reached the front where I saw several supporters tending

the dead and injured.     I was asked to help many individuals by these

people.   I heard shouts of 'Cone on mate this kid's dying.     Help him'

and 'Give us a hand here.     Do something.'

I saw a pile of bodies lying waist deep at the bottom of the terrace

steps against the wall. Three or four people still alive were trapped

up to their hips in bodies.     I spent a long time with spectators

trying to free these people, without success at first.     There was

vanit and mucus in people's hair and on their clothing.     There

were shoes, coats, money, Liverpool scarves, hats and paraphernalia

scattered all around.     I gave heart massage and mouth to mouth to two

or three people on the steps, but cannot remember any description or

other details of them.     There were so many in need of help, I felt so

utterly inadequate.     I persisted in pulling the limbs of dead and
                                                                    PAGE 12
                                                                    S1156

dying males and females from the pile, but it was just like tangled,

slippery spaghetti and difficult to get any sort of purchase.       Other

police officers were by this time climbing through the small gate,

over the bodies, to get inside.

I remember being joined by Inspector WOODWARD and others whose

identities I cannot remember.     I must emphasise that the actions of

many spectators was very heroic and sensible.    Several made

commendable efforts to resuscitate casualties and carried the dead and

injured away.

I was concerned about one young boy with blonde hair, aged about 10

years, who was lying with his face pressed against the wall, but who

showed signs of life.    I tried to work him free and cradled his head

in my hands to prevent him grazing his face on the wall.    He seemed to

be breathing but only with shallow panting breaths although his skin

was still pink in colour.

I tugged at belts, clothing, arms and any other places where I could

get a firm grip.    I was assisted by other police officers and

civilians.    The bodies began ccming free and I carried three or four

back down the tunnel into the rear enclosure with other policemen.          I

also carried injured back there.     I left them to return to the

terraces as there was much work to be done.     There was a lot of

jostling and confusion and I lost my footing on the steps, tripping

over people and being pushed.

As time passed there was seme success in breaking down the fences

behind the goal to the left of the pile of bodies.     Police personnel

and civilians did this by kicking and pulling the wire from its

supports.    As this opening appeared, bodies were handed out to others

on the track, with a carment as to whether I thought they were alive

or dead.     Several times I repeated 'This one's alive, this one's

alive.' I finally managed to free the 10 year old boy and passed him
                                                                    PAGE 13
                                                                    S1156

through the hole.    I remember shouting to the person I handed him to,

'This one's still alive.' I lost contact with him after that.        I

remember sweating and my mouth being very dry.    The clothing under my

anorak was wet with perspiration.

I saw an ambulance drive round the perimeter track from the direction

of the gymnasium and stop on the pitch near the goal posts at the

Leppings Lane end.

Eventually the bodies were cleared from the terrace and I climbed out

through the hole, where I began tending to people who were lying on

the grass. I attempted mouth to mouth and heart massage with seme of

the bodies, but without any success.    I did not persist with any

particular one but went from one to the other trying to help other

police officers.     I assisted in loading hoardings which were being

used as makeshift stretchers. I carried three or four bodies from

that end of the field to the other end where I laid them on the grass

to be tended by ambulancemen and firemen.     I remember one of these was

a boy of about 12 years but I cannot describe any of the people whom I

carried.

I remember several Liverpool supporters on the pitch were still

aggressive and abusive, passing comments such as 'You've killed these

people.'   Their aggression was also directed toward the Nottingham

Forest crowd.   Looking around the ground I saw a large number of men

and youths running towards the Spion Kop shouting and swearing.

Others I saw climbing into the North and South Stand of the pitch,

where sporadic fighting broke out amongst supporters. For this reason

I believe that a cordon of police officers was formed on the half-way

line by Chief Superintendent NESBITT.

There appeared to be a lull in the activity on the field for a short

time.   I had a drink from the groundsman who was carrying a bucket of

water as my throat was so dry and I was sweating profusely.     I
                                                                   PAGE 14
                                                                   S1156

remember speaking to Detective Constable CLARKE on the pitch. I also

spoke to and tended a number of individuals who were wandering about

the field in a dazed condition, mostly Liverpool supporters. I put my

arms around seme of them in an effort to comfort them.

I was approached by a man who identified himself as an off-duty police

officer from Merseyside.    My recollection of his appearance is

very poor but he said he had lost his brother (who was also an

off-duty Merseyside policeman) on the terraces.     He was extremely

worried. I escorted him to the gymnasium.      This was, by now, being

used as a temporary mortuary.    I asked him to remain outside whilst I

went inside to make enquiries on his behalf.     I saw several bodies of

deceased people being laid out on the floor. It was obvious to me that

I would not be able to obtain any positive information about his

brother at this stage.     I went back to him, explained the situation

and I then obtained a hot drink for him and sat with him for a while.

I then began to assist loading injured people from hoards onto

proper cots which I carried and wheeled with ambulancemen. I also

assisted several walking patients to the emergency vehicles which were

arriving at the scene continually.

There was a debrief in the North Stand, where I joined my serial. I

gave them instructions on the compilation of their notes regarding the

incident and then completed my debriefing sheet which I handed to

Chief Inspector BEAL.    We were then stood down.

I remember going back to the gymnasium and assisting several officers

with their duties.   These included P.C. 420 DAVIES, P.C. 1171

HORSFIELD, D.C. 1531 PONT and D.C. 1212 QOULDING.     This concerned the

handling of the corpses, loading them into body bags and recording

^property.   I was not directly involved with any of the deceased for

continuity purposes.     I finally retired from duty at about 6.00 p.m.

(1800).
                                               PAGE 15
                                               S1156




                                J MORGAN PS758 SIQ1ED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                         935
Incident        102   050390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER S1263


•   Surname           MAHER
                                                                             Station



    Forenames          PETER

    Age                33                       Date of birth

    Address


    Occupation         FIREMAN

    Telephone

    IC                 Height                   Build

    Hair colour

         ir type
€
    Eyes                                        Complexion

    Facial hair

    Glasses           Use                       Accent

    Number of Pages 5

    Dated             280589                                                    Signed


               I attended the cup tie at Hillsborough Sheffield, on the 15th April

               (150489) I witnessed the scenes at the Leppings Lane section of the

               stadium. In my possession I have a complete ticket for section B of

               the Leppings Lane. Here I will try to outline points which may be of

               help to you in an enquiry.

               May I first tell you that I am a 33 year old married man with a

               family. I am a serving officer in the Merseyside Fire Brigade. I

               attended the match with three friends, travelling in my vehicle

               myself being the driver. It is important for me to tell you I did

               not have any alcohol which may have affected one's judgement. I

               attended the cup tie last season at Hillsborough and stood at the same
                                                                                         i
               Leppings Lane end. I am a stand season ticket holder at Anfield. The

               following is an account of the scenes I witnessed on this day.

               My friends and I approached the stadium Leppings Lane at approximately
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S1263

1435 hrs we were confronted by a swarm of people too many to estimate

the number.

Total confusion prevailed, due to poor ground information and a lack

of Police control Policemen on horse back added to the confusion fcy

pushing people in all directions.

Having found our way to section B gates at approximatley 1450 hrs

(1450). I witnessed the gates open and then closed within minutes. The

gates opened again, at this time I was approximately 25ft (25') away,

but within a minute I was carried forward and through the gates into

the turnstile area. The Police could not get the gates closed.

A cantilever door at the side of the turnstiles was open. We proceeded

through this door into the area behind the terraces.

Section B was the nearest entrance to the terraces and automatically

you were drawn down the tunnel of Section B. I do not recall seeing

any other directions, signs which may have led us all away from B.

At this time I must forcefully point out the complete absence of any

stewards or police officers in the area rear of section B who could

have directed supporters to empty sections of the leppings Lane

terrace.

The supporters entering this area would have no idea of the size of

the crowd already in position in Section B.

We made our way down the tunnel leading to the terracing I could see

the teams ready to kick off as I neared the end of the tunnel. It was

at this point of time that I first saw the crowd and indeed I was at

the back of the crowd.

Suddenly I was thrusted forward into the crowd and did not see my

friends again until we returned to my car. Once amidst the crowd I

knew immediately I had to get out of this area.

The pressure on my body was intnense I have never felt such pressure

before.
                                                              PAGE      3
                                                              S1263

I had no control over my movement and could not help people near me as

my arms were locked to my body.

I had no conception of time the gate at the front of the fence behind

the goal was in my view as often as could be, as this was the only

exit.

The people near the front begged to be released. I could see the fear

in the face of the officer in charge of this gate. Occasionally this

gate opened and one or two people would be released. The sight of this

gate being closed I can only describe as, like the gates of hell

closing behind you.

Suddenly amidst the screaming and desperation, I found myself pushed

towards the gate, I could not believe how my fortune had so quickly

changed. I held my arms aloft like a helpless child and I was pulled

up through the now open gate to freedom, freedom is how it felt.

As I walked along the fence a Policeman told me, go into the next

section and stupidly I did.

As I stood there looking around the stadium I began to feel uneasy and

I felt I had to leave the stadium.

As I looked across behind the goal area I saw people being placed on

the pitch. I could not stand there and watch this and I moved forward

to a gate near the Notts Forest Stand, controlled by a Policeman.

I informed this officer that I was a Fire Officer and I felt I could

help on the pitch with first aid. My offer was rejected telling me

there was already enough people on the pitch. The offers of other

people were also rejected.

Undeterred I moved along to the gate I entered this section by, which

was open and climbed out onto the pitch. I then proceeded to give

artificial respiration to a man later assisted by a fellow fireman.

After a short while a man came up and said he was a doctor and told us

to leave him.
                                                               PAGE      4
                                                               S1263

As I stood away and turned round I tried to assist another man lying

on the ground, I was soon relieved in this task by a nurse. I then

helped put this man on a stretcher and carried him up through the

Notts Forest stand. Shortly after I left the ground.

In summing up;

I do not apportion blame to the officer who ordered the gates to be

opened at the Leppings Lane, only if he had no ccnrounication with his

control room, where officers must surely have been aware of the size

of the crowd already assembled in Section B.

The stadium authorities and the Police must take responsibility for

their absence in the area between the turnstiles and the tunnel

entrance to Section B. Had this area been Policed people could have

been directed to empty sections of the terraces, resulting in lives

being saved.

There must have been a breakdown of procedures in the monitoring of

numbers passing through turnstiles are these turnstiles not

electronically monitored.

In sadness I say that the Police Officer in charge of the gate rear of

the goal did not realise the seriousness of the situation in front of

him. When his fears were realised I firmly believe his actions were

delayed by Police orders or procedures, as he or collegues were in

contact via senior officers with portable radios.

Closed circuit TV facilities are used at football ground to monitor

crowds, if used inside Hillsborough why did the Police not take action

earlier.   Senior Police officers must take responsibility for their

decisions.

I feel sure the officers behind the goa'l did as much as anyone once

rescue operations where mounted.

The Tannoy system within the ground was inaudible.

The behaviour of Liverpool supporters during this;emergency was
                                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                                   S1263

            magnificant.        Young men without training shewed initiative and

             strength, qualities not normally attributed to football supporters.

             I have not been alone in the sadness I have felt, following

             Hillsborough.      We must learn from all disasters to prevent any repeat

             and I hope this letter can help in seme small way.




                                                                       P. MAHER SIGNED

  STATEMENT TAKEN
            PLACE:

               TIME:                 DATE:   280489

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

O fficers s i g n a t u r e :

END OF REPORT




                                                                                               940
                                                                        STATION

^pM E:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260789                                                          (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents, my

         younger brother and sister.

         On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the Football

         Association Challenge Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club

         and Nottingham Forest, held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football ground

           in Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           I am a supporter of Liverpool football club, I have been attending

         most home games at Anfield Road for the last nine years and in the

           last four years I have been attending seme of the away fixtures.

           I am a season ticket holder and I obtained my ticket for the semi­

           final at Hillsborough from Liverpool Football Club, using my season

         ticket voucher.    The ticket I obtained was a six pound ticket for the

         Leppings Lane terraces (standing area).

           I travelled to the game at Hillsborough with a group of friends, the

         names of my friends are:

           1   .
         2     .
           3.
4.       _______________

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.                     .   ,                      1


11.                                          .

I don't know any other details about my friends' addresses, all the

above named live close by to my house on the _________________ ■

except

We all travelled together on a coach belonging to Eavesway Travel, we

were picked up in Haydock near to St. Helens at about 11.00 am (1100)

and after picking up other supporters we departed for Sheffield

between 11.30 am (1130) and midday (1200).

We travelled on the motorways to Sheffield, we were not subjected to

any travel delays.

We arrived in Sheffield at about 2.20 pm (1420) and the coach driver

stopped very close to the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground.   The

Police would not let us get off the coach and the coach driver was

directed to park on a hill seme distance away just p»ast a Gateway

Superstore.

The coach parked at about 2.25 pm (1425) and myself and my group of

friends all walked down towards the ground together.

We never received any escort from the Police down to the ground, there

were a large number of supporters walking back down the hill towards

the ground, we just followed all the other supporters.   I did not see

or receive any directions from the Police.   There were Police on the

route that we walked down towards the ground.    I attended the semi-
_________________________________                                           3


final in 1988 (000088) and I do not think that there were as many

Police on the roads leading to the ground at this year's game in

comparison to what I can remember seeing last year.

As far as I am aware there was no drink taken on the coach we

travelled on.     I saw a few supporters drinking cans of beer when I was

walking down towards the ground, but I never saw anyone who I would

say was drunk.     I did not see any signs of fighting or disorder.    I

can say that the atmosphere amongst the supporters walking towards the

ground was happy.

We arrived outside the ground at the Leppings Lane entrance at about

2.35 pm (1435).     At this time there were no queues visible leading up

to the terrace turnstiles there was just a mass of people.

There were a number of Policemen in the area of the turnstiles, seme

actually standing by the turnstile gates, there were also seme

Policemen standing by the outer gates.     I stopped and showed one of

the Policemen standing by the outer gates my ticket and asked him

which turnstiles I had to go to.     I was a little confused which

turnstiles to go to, they were not clearly signposted.     This Policeman

directed me to the terrace turnstiles.

I can remember seeing about five or six Police horses in the area of

Leppings Lane outside the outer gates.

I cannot remember seeing any of the Police either on foot or mounted,

who appeared to be attempting to organise the supporters leading up

the turnstiles into queues.

I can remember seeing quite a few stewards in the area of Leppings

Lane outside the outer gates. I recognised some of these stewards as

Liverpool stewards.     The stewards did not seem to be directing or

attempting to organise people but they were there if people wanted to

ask directions, as were the Police.
                                                                         4

After me and my friends went through the outer gates, we joined onto

the mass of people leading towards the terrace turnstiles.    I didn't

experience any difficulties getting up to the turnstiles.    When myself

and my friends got to within about ten to twelve feet from the

turnstile gate I noticed that people were organising themselves into

queues to get into the turnstiles.

Our group arrived at a turnstile at about 2.45 pm (1445), we all

intended to enter the ground together through the same turnstile.

The Police standing by the turnstile gates were searching people

before they entered the turnstiles.

Our group was also stopped and searched, we had a Union Jack flag and

also a banner reading 'Liverpool F.C. Chain Lane'.   The flag and

banner had no sticks attached, we unrolled the flag and banner to

show that they bore nothing offensive on them.

The Police outside the turnstiles took the Union Jack off us and we

were issued with a receipt for it.    What surprised me was the police

having taken the Union Jack allowed us to take the home made banner

into the ground with us.

Having been searched once, we asked the officers why they had taken

the flag off us, we were told it was because the flag was a 'fire

risk'. One of the lads in our group on hearing this said, did they

want us to take our clothes of as well as they may be a fire risk.

Because this comment was passed the two Policemen then searched all of

our group again.

After being searched twice outside the turnstiles we all entered

through the turnstile, I handed my ticket into the turnstile

operator.   Once through the turnstile our group was stopped by a

Policewoman and a Policeman and we were given another search.

Between arriving at the ground and eventually entering through a
turnstile, I did not witness the opening of any gates or see any other

gates open other than the turnstile gates.   I did not see any

unauthorised entry to the ground.

After being searched for the third time on the ground side of the

turnstiles, our group headed towards the tunnel.    I did not see any

signs directing fans to the terraces (standing area), I was not aware

that entry could be gained to the terraces by any other means than the

tunnel.

We all entered the tunnel together, the tunnel was fairly empty.     I

can remember seeing two Policemen by the entrance to the tunnel one

on either side, there were also stewards in the area by the entrance

to the tunnel.   I think, although I cannot be certain, that I saw

two stewards actually standing inside the tunnel.

We had free passage along the tunnel, when we came to the end of the

tunnel we were confronted by a wall of people.

We got to the back of the terraces at about 2.50 pm (1450), all of our

groups had intended to view the game from a position behind the goal

and we started to work our way onto the back of the terraces and

towards the right into pen number 3.

Once we got onto the terrace I noticed that people were packed

together very tightly, our group managed to work our way forwards to a

position I have marked as number one (1) on the attached grid plan

(exh.no. 1) (ref.no.       ). At this position I believe our group was

all together.

I had not witnessed any disorder or other unusual incident on the

terraces.

As we got to position number one (1) I believe the players had just

come out onto the pitch for their kick about, the time would have been

between 2.50 (1450) and 2.55 pm (1455).
                                                                          6


We were only in this positon for a very short time when I noticed the

pressure around me starting to increase, there was a lot of movement

amongst the supporters, people jumping up and down and singing and

people trying to push their way into better viewing positions.

Within a couple of minutes our group was pushed across to a position I

have marked as number 1A on the grid plan.    We had not intended to

move to this position, we had just been carried along with the

movement of the crowd.

When we got to position 1A I can definitely say the game had not

started, the players were still warming up.    I can remember they were

just starting to take off their tracksuit tops to prepare for the kick

off.

We stopped at position 1A for only a short time, at this position the

crushing was so severe it was starting to hurt.    There were a lot of

fans junping up and down and singing.    I was having difficulty keeping

upright and my feet on the ground.   Our group decided that this

position (1A) was too packed and our group decided to climb out of the

pen over the dividing fence into pen number two.

As best as I can remember just as I climbed over the dividing fence

from pen number three and got down into pen number two the game had

just kicked off.

When we got into pen number two we found that

         were missing from our group.    We later found out they had

been pulled out of pen three and up into the West Stand.

Once we got into pen number two I found that we were no longer being

crushed, there was ample space in pen number two.

We had been in pen number two for about two or three minutes when pen

number two started to fill up rapidly, I have no idea where this

sudden insurgance of people came from.
________________________________                                         7


The next thing of any consequence I remember is Peter BEARDSLEY

hitting the crossbar, there was a surge forward in the pen I was in,

pen number two.

I looked to my left into pen number three as this surge took place and

I could see a rapid surge in pen three behind the goal, this surge I

would describe as continuous in forwards movement, it just did not

seem to be stopping.   It was at this time I noticed people were

climbing over the perimeter fence from pen number three.   I was not

aware at anytime of a barrier breaking in pen number three, I saw that

the barrier had broken after the game had stopped.

Although I did not see a barrier break, when I saw the surge that

occurred after BEARDSLEY hit the crossbar, I thought something had

given way because of the continuous movement forwards there seemed

nothing to stop people going forwards in pen three.

At no time did I witness any consumption of alcohol in the ground or

any kind of fighting or disturbances.

I was not injured at the game.

I did not witness any deaths on the terraces, I did see a member of

the St. Johns Ambulance giving resuscitation to a fan on the pitch

just to the right hand side of the goal post.   The person being

resuscitated I would describe as a white male, fat in build with brown

hair, he was wearing blue denim jeans, he was naked from the waist

upwards and I also remember he was not wearing shoes.   It appeared to

me that the St. Johns Ambulance man had managed to revive this man

because people around them cheered, but a short time later everyone

walked away from the man and this made me think that the fat man had

died.

I did not go onto the pitch to assist any of the dead or injured, I

did not go onto the pitch because I have no knowledge of first aid.      I
                                                                         8


do think a lot of the people who went onto the pitch didn't know what

to do and may have got in the way.

The only thing I saw which I though was a factor in the deaths and

injuries was at first the Police were pushing people back into pen

number three, I believe they feared a pitch invasion.

I eventually left the ground at about 4.30 pm (1630) of my own accord,

we got straight onto our coach, there were no passengers missing from

our coach.

I did not witness anything during that day which I would say was a

criminal offence.

I do not consider that there were sufficient medical equipment

available to deal with the incident.   I think that the quality of the

loud speaker system was very poor, I also consider that the supporters

were not given sufficient information about what was occurring.

I think at first the Police panicked and were slow to take charge of

the situation, I feel that the Police were more concerned about

trouble occurring between the Liverpool and Nottingham fans than

concentrating their efforts on dealing with the dead and injured.

I do feel in spite of what happened that the Policeman who gave the

order to open the gates outside made the correct decision.

I have previously stated that the Police presence on the route to the

ground was not as large as that which I saw at the 1988 (000088) semi

final.   I do not wish this to be construed as a criticism of the

Police, I do consider that a lower profile of Policing was a good

thing which would have been appreciated by the majority of

supporters.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   260789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                  949
                                                                        STATION

^\ME:

 ADDRESS:


 AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

 OCCUPATION:


 Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
 by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
 it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
 prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
 to be false or do not believe to be true.


 DATED: 040589                                                          (SIGNED)



            I am a single man living with my parents at the above address.     I

            have been a resident in the Merseyside area for 18 years and I have

            worked in my present position at the                             for 10

            years.

            I am a supporter of Liverpool Football Club and have been going to

            Anfield for the last 11 to 12 years on a regular basis.   I am a

            season ticket holder and if I miss one heme game during the football

            season that is all, I do travel to support Liverpool especially in cup

            canpetitions.   I had been to all previous rounds of this season's FA

            Cup except for the game at Millwall.

            During my time as a supporter I have visited Hillsborough football

            ground on two previous occasions, once at last year's semi-final when

            I was seated in the North Stand and the first time I went was another

            FA Cup Semi Final in the early 1980's when I stood on the Leppings
                                         i
            Lane terracing.

            On the day of this year's Semi-Final I travelled to the ground with my

            brother

            and two friends,



                                                                                      950
                                                         we all had

tickets for the match which had been obtained from season ticket

vouchers from Anfield.

We travelled to the ground in my brother's private motor car leaving

hone at about 10.15am (1015) having picked         up in Birkenhead

actually left Liverpool at 10.30 (1030), the reason we left early was

due to bad travelling experiences on the way to last year's match,

we left in good time so we wouldn't be rushed once in Sheffield.

We went out of Liverpool on the M62 we experienced a slight delay due

to a road accident on the M62.   I observed that there was a steady

flow of traffic obviously heading for the match but at the time we

travelled nothing excessive.

We left the M62 and went through Huddersfield we stopped off somewhere

between Huddersfield and the Ml for a drink at a small village public

house and continued on joining the Ml which travelled along leaving to

take the A61, the road to Sheffield.

On leaving the motorway I saw a number of Police Officers who were

allowing the free movement of traffic from the motorway onto the A61,

there was a sign 'FOOTBALL TRAFFIC' situated half across the

entry to the A61 directing traffic to the next exit from the island,

from previous experience we knew that this would lead us to the far

side of the Hillsborough ground where we had experienced terrible

traffic delays on leaving the ground, for this reason we went onto the

A61 a more direct route to the ground to make our return journey

easier.

Fran the island off the motorway we travelled along the A61 for about

10 minutes along the main road I saw a large cream/white coloured

sign which gave directions to a parking area, it also showed that the

area was '5 minutes from the ground' so we decided to park there
                                     |                                   3


the time being about ten minutes to two (1350), the area was on a

housing estate and parking was easy I did not notice any other

football supporters there.

We walked from our car back onto the main road where the first thing I

saw was a group of Liverpool suporters, about 5 in number who

approached us asking for spare tickets, they were walking away frcm

the ground at this point.

As we waited along I did not observe any football supporters drinking

from cans, however I did see numbers of supporters drinking outside a

large public house on the main road, about one mile frcm the ground

and further supporters drinking at a working mens club about the

same distance away, I must admit I was surprised to see Pubs open so

close to the ground.   An observation as we walked along the main road

was that the sign directing to parking areas '5 minutes frcm the

ground' appeared at every major junction I would say frcm where we

parked our car supposedly '5 mintues' walk away our walk in fact

took 30-35 minutes and I walk quite quickly.   On the way to the ground

we stopped at a chip shop and ate, I left my brother and friends at

the chip shop and made my way alone to the ground arranging to meet

back at the car after the game.   The time by now was about two thirty

(1430), I walked for about another five minutes arriving at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground at about twenty five minutes to

three. (1435).

As I arrived at the ground I saw a large number of Police Officers at

the roundabout just up from the ground, there were Police vans and

numerous officers, I don't know what their function was, possibly to

stop supporters straying to the wrong end of the ground, I initially

thought that they would be checking tickets, this was not the case.

I noticed as I walked down Leppins Lane that the closer to the ground
                                                                        4

I had got then fewer Police Officers I saw, immediately outside the

ground there were a number of officers sitting on the wall of the

bridge which crosses the River and a Police car there which appeared

to contain senior officers, they were opposite the ground and didn't

appear to be doing anything, iirmediately opposite them there was a

totally disorganised chaotic mass of people trying to gain entry to

the ground.

The area outside the turnstiles was a mass of people, there are

actually wrought iron gates across the front of the area and I saw an

officer trying to control the flow of the crowd by opening and

shutting the gate,   there were a large number of people across the

pavement to the edge of the road and a lot of confusion as to entry

points.   I felt that the signs above the turnstiles were not clear

which added to the 'panic' and general air of disorder outside, only

from previous experience did I relaise that to stand one had to enter

via the right hand side turnstiles so I made my way through the crowd

towards that area.

As I have said there was a lone Police Officer opening and shutting

the wrought iron gate, it took me a couple of mintues to get through

that gate into the immediate area in front of the turnstiles, in that

area which was like a pen due to fencing I would describe the crush as

horrific there were far too many people crushed into the area with

no organisation at all it was very much every man for himself and the

closer to the turnstiles I got the worse the crush, I found it a very

frightening experience and I have been ,in bad crushes outside

the football ground.   People were shouting out to be let in, there

were obviously people being hurt and very distressed.

I had managed to work my way to the right hand side of the area

heading for turnstile 'F' I saw a man about 30 - 35
                                                                         5


light haired, clean shaven approximately 5' 10" (5'10) wearing

a brown coat, he was pinned to the wall to the left of turnstile 'F'

with his back to the wall facing the crowd this bloke was obviously in

a lot of trouble, he was very distressed and couldn't move, a group of

us managed to lean back, giving him roam and he did eventually get

through the turnstile.    At this point I saw   people being liftedfrcm

the area of the fencing   to the right of the   turnstiles into the"Lane"

where the crowd wasn't so bad, I also saw some people being lifted

and climbing onto and over the wall above the turnstiles to my left.

I eventually went through turnstile 'F' my ticket was taken off me and

I was left with the stub, it was my intention to go to the

terracing to the right of the standing area, I have identified this to

PC HOBSON of the West Midlands Police as Pen 1 or 2 on the map of the

ground.   However as I got through the turnstile there were a large

number of people, I must say not as bad as the other side of the

turnstiles and everybody was heading for the tunnel which leads to

behind the goal, the game had in fact started and everybody wanted to

get to somewhere quickly to watch.   I did not see any ground stewards

and only one Police Officer who was to the left of the area by an open

gate there was no direction of supporters everybody headed for the

tunnel reminiscent of a heard of sheep moving together.   The general

atmosphere was relief to get into the ground.

As I entered the tunnel   it was absolutely crammed full I would

describe it as a Champagne cork in a bottle     ready to explode, out, I

was carried through the tunnel on the left side, my feet in fact

rarely touching the ground I was carried along with crowd, I had no

control over the direction that I was going.

As I said I moved along the tunnel very quickly when I eventually

reached the end the movement just stopped, ground to a halt due to the
already massively overcrowded area, as I went onto the terracing I was

forced to the left.   I wanted to get ray back against the back wall

because I felt something was very wrong, I was very scared but

couldn't get out of the crush again being forced forward but there was

nowhere to go forward so I was in fact forced out to the left of the

area.   I have been shown a grid map by            where I have

identified ray entry point in marker, this with the number (1) (Ex.

Ref. No:        (Exh. No:). At this point ray movement stopped

the crush was unbearable, all I could move was ray head, ray arms were

pinned in front of me and I was finding it difficult to control where

I was going.   In fact I was turned round halfway, facing the crowd to

the side of me, at this point I was very worried as I could see that

people were still coming through the tunnel and it was getting worse.

I realised that I had to get from this area.     I was in this

position for a good 15 mintues, I couldn't see the pitch but

realised that the game had been stopped.     I heard an announcement over

the Public Address Systen to clear the pitch, the P.A. was very poor

and difficult to understand at this point.     With the presssure and the

fact that I noticed some people climbing over the fences at the front

and side of the Pen I was able to move over to the point marked (2) on

the grid map          As I went along I caught my left leg on

something which was the barrier that has been marked on the grid.      I

wasn't able to see the barrier, I managed to go round it and heard a

scream from behind me, I turned my head and saw a man who I can't

describe collide with the barrier and go to the left of it as I

turned I saw a fair haired man with a moustache, about 17

old, his hair was collar length, he was wearing what I think was a

white 'T' shirt or sweatshirt, this man was pinned across the barrier

at waist height, he wasn't moving, his eyes were closed.     I don't know
                                                                          7


if he was dead but it appeared that way, the crowd were still crushing

against him, he couldn't have got out any way.

I managed to get to the far left of the Pen and could see that a gate

was open at the bottom of what I now know as Pen 5.   I managed to

help a few people over the fence into Pen 5 and then due to sheer

exhaustion had to climb over myself I was also helped over and let

through the gate onto the pitch by two Police Officers who were

standing on the pitch side of the gate.

I looked back onto the terracing and saw that Policemen and supporters

were trying to rip down the outer fencing, the Police did not appear

organised but a lot of officers were getting on with their job on

their own initiative, a number of officers just appeared frozen on the

pitch.

I realised there was little I could do and my primary concern was to

find my brother and friends.    I went back onto the terracing into Pen

(6) and through to the back of the stands I saw a number of people

milling about but couldn't find my friends so I went back onto the

pitch, at this point I saw the Fire Brigade arrive to tackle the

fencing.    I must say that the only ground stewards I saw was at this

point on the pitch.    I couldn't see my brother or friends and so

thought the best thing to do would be to go back to the car and wait

for them.    It must have been about quarter to four (1545) or later

when I left the ground.   We all met up later my brother had cracked

ribs and other injuries, I had some bruises but no real injuries.

I feel that the main cause of the incident was not the decision to

open the gate which I did not see or witness but the disorganisation

and confusion outside the ground.    The poor sign-posting of the

standing entrances and direction to standing areas,    the Police

outside did their best but were sadly outnumbered, as I said earlier I
        only saw one officer by the turnstile and another on horseback.      I

         feel that Hillsborough is a terrible ground for supporters especially

        at the Leppins Lane end.       The fencing at the front of the terracing

         is not a major factor but the side fences are.     The whole incident is

        very sad.     I hope that it never happens again.




                                                                          SIGNED

^TATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME                DATE:     040589

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE               PC
Incident    102   050390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S2204

                                                                          Station

Surname            SCHOLEY

Forenames         D

Age                                        Date of birth

Address           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  ECCLESFIELD, SHEFFIELD

Occupation        POL PC1834

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

^Hair type

Eyes                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

 Dated            020589                                         D. Scholey Signed


           At 10.30am (1030) Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) commenced duty on

           turnstiles at Leppings Lane entrance S.W.F.C.

           11.30am (1130) seconded to coach reception.     By this time a few fans

           were milling outside ground.

           12.05 approx    (1205) turnstiles opened but nobody made any attempts to

           enter the ground.

           Football special buses began to arrive but fans invariably wandered

           away from ground, loads of youths touting for tickets and a lot of

           people with cans of beer.

           Crowds then began to increase steadily but still only a few were

           entering the ground.

           By 1.30pm (1330) crowds so dense that traffic had to be stepped, as

           the crowds were spilling over onto the road.     Not enough officers to

           clear roads so any attempts to do so were futile.     Although officers
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S2204

on horses made several attempts to clear the roads, this only

aggravated the crowd many of whom were now turning up drunk.

From about 2.pm (1400) everything was pretty static due to the throng

of people and very large crowds gathered outside the turnstiles but

there was no sort of order just one big mass of people, a lot of whom

did not have tickets and were trying to buy them off other fans.    A

lot of the others were confused by the badly signed turnstiles and

they didn't know where they were going and were in the wrong section

etc.
I was then ordered by Inspector SYKES to assist PS PROCTOR and

his serial at the perimeter railing gates (to ease the crush at the

turnstiles). The crowd was so dense that I could not see any other

Police except a few mounted officers.   I pushed my way through the

crowd until I found the gates and PS PROCTOR although I didn't see the

rest of his serial.   I then assisted PS PROCTOR and mounted officers

to close the gates which lead to the access road towards Penistone

Road and the South Stand.   This did not prevent the crowds already at

the turnstiles   from pushing and crushing each other indeed seme fans

were climbing onto the turnstile roofs.   2/3 mounted were trying to

bring order to the turnstiles and there were 2 housed directly in

 front of the railing gates trying to keep pressure off myself and PS

 PROCTOR, so we could keep the gates shut.   The mass of people outside

 the railing gates who were pressing against myself and PS PROCTOR

 were becoming very aggressive and objects were being thrown at

 mounted officers who were already covered in spittle.

 I had rairmed the three quarter inch securing spike for the gate into

 its locating hole in the ground but by now the pressure was such

 that the spike bent and the gates sprang open under the pressure and

 the crowd surged through the gates. All I could do was pull out people

 who were being trampled by the mass of people rushing through.
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        S2204

         A very short while later the crowds disappeared.   A few minutes later

         I was in the pens pulling out bodies.




                                                             D. Scholey SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
                                                                           STATION

^pAME:           GRAHAM
                MCKAY

 ADDRESS:        S YORKSHIRE
                 ECCELSFIELD PSTN

 AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

 OCCUPATION:     POL DSU




            DETECTIVE SUPERINTENDENT



            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, ECCLESFIELD POLICE STATION

            In April 1988 (000488), as Detective Superintendent at 'F' Division, I

            attended a football match being played at the home ground of

            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough. The game was a Cup

            Semi-Final and was played between Liverpool PC and Nottingham Forest

            PC. There was a capacity crowd and admission was by ticket only.

            My remit on that day was to organise and supervise, all elements of

            crime prevention and crime detection.

            At about 2.40pm (1440) that day I found myself outside the ground in

            the Leppings Lane turnstile area. The crowd using those turnstiles

            were mostly good natured but, about 2.50pm (1450) there was a build-up

            in the numbers of people using the turnstiles and a sizeable queue

            developed. There was increasing evidence of drunkenness amongst the

            supporters who were all Liverpool fans. There was a good deal of

            pushing and shoving and police officers on horses were necessary to

            control the crowd. An ideal opportunity for pick-pocket activity. It

            took this build-up of supporters several minutes to clear through the
                           i
                           I
            turnstiles but without problem.

            On Friday 14 April 1989 (140489), I took part in a 'phone-in programme

            with Radio Merseyside, when I spoke with the presenter of that
MCKAY                GRAHAM


programme in relation to the Semi-Final to take place on the following

day and passed on various pieces of advice for fans who were

travelling to Sheffield. One of the areas which I stressed was that it

was an all- ticket match and that fans who did not have a ticket

should not come. At 3.00pm (1500) that same afternoon I gave similar

advice, by telephone, which was recorded by a member of staff at

Radio Nottingham.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I was responsible for all matters

in relation to crime at the Cup-Tie Semi-Final between Liverpool PC

and Nottingham Forest PC. As it was a carbon copy of the match which

had been played before it made sense to use what had previously been

successful arrangements as the bulk of the supporters would have

attended the previous match and would be aware of the locations of

the various facilities and the various systems operating at the

ground.

On the day my staff were split into two teams. A team of 12 officers,

under the command of Detective Inspector TOWELL, who were to operate

in and around the ground. Eight of those officers were to be engaged

on observations looking out for pick-pockets.

Outside the ground Detective Inspector SCAIFE had charge of a team

of 14 officers who were to be responsible for the prevention and

detection of street crime. Two of these officers were in plain

clothes on non-descript motor cycles and it had been envisaged that,

whilst the game was in progress, these officers would patrol the

quiet streets lined with parked cars in an effort to prevent and

detect theft from cars.

I attended the briefing at Sheffield Wednesday PC at 10.00am (1000)

and following this briefed my own detectives. I was accompanied

through the first piart of the day by Police Constable 2439 BOCKING,
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             3


who was in civilian clothes.

At 10.50am (1050) together with PC BOCKING, I went to mobile police

radio control, who were monitoring all CID transmissions on channel

19. This caravan was placed on land at the side of Hillfoot bridge

and only a few yards from the frontage of a public house called 'The

Owl'. Even at that stage supporters were queuing outside, waiting for

the 'The Owl' to be opened, and at 11.00am (1100) the bars opened.

I remained in and around the location for some 40 minutes during and

that period, trade at the public house increased as football fans

gathered there.

The location of this public house would lead me to believe that the

majority, if not all, of these fans were Nottingham Forest

supporters. I had nothing to do with them and cannot say for certain.

I patrolled in my own vehicle with PC BOCKING and at about 1.00pm

(1300) had a meeting with Detective Inspector SCAIFE and seme of his

staff in the parking area for Wadsley Bridge section station. This

lasted a few minutes and after the departure of Detective Inspector

SCAIFE and his staff I was joined by the two motor cyclists and I gave

them further instructions.

At about 1.30pm (1330) I went to the South Yorkshire Police Sports and

Social Club at Niagara as traffic was building up and it was my

intention to leave my car in the car park there and spend the time

between then and the start of the match, on foot. Whilst at that

location I went into the Club with PC BOCKING and sought out the

Deputy Head of Merseyside CID, a Detective Superintendent BAXTER - a

man who I knew would be lunching at the club with some of his

family and for whom I had arranged nearby parking. I had not met Mr

BAXTER before and, having introduced myself as a matter of courtesy,

PC BOCKING and I left the Club.
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                              4


Whilst I was in the Club I noticed that there was a large number of

supporters of both football clubs who, I assumed, were all police

officers. It was apparent that most were dining or waiting for meals

they had ordered or having a casual drink.

About 1.50pm (1350) PC BOCKING and I went to the gymnasium at

Sheffield Wednesday PC where we had a meal and, at about 2.15pm (1415)

we left and I decided to spend the remaining time until kick-off

outside the ground in the vicinity of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, as

I considered this to be the most likely place for pick-pocket

activity.

With PC BOCKING I walked out onto the perimeter track surrounding

the ground and walked across the front of the Spion Kop, where the

Nottingham Forest supporters were gathered. There was still plenty of

room in the Spion Kop but, nevertheless, there was a large number of

spectators present and there were very few barren places.

In contrast, looking over to Leppings Lane end of the ground there

appeared to be very few spectators in evidence in the terraces or

the stand at the back of the goal. Equally, the seating in the North

Stand was sparsely occupied. I went down the players tunnel and

through onto the service road and car parking area at the rear of the

south stand. We made our way through a sterile area up to a light

portable barrier which was near to a pair of metal concertina type

gates, marked 'C' at the Leppings Lane turnstiles area.

This turnstile serves the North Stand and the West Stand and terraced

areas behind the goal. There are three lots of turnstiles and it

imnediately became apparent that the seven turnstiles, serving the

terraced area and between the concertina type gates marked 'B' and

the ones previously referred to marked ' C ' were in heavy demand. A

large crowd was backed up right out onto Leppings Lane and there was
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             5


angry pushing and shoving taking place. There were several police

officers in evidence and in partiuclar two mounted officers who I

believe were from Merseyside. The officer in charge of a serial of

men was Inspector PURDY, a man I have known for a number of years

and recognised imuediately. Inspector PURDY and his serial were

having a great deal of difficulty in controlling the crowd at this

point. The turnstiles 'A' to     'G' were arranged on the left by the

gates marked 'B' set into a high wall and on the right by a metal

barrier seme 20 yards long (20 yds) and at chest height, the crowd was

contained behind this barrier.

It was apparent that the turnstiles were not coping efficiently with

the crowd, which was swelling by the minute.

Throughout the next 30 minutes or so I rsnained mostly at that

location but, on two occasions, walked back through the sterile area

to where a serial was employed at another barrier at the Nottingham

Forest turnstiles into the South Stand. They were having no

difficulty with the people in that area and I spoke to a man I know

as Sergeant Hodgett and told him that I anticipated that, as the crowd

increased at the Leppings Lane turnstiles, more police officers

would be required and I asked him to post an officer frcm his

serial nearer to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane and in view of the

turnstiles in order that he could respond should the occasion demand.

At Leppings Lane the build-up of crowd increased, tempers became

frayed and evidence of drunkenness became more and more pronouced. I

remember at one time, Inspector PURDY standing on the barrier with

his back to the turnstiles, while in the manner of a tight-rope

walker, vainly trying to address the crowd. He was beginning to look

frightened and, frankly, I was not surprised.

A young boy of some 10 or 12 years climbed to the top of the wall
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                              6


near to gate 'B' but apparently what he saw on the other side

deterred him from dropping over and he returned to the crowd on this

side. I was dismayed to realise that in this swelling mass of people

there were such young children. There were many people standing about

not attempting to join the queue (if it can be described as such) and

I wondered at that time whether they had arranged to meet friends;

whether they were waiting for the rush to die down or whether, in

fact, they were opportunists without tickets. The gates marked 'C'

were opened and closed on a number of occasions by stewards on the

other side, either to allow officials and police officers to enter or

leave the ground, or to admit people who were in distress. I remember

on at least three occasions these gates were opened at the request of

police officers outside to admit people with injuries. One of these

was a child who was carried bodily in and who had been removed frcm

the crush at the turnstiles.

At some stage, I would guess at about 2.40pm, (1440) I saw

Superintendent MARSHALL directing police operations in this crush. He

was having to shout to make himself heard on the radio and I heard a

shouted request from Inspector PURDY for the gates to be opened to

relieve the pressure on the turnstiles. Even at that stage I could

understand   the reason for this request. I did not see Superintendent

MARSHALL again. I was later to learn, in fact, that he remained there

continuing to direct operations in the area of the leppings Lane

trunstiles but such was the thronging mass of people that I did not

see him even though he must have been a matter of yards frcm me. Not

long afterwards I spoke to Inspector PURDY and said I thought the

gates should be opened.

At some stage it was decided that seme large wrought iron gates which

lead out into Leppings Lane should be closed in order to prevent the
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             7


now seething mass of people in Leppings Lane from continuing to apply

pressure to the queue to the turnstiles. This was done successfully

but it seemed to be only minutes before the gates were forced open

again and the pressure resumed. At one stage, still pre-occupied with

the pick-pockets, I moved nearer to these blue gates but inmediately

became engulfed in the crowd and I had to push and struggle to get

back into a relatively clear space near to the light portable barriers.

During these few brief moments I was frightened for my own safety and

it made me realise what conditions must have been like in the more

severely packed area behind the barrier leading to the turnstiles. I

was getting quite concerned and remember remarking to PC BOCKING that

they were going to have to open the gates.

PC BOCKING was carrying my radio at this time which was tuned to the

channel designated to CID, number 19. Uniformed officers were being

directed frcm control on channel 25.

Conditions deteriorated, missies were thrown, a beer can with a drink

spilling from it striking a police officer on horseback. There was

another surge from the crowd which appeared to be a concerted attempt

to unseat this same officer and the horse started dancing about in

fright. Throughout I could hear demands over a loud speaker system

pleading with the crowd to stop pushing, to be patient. I could

recognise the speaker as PC 1035 RYAN.

As it got nearer to 3 o'clock (1500) it became apparent to everyone

that it was impossible for this vast crowd, which now stretched out of

my sight in both directions of Leppings Lane, to gain access to the

ground before kick-off and I heard some uniformed officer remark that

kick-off had been delayed for 15 minutes.

The crowd became more and more unruly and nasty and I could hear

officers, who were caught in the press, shouting loudly into their
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             8


personal radios.

I began to have grave fears that the situation could only end in

disaster. The crowd were beginning to swarm over the walls into the

ground. People in the crowd were shouting and screaming for

assistance and yet the thrust from Leppings Lane continued.

At various times during this period the mounted police officers had

been supplemented by a number of others and I would estimate there

being in the region of eight to 10 mounted officers in that small

area. They were, for the most part, engulfed in the crowd and unable

to contain it.

A few minutes before 3 O'clock, perhaps three or four (1456 - 1457) ,

I heard the message given over a uniformed officer's radio "Open the

gate" and almost immediately the concertina doors of gate 'C' were

opened. I was standing only a few yards from the gate. I should say at

this point that these gates had never been under severe pressure as

the crowd had recognised that there was no probability of entering

through that gate. The people in the immediate vicinity of the gate

began to go through it and it seemed to take the bulk of the crowd 30

seconds or so to realise what had occurred.

The trickle of people going into the ground through this gate

increased and for a short period there was containable entry through

the gate. It was a relief to me to see the gate opened and, at this

point, I remarked to PC BOCKING "That gate should have been opened

earlier."

Over the next two or three minutes the flow through this gate

increased and it was apparent to me that the situation at the

turnstiles would soon be eased. It was about this time that I heard a

roar from the crowd inside the ground and assumed that either the

players were out or that the match had commenced. This surprised me,
MCKAY               GRAHAM                                              9


having thought that the game was going to be delayed. This roar

increased the urgency of the people entering the ground. I turned to

walk back with Pc BOOKING down the service road and made my way to

the south east comer of the ground, where I walked onto the

perimeter track of the pitch, behind the Spion Kop goal.

The game was in progress and as I looked up towards the lappings Lane

end I could see the crowd spilling out from the terraces onto the

pitch. I could not understand this but, as there were large numbers

of unifomred officers making their way along the perimeter path in

front of the North Stand towards that area, I assumed that the matter

would be contained and I left the pitch at the north east corner. I

walked back to the gymnasium which was being used as a dining rocm,

where I spoke to Detective Inspector TOWELL, and a few mintues later

someone called to me that play had been stopped and that there were

injuries.

Uniformed officers were hurrying out of the gymnasium and I returned

to the north east comer of the pitch to see what was happening. The

scene was one of confusion at the Leppings Lane end with some people

climbing from the terraces into the seated stand above and people

continuing to spill out onto the pitch through gates in the fencing

which were now open. It appeared to be an invasion of the pitch which

should be contained by uniform officers but, after a minute or so, I

decided to walk over. I had gone only about 40 yards (40 yds) when I

met Detective Sergeant 727 LINDLEY coming the other way and he called

to me, "There's about 20 dead in there boss."

I went immediately to the Police Room under the North stand, from

where I contacted Detective Chief Superintendent ALOIS by telephone.

I would estimate the time to be somewhere in the region of 3.15pm

(1515). I informed Mr ADDIS that I believed there were deaths and we
MCKAY                  GRAHAM                                           10


discussed that we would need to be thinking in terms of setting up an

Incident Room and activating a Casualty Bureau.

I have to say that from that time I have no clear recollection of the

sequence of events or of any timescale. I returned to the gymnasium

and my return coincided with that of Chief Inspector BEAL who

shouted, "We are going to set up a temporary mortuary in here, clear

these tables."

One half of the gymnasium had been set up as a dining area and there

was a temporary partition down the centre of the gymnasium. It was

this area that was cleared and there was a rush by police officers to

put tables to one side. I believe that Detective Inspector TOWELL was

in the gymnasium at that time and I am certain that I was the senior

officer present.

People started arriving into the gymnasium carrying victims. The

first victim to arrive was a young man and I believe he was carried

in by two police officers and a civilian. He was taken to the wall

opposite the door and laid down. Other people were now flooding into

the gymnasium carrying victims. The first man was apparently dead and

I touched one of the officers, introduced myself, and explained to

him that the     body was his responsibility and that tinder no

circumstances was he to leave that body. He was to ensure that no-one

else had any dealings with the property or clothing or identification

of that body. These were instructions that I was to repeat dozens of

times on that afternoon.

Brought in with the dead were the injured and these were directed to

the far end of the gymnasium at the other side of the partition. The

dead were arriving in such numbers that it was impossible to try to

establish whether, in fact, they were dead, but I have to say that

every body that I saw bore what I recognise to be classic signs of
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                              11


asphyxia and I am satisfied that every tody that I saw and directed

into the area designated as a temporary mortuary was, in fact, dead.

Although I saw most of the bodies I have to say that I did not see

them all. Indeed they were arriving in such numbers and with such

frequency that on many occasions it was inpossible to give

instructions before the officers who had brought the body in had

departed.

Satie of the bodies were carried in by msmebers of the crowd. Satie of

these people were distressed, weeping openly, screaming, aggressive

and I saw several fights and scuffles break out in the area around,

between and over the bodies that were being deposited.

Many fans were giving assistance to bring the dead and injured

persons into the gymnasium and it has to be said that whilst same

were apparently drunk they were not causing trouble. Officers and

civilians were attempting to resusciate some of the victims and I saw

at least two such groups attempting to revive, what were quite

obviously to me, dead bodies.

Of the people arriving in the gymnasium many were standing around,

remaining there. Police officers were going back out to fetch more

casualties and the scene was one of general confusion with bodies

being put down haphazardly.

At some stage I saw Detective Inspector CHARLES, apparently having

come into the gym with a body, about to leave the gymnasium. Mr

CHARLES had attended the match on duty in full police uniform. I

shouted to Mr CHARLES and when he came to me I told him that this

public order situation in the gymnasium had to be controlled and told

him to get some men and get on with it. He immediately started

gathering police officers to him and giving them instructions and I

noted that he gave priority to the gymnasium floor. It was impossible
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             12


to count the bodies as they arrived, but when there were about 20 I

remember thinking that there could not be many more dead. As the

bodies were laid nearer and nearer to the gymnasium door someone, I

believe it was Detective Sergeant MCSLOY, said to me "If we don't

start laying the bodies out neatly we will never get them all in." I

told him to grab some men and get on with it.

Two officers in uniform from the Underwater Search Unit came to me

at some time. They were carrying a hand-held video unit. They told me

that they had been recording the scene in and around the area of the

Leppings Lane goalmouth but that they had been assaulted on two

occasions by football supporters and they had had to retreat for

their safety. I recognised need for evidence gathering and told them

to start filming the scene in the gym. I do not remember seeing them

again.

I find it very difficult to recall the events in the gymnasium. My

overall perception is one of dead bodies arriving and being carried

by shocked and perspiring police officers; by distressed people who

were obviously friends and relatives and by drunken people, some of

whom were shouting and wanting to fight. Injured people were arriving

and being directed to the far end of the hall and the scene was one

of increasing confusion.

Seme degree of regulation began to take place as Inspector CHARLES

and his team regulated the people in the gym and ejected the unruly

ones. It would have been folly to try and separate the grieving

relatives and friends from the bodies and many, many people were left

standing around in the gymnasium helplessly, in all stages of

distress. On several occasions I went through to the Police Room to

make use of the telephone which was in there, but the Police rocm was

busy, the telephone was in use and when I bullied my way to the
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             13


telephone the numbers I tried to get were engaged or unobtainable.

At some stage I recall having seen a police officer sat on a chair by

the telephone in the Police Room. He had a big tear in his trousers.

He was weeping openly. He was quite obviously shocked. I had a few

words with him which seemed to me to be totally inadequate and left

him.

At a very early stage I had deputed someone to arrange for the major

incident boxes to come from Hammerton Road and Ecclesfield and I

asked Detective Inspector SCAIFE, at some stage, to contact the Medico

Legal Centre, assess their available capacity for bodies and to ring

round the various hospitals and mortuaries in the district with a

view to establishing the available capacities for dead bodies. I had

also asked for the Coroner to be informed-which seemed at the time to

be an absolutely incongruous request.

At some stage, I think after half an hour, I needed to make contact

with the control box inside the ground to inform them of the

situation in the gymnasium and as I was uanble to contact them by

telephone and I knew that any radio message passed would be relayed

over every officer's radio in the ground, I went on foot. I am now

informed by Detective Inspector TOWELL that he accompanied me, but my

recollection of events is so blurred and distorted that I cannot

remember him doing so, although I have no reason to doubt that he did.

At the Police Control Box I spoke to Mr ADDIS and, whilst I cannot

remember what I said to him, I must have told him the situation in

the gymnasium. I do remember speaking to the ACC Operations, Mr

JACKSON, and mentioning that amongst other problems we would have

were the press, who were present in numbers. Mr ADDIS asked me to

take him back to the gymnasium and as we left the area of the Police

Box I remember hearing the Liverpool Manager, Kenny DALGLISH,
MCKAY                 GRAHAM                                            14


addressing the crowd and a ripple of applause went round the ground.

Other than that I have no idea of what time it was.

On my return to the gymnasium with Mr ADDIS I saw senior ambulance

officials, in particular Alan HOPKINS who I introduced to Mr ADDIS

and we discussed the eventual removal of bodies from the gymnasium

and who would be responsible.

Mr ADDIS then took charge in the gymnasium and after a few minutes of

assessing the situation he stood on a chair, called for order in the

hall, and told police officers what he intended to do. The gymnasium

floor was littered with rows of bodies and I remember someone

telling me when I asked how many "Seventy odd and more at the

Northern General.11

Most of the bodies by this time had been draped with what appeared to

be white shrouds and I remember wondering where on earth they had

come from. I was later to learn that they were, in fact, the paper

tablecloths which had been removed from the wooden tressle tables,

now piled up at the side of the gymnasium.

It was about this time that I remembered that my youngest son was

somewhere in the crowd and almost all of the bodies, the feet of

which were protruding from under these tableclothes, seemed to have

trainers on identical to his, I had to resist the urge to go and look

at each of the bodies.

It was decided that I should return to Hammerton Road, assist in

setting up a Major Incident Room there and also arrange for the

friends and relatives to be bussed to Hammerton Road Police station.

I arranged to be taken to Hammerton Road by a marked Police car and

Detective Inspector TCWELL travelled in what I believe was the prison

bus, with anxious relatives and friends.

On arrival at Hammerton Road I found the place under virtual siege.
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                             15


Liverpool supporters were wanting to make urgent enquiries, many were

standing around not knowing what to do and someone had put out a call

for all off-duty social workers to report to Hammerton Road and

there were many social workers. My first reaction was one of dismay

at the thought of so many social workers being directed to this area

but, in a very short time, it became apparent that they were to be

invaluable and provided a buffer between distressed relatives and

fans, who had lost contact with relatives and friends in the crowd,

and the police.

I called together the Incident Room Staff, who had arrived at the

Station to set up the Incident Room, and briefed them as to what had

occurred at the ground and the situation there. I. should say here

that I was aware that arrangements had been made for the Casualty

Bureau to be activiated. I was shortly to be informed however that

all numbers to the Casualty Bureau had already gone out over the

radio, jamming all of the lines, and as a result there was to be no

police contact by telephone with the Bureau for many hours.

Having told the Incident Room staff what had occurred they went about

the business of setting up the Incident Room at Hammerton Road. I

tried to make a telephone call to my home but could not get an

outside line. I later went to an adjacent building where I knew there

was a direct outside line. I telephoned home and established that my

son was safe. I think the time was then about 6.30pn (1830) but all I

can say for certain is that it was still daylight.

I was surprised to see Superintendent SLEATH at Hammerton Road Police

Station in civilian clothes and he told me that he had responded to a

call for all off-duty police officers to go either to Hillsborough or

the closest police station. Mr SLEATH had assumed responsibility for

relatives; liaison with Social Services and with the temporary
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                            16



mortuary.

During the course of the evening there were three other events

unconnected with this incident, which required my attention. One was a

potential firearms situation in 'FI' Sub-Division; another was a

potential firearms situation in 'F2' Sub-Division; and, the third

involved the body of an old lady which had been found in a fire at

her home under suspicious circumstances. I asked Detective Chief

Inspector ADDISON to go to Ecclesfield Police Station and deal with

the body and deputed Detective Inspector SCAIFE to deal with the

firearms incident there.

I needed to speak to Detective Chief Superintendent ALOIS on many

occasions during the evening but contact with him was only possible

by contacting people with him on channel 25 of the police radio and

then requesting him to return to channel 19, in the hope that our

conversation would be more secure.

At some time during the evening, but not long after Mr ADDISON had

left for Ecclesfield, I returned to the gymnasium for a conference

with Mr ALOIS and found that the Coroner, Mr POTTER, and the Home

Officer Pathologist, Professor USHER, were in attendance. Professor

USHER said that there was little he could do at the scene and agreed

to go over to Ecclesfield to look at the scene and the body there. I

arranged transport for him.

The scene at the gymnasium was now much more orderly. The bodies had

all been certified dead. There were a number of doctors in

attendance; there were social workers; many grieving relatives and

many many police officers, all of whom looked shocked, drawn and

tired. I believe that it was at this stage I saw a man I recognised

as Dr DUCKW0R3H, psychologist, who lectures at police establishments

on trauma connected with major incidents and, in particular, in his
MCKAY                GRAHAM                                            17


involvement with police officers following the Bradford Fire.

Mr ADDIS discussed with me his plans to photograph, with a polaroid

camera, each of the bodies; to display these on a wall at a

different part of the gymnasium and to have relatives brought, one

lot at a time, to the gymnasium to be shown the photograph and, if a

photograph was picked out, to have the body relating to that

photograph removed from the hall into a temporary viewing rocm and

identified.

We also discussed at that time our priorities and decided that no

police enquiry could cortmence that night and it was imperative that

all police efforts should be directed towards the situation at the

gymnasium;

identification of the bodies and providing what assistance was

possible to the relatives.

I returned to Hammerton Road Police Station and closed down the

Incident Rocm, which had already commenced feeding the basic

information into the system. For example, a copy of the Operational

Order of the football match.

During the evening the relatives had been removed first to

Hillsborough Boys Club premises across the road from Hammerton Road

Police Station, and then to the Church Hall on Forbes Road.

The only occasion I can definitely set a time for is 9.00pm (2100)

when I had a conversation by telephone with the Deputy Chief Constable,

Mr HAYES, to update him of the operation.

He requested that a conference be set up of all senior officers

involved with a view to being able to supply the Chief Constable with

a factual account of events in order that he could be properly

prepared to meet the inevitable barrage for information from the

press. Mr HAYES asked me to arrange for all senior officers concerned
MCKAY                  GRAHAM                                           18


to be at the Conference Room at Headquarters for 11.00pm (2300). I

remember looking at my watch at that stage to assess how much time I

had. I had at least two other conversations, during the evening, with

ACC, Mr JACKSON to update him, but I cannot remember the content of

the conversation.

I returned to the gymnasium at Hillsborough, spoke to Mr ALOIS and

told him of the conference.

I decided that I ought then to have a look at the stand and terraces

where the disaster had occurred (even though it was in darkness) in

order that I could be properly informed for the conference which was

to follow. Although the light was not good it was light enough to

give me some indication of the devastation which had occurred. I was

accompanied by Detective Inspector TOWELL. We went from there through

the tunnel and round to the turnstile area and on our way back to the

gymnasium saw the Chief Constable with a group of people at the scene.

I informed the Chief Constable of the meeting being set up at ll.OOpn

(2300). I returned to the gymnasium. I had a further conversation with

Mr ALOIS and the Chief Constable then visited the gymnasium. He was

obviously looking at the scene carefully and was speaking to as many

officers as he possibly could, offering words of encouragement. I

believe shortly after this I returned with Chief Superintendent ALOIS

who had not had the opportunity to visit the area of the disaster and

together we went from there into the service road at the back of the

South Stand where we discussed the prospect of approaching the many

television crews now in attendance with a view to obtaining video

recordings taken by them. Mr ADDIS decided against it.

After I had returned to the gymnasium I went to Hammerton Road Police

Station with Detective Inspector TOWELL. I made arrangements for

video recordings    to be available to the Conference Room at Police
MCKAY                  GRAHAM                                           19


Headquarters. I travelled to Headquarters with Detective Inspector

TOWELL only to find that the conference had been cancelled for that

night and was re-arranged for 9.00am (0900) the following morning. I

returned to Hammerton Road Police Station and went off duty at around

2.15am (0215).

On arrival home at about 2.30am (0230) I discovered that my youngest

boy had picked up two distressed Liverpool fans, one of whom had been

parted from his brother, and these two young men were sleeping at my

home.

I returned to work for 7.30am (0730) the following day and during the

day that followed I was in charge of the Incident Room at Hammerton

Road Police Station.

At 12.30 pm (1230) on Tuesday 18 April 1989 (180489), as a result of a

conversation I had with Inspector SYKES, I returned to Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club and examined the blue wrought iron perimeter

gates which I have previously mentioned.

These gates had by this time been turned into a shrine and flowers

were piled up against them and scarves tied to than. I saw that one

of the bolts, which secured a gate by dropping into a hole in the

asphalt, was bent and that another such bolt on a different gate had

gouged out a groove in the asphalt some 18" to 2' (18" to 2') long,

and that this damage was quite obviously recently caused. I returned

to Hammerton Road Police Stastion and made arrangements for the gates

to be photographed.

At 2.30pm (1430) that same day, at a conference between Mr JONES,

Assistant Chief Constable of West Midlands Police; Chief

Superintendent PEMBERTON of that Force, Detective Chief Superintendent

ADDIS and myself; Mr JONES formally assumed responsibility for the

enquiry into the disaster.
        MCKAY             GRAHAM                         20




                                   GRAHAM MCKAY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                              980
                                                                           STATION

^VM E:


 ADDRESS:


 AGE / DATE OF BIRffl:

 OCCUPATION:


 Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
 by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
 it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
 prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything w h i c h I know
 to be false or do not believe to be true.


 DATED: 120589                                                            (SIGNED)



            I am a single man living at the above address with my parents. I am a

            very keen Liverpool Football Club supporter and hold a season ticket

            for the Kop end of Anfield.

            I wanted to see Liverpool play Nottingham Forest in the F A cup Semi

            Final at Hillsborough, Sheffield, on Saturday 15th April 1989,

            (150489) and my season ticket entitled me to a ticket for the match.

            I bought my ticket the day they went on sale at Anfield.     It cost

             6.00 and was for the Leppings Lane end terraces.

            I arranged to go to the match with my brother,                 ,   who

            lives at my house and two friends,



            We arranged to travel by coach which was being organised by

                                                                and



            At 1000am (1000), on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I met up

            with the other lads at
                              Liverpool. We boarded the coach which I believe was

            on hire from Mersey Bus and was a 52 seater, which was more or less
full. At approximately 1015am (1000), the coach left and we set

off for Sheffield avoiding the motorways, travelling along the A

roads. We were not subjected to any real delay and we arrived at a

Public House on the outskirts of Sheffield called the Travellers (Inn)

at just after 1200 (1200) midday.

We went into the Travellers (Inn) for about an hour and had a few

drinks.    All the people off the coach went in.

From the pub we then got back on the coach and travelled right into

Sheffield until we got to our drop off point which again I remember

was near to a Pub called the Travellers (Inn) and also near a Gateway

supermarket.

On this coach journey to the drop off point, I saw quite a few Police

on the route but I don't really know if they were directing us to the

ground.

We got dropped off at about 2.15p*n (1415) and

          my brother       and I made our way to the ground.

Another three men walked to the ground with us but I only know one of

them whose name is                  who lives somewhere in

Kirby, Liverpool.

On our way to the ground there were Police along the whole route.     The

fans who were making their way to the ground were all in good spirits,

some were singing seme just talking.     Everyone was happy and I didn't

see anyone drunk or behaving badly or fighting.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance at about 2.25pm (1425) and on

the approach to the actual turnstiles I saw crowds of people waiting

outside.

There were no queues as such just masses of people which stretched

from the turnstile to outside the perimeter iron gates.      I saw two or

three Policemen on horseback trying to control the crowds.     We joined
the crowd to wait to enter the ground.

At this point                left us as he had a ticket for the North

Stand.   It wasn't long before we became part of the crowd and I soon

lost sight of                 and the other two men.

At first it seemed as though it was just like any other game with the

usual hustle and bustle.

At this time I noticed that there was a Police minibus parked just

away from the crowd which appeared to be full of Policemen.      My self

my b r o t h e r a n d              tried to stick together but one

of the Police on horseback rode through the crowd and           and I were

caught one side of him while         was caught on the other.   I didn't

see         again until after the match.

We had been part of the crowd outside the ground for about 15

minutes, when eventually we reached the turnstiles.

At this time people at the front were shouting out for the crowds to

go back as they were getting crushed.          and I entered through a

turnstile which I think was in the middle of the turnstile block.        I

handed my ticket to the man in the turnstile box, he tore the

ticket in two and gave me half back.

On the other side of the turnstile I didn't see any Policemen or

Stewards.

By this time it was 2.40pm (1440) and          and I decided that we'd

wait just inside the turnstile to see if          Tould come through.

I then saw six or so men climbing over the wall above the turnstiles,

jump down onto the turnstile hut and then into the ground.      I noticed

that two Policemen standing nearby made no attempt to stop or catch

these men.

We waited for         for two or three minutes but we didn't see him coroe

through the turnstiles.     I then realised that a large gate to my left
was open and crowds of people were running into the ground through it.

It was a blue concertina type gate about 12 - 15 feet (12'- 15') in

width.     The crowds of people were running past me and heading for the

tunnel under the West Stand.

         and I tried to wait for      but we decided after a minute or so

that if we didn't go to the terrace then that we wouldn't be able

to get in at all.    We then went with the crowds towards the tunnel.

I didn't see any signs directing me to the terraces but all I could

see in front of me was the tunnel and as everyone else was going that

way I joined them.     I had been to the same match the previous year and

that time there had been Police and stewards lined up across the

tunnel telling everyone to go round to the sides.    This time, however,

everyone was making for that tunnel and there were no Police nor

Stewards to be seen.

         ind I waited through the tunnel and we had free passage along it

although there were quite a few people also going through.    There were

no Police nor stewards inside the tunnel.    When we reached the terrace

we went to the left Pen where there was still a little bit of room at

the back.    We stood just behind a crash barrier right at the back of

the pen.

From entering the ground to taking up the position on the terrace,

I hadn't seen any incidents of drunken or disorderly behaviour.    By

the time we first stood on the terrace it was about 2.40pm to 2.45pm

(1440) (1445). I didn't see anyone drinking in the ground.

Almost immediately after standing at the crash barrier, I felt a

sudden surge of pressure from behind me and I was crushed against the

crash barrier.    This eased off slightly and I managed to ease my way

to the side of the barrier and tried to stand in front of it with

          However, almost staight away I felt another surge from behind
and suddenly I had no control of where I was going.    I felt myself

being swept with the crowd down the terrace, but somehow          and I

stayed quite near to each other.     In a matter of seconds I found

myself near the front of the terraceand over to the left almost in

the comer. I have been shown a plan of the terrace and I would say

that my original match view point would have been position G2 and by

the time I was pushed to the front at position B5.

People around me were screaming for people to get back as they were

being crushed down the front.   I saw young children being passed from

the back of the    terrace over people's heads and      eventually over the

fence to what I now know is Pen 5.

I was almost at the fence at the front of the terrace by now and I put

my arms out in front of me against the fence to stop myself being

crushed.   There   was a young boy right in front of me whoI was also

trying to save from being crushed.    I   felt that     he wouldget badly

injured if he didn't get out so I tried to lift him up.    I lifted

him up so far and then other people helped and eventually he too was

carried across the crowd and out into Pen 5.

This lad was 13 - 14 years old, 5'0 (5'00) tall, dark brown

hair, fair complexion with the start of a moustache.

I can't remember what he was wearing.

I had been aware that my brother wasstill next to me in the Pen

although I couldn't see him because of my position.

I was being pushed closer to the fence with Pen 5 and then I noticed

that about 6 feet (6'00) away to my right as I faced the pitch, there

was a man who looked as though he was dying.    His eyes were closed

and his head was pushed back and his face was turning grey.     I had

sight of this man for a couple of minutes and throughout that time he

didn't move, his face just became darker and darker.
                                                                             6


People all around him were shouting for someone to come and help him

and get him out.

I would describe him from what I could       see at thistime as a white

man, about 30-35 years    old, fair hair,   wavy, aboutcollar length.     He

was clean shaven and I    could see he was well builtand must have been

about 6'4 (6'04) tall.I would say he     was in position B/C 3 on the

plan of the Pen shown to me.

I eventually found myself right in the comer of the Pen 4, up against

the fence into Pen 5.    Pen 5 was very narrow and I saw that there was

a gate at the front of it.     Everyone was shouting to the Policeman on

this gate to open it and eventually after quite a few people had got

into Pen 5, this gate was opened, either by the Policeman or Stewards

that were around it.

I saw two other Policemen walking up and down along the edge of the

pitch behind the goal area right in front of us.    Everyone was

screaming at them to open the gates or help but they just kept walking

as though they didn't realize what was happening.     I then heard

someone shout my name from the direction of the pitch and I looked up

and saw my brother         Ln front of me on the edge of the pitch.     He

had somehow managed to get out.

He then went to the Policeman who was standing on the gate to Pen 5,

said something and then made his way actually into Pen 5.    He then

climbed up the 6' (6'00) fence which separated Pens 4 and 5, leaned

over and grabbed hold of my hand to try and pull me out.

Just then I heard someone say, "Get him out, he's going."

I looked just behind me and* saw a man who was standing just next to

me.   His head went backwards and his eyes were twitching

                         . This man was white, about 27-28 years, 5'11-

6'0 (5'11) (6'00) tall, shortish dark brown hair, clean shaven,
wearing a red short sleeved shirt and a Liverpool scarf.

I then saw him get dragged over the fence and into Pen 5 by seme of

the fans in Pen 5, but then I lost sight of him as I myself was then

dragged over the fence by my brother and a few other men.

I immediately went out onto the pitch through the gate and noticed

that the footballers were leaving the pitch.     This was the first time

I had seen anything of the footballers at all.

I then went straight to a Policeman who was standing just on the pitch

almost immediately in front of the gate and told him to do something

about was happening.   He said, "Calm down, we're doing all we

can", but to me he was doing nothing.

My brother and I then went to the fence at the front of Pen 4, we

stood on the advertisement hoarding just in front of it and leaned

over the fence and started pulling people out of the crowd out onto

the pitch.   By this time there were a number of us doing the same.

I pulled about four or five people out and whilst I was doing this a

Policeman came up to me and tried to get me down but I just carried on.

Soon though the wood of the advertisement hoarding cracked and

everyone fell off.

Just after that we started to try to pull the caging of the fencing

back so that we could get people through the fence.          and I and

two other men started to pull the fence back and we were joined by a

Policeman and a Policewoman who helped us.

After twenty seconds or so the bottom right hand comer of the panel

we were pulling gave way and we managed to pull the fencing back

leaving a gap big enough to get one person through at a time.

I then noticed a man lying on the terrace in Pen 4.    It was the same

man I had seen earlier whose face had turned grey.    By this time there

was a clearing around him and a St Johns Ambulance Man was thumping
his chest trying to revive him but the man did not stir.     He was then

carried from the terrace through the hole in the fence that we had

made onto the pitch.     He was placed in the penalty area where someone

else tried to revive him.    They could not get any movement from him

and to me he was obviously dead.    He was wearing a pair of blue jeans

                                           , a pair of         underpants

                                           and a white shirt which was

pulled right up to his shoulders exposing his belly.     He was lying on

his back.

I then went to help some of the other fans who had started to make

stretchers out of advertisment hoardings and who were carrying people

on those to the other end of the ground.     I helped to carry four or

five people off the pitch at the Leppings Lane end of the ground down

to the Spion Kop end where they were being laid out just off the edge

of the pitch to the left of the goal.    Some of those I had helped to

carry had coats over their heads.    We had made two runs before we

noticed the first ambulance enter the ground.      1

Whilst making these runs with injured and dead people, I saw the

Police make a cordon across the half way line of the pitch and a

cordon in front of the North Stand between the half way line and the

Leppings Lane end.     I felt that these Police could have helped the

injured and the dead rather than just stand there as they did.      Even

when people asked for help they didn't move.

Of the people I helped to carry on the hoardings the only one I can

remember was the first man who had a brown leather jacket over his

face.   He was wearing blue jeans and brown shoes.

I got very tired after carrying the people up and        downthe      pitch soI

then went back to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

All over the pitch at this end I could see people        lying on     thefloor,
sane injured, sane unconscious and some obviously dead with sheets and

coats over their faces. I then saw a young man who had travelled to

the ground on the same coach as us. I saw that his nose was bleeding

badly as though it was broken.    He was walking around in a daze as

though he didn't know where he was.

         and I then made our way to the North Stand where we knew

     was sitting.     We found him and we decided that we had seen

enough and could not do any more to help so we left the ground.      This

was about 4.15pm (1615) - 4.30pm (1630).

I didn't hear any announcement to leave the ground.

We made our way back to the pick up point for the coach arriving there

at about 4.40pm (1640)     Gradually everyone started to come back to the

coach.

We waited until about 6.00pm (1800) but three lads that had travelled

on our coach hadn't turned up.     One of them was the lad I had seen in

the ground with the broken nose and the other two who I didn't know,

I have subsequently found out were Steven ROBINSON and Carl LEWIS who

both died at the match.

I would like to say that there should have been more Police and

stewards inside the turnstiles at the leppings Lane end directing

people to different parts of the standing areas so that the crowd was

spread out.     I feel if this had happened, the tragedy would not have

occurred and people would not have died.

Also the FA are to blame in as much as that they should have allocated

Liverpool the larger end of the ground knowing that they have a much

larger following.

Once the seriousness of the incident became apparent, I feel the

Police were very slow to react.     The fans were pleading for them to

help but it was a very long time before they did so.
                                                                                   10


        Also there were very few medically trained people in the ground apart

        from the St John's Ambulance people.     Those medically trained that

        were there seemed to have very little organisation in knowing who to

        attend to and who to leave.     Also the Police that lined across the

        pitch did nothing to help those injured or (tying.

        On the day of the match, I was wearing a blue denim Wrangler jacket, a

                          blue                                  shoes.

        wearing

        shoulder, blue jeans

                                                 blue Reebok training shoes with

        yellow stripes.

        Once          had got out of the terraces he took off his T shirt, and

        walked around bare chested.



                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:   120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and I reside at the above address with my family.

       On Saturday April 15th 1989 (150489) I went to Hillsborough with my

           son and a mate of his, we are all Liverpool supporters.   We travelled

       to the game in my sons car.      I purchased my ticket from the ticket

           shop at Anfield and it cost me six pounds.    It was for the Leppings

       Lane standing area.

       We did not stop anywhere on the way to the game but we did get stuck

           in road works on a large Island somewhere, I'm not exactly sure where

       that was.

       We got to the area of the ground at about quarter to two (1345) and we

       parked about five minutes from the ground near to a place that sells

       caravans.

       We did not get escorted to the ground at all and after parking the car

       we went for a pint.      I think I got to the turnstiles at about twenty

           five(1435) to or quarter to three (1445).    When I got to the area of

       Leppings Lane all I could see was a mass of people.        There were no

           formal queues, there was no organisation at all.    Where I was stood

       there was a mounted Policeman trying to control the crowd.        He was
                                                                             2


unable to do anything about it all and was no use at all.        The sheer

numbers of people outside the turnstiles and the lack of any queues

made it very uncomfortable.     It was a real tight situation.     I could

not see any signs telling me where I had got to go into the ground and

it was quite confusing because of the way we were all being pushed

backward and forwards and side to side.

I cannot remember how I found out but I realised that a gate had been

opened at the right hand side of the turnstiles.     I ducked under a

dividing railing and went through it.

There was obviously no one to collect my ticket and on seeing the

tunnel I headed straight for it.     I reckon that I was one     of    thefirst

hundred through the gate and down the tunnel.

I got down the tunnel, which was not too bad at that time, and into

pen 4.   There was no one to guide me away from the tunnel or          anysigns

to direct me to the sides.    I do not normally stand behind the goal in

these circumstances but on that day I didn't have a choice.       As soon

as I got into Pen 4 I realised that loads more supporters were coming

in from behind me.    That's how I know that I was one of the first

people through the open gate.

I don't remember what time I got into pen 4 but I do remember the

teams on the pitch.

The pushing and crushing from behind was unbearable.     It went on and

on   I was screaming at seme coppers and stewards on the pitch to do

something but they just shrugged their shoulders as if to say "What

can we do?"

The small gate that leads onto the pitch was opened and I just kept

thinking that I had to get out.

After what seemed to be an eternity I got to within about two feet of

the gate and someone climbed over my head in an effort to get out.
       This must have knocked me out because all I can remember is ccming

       round at the back of the stands.




       All I can really say is that compared to last year the whole thing was

       a shambles.    The organisation was really bad this year, frctn outside

       the ground to the point inside where people were allowed to go down

       the tunnel even though the two pens were both full.

        I don't know what went wrong but there must have been something not

       right because we did not have these problems last year.



                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                     ?C



OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be time.


DATED: 120689                                                            (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my mother and father.    I am a

       Liverpool Supporter.

       On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I travelled to Hillsborough

       Football ground in Sheffield for the Football Association Cup Semi-

       Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.      I went with

                                                   already seen) ,

                            (unknown if been seen),

                  (unknown if been seen) and                  address unknown

           (already seen). We all travelled to Sheffield in                     rar

       and left Liverpool at about 11.00am (1100).      I got my ticket for the

       match through my season ticket at Anfield.      I paid #6.00 for the

       ticket which was for the Leppings Lane terraces.

       On route to the game the car broke down on the M62 but it only delayed

       us for five minutes.     We were delayed on the M62 for about half-an-

       hour due to roadworks, then we missed a turn off, which again delayed

       us.

       We reached Sheffield 2.30pm (1430).     On the journey down I saw no

       Liverpool fans drinking alcohol in cars, coaches or mini-buses. We
parked the car on a side street on the Leppings Lane side of the

ground which was about a twenty minute walk to the ground.     On the

walk down to the ground I saw some Liverpool fans drinking alcohol

outside pubs and also drinking from cans on the street but I did not

see anyone who was completely drunk.

Police Officers were evident on the walk down to the ground but we did

not receive any Police directions or get a Police escort between our

arrival point and the entrance I saw no fighting or any other

disorder.    We got to the Leppings Lane entrance at about 2.45pm

(1445) , there were no orderly queues by the turnstiles or outside the

outer gates, it was just a mass of people.     I attended the same match

last season so I knew which turnstiles to use to gain entry.      I saw

that the two blue outer gates before the terrace turnstiles were shut

and outside these gates there was a line of about six or seven Police

horses.     This line was formed across the gates between the newsagent

shop and the comer of the bridge.      I saw that the horses

were being used to only let so many fans into the area of the

turnstiles at any one time, also I saw policemen on foot by the

outer gates, people were walking everywhere in this area and a lot of

people went on the road.

During this time outside the outer gates, myself and the other two got

separated from                      We eventually got past the horses

and I then saw that the two outer gates giving access to the terrace

turnstiles had been opened although I didn't see who opened them.

Outside the turnstiles it was crowded but not excessively.     You had

some movement of your upper body.     I had no difficulty finding the

right turnstile as I knew which one to use and I had no difficulty

entering the ground.     I entered through a turnstile and gave up my

ticket in the usual way.     I saw no gates open other than the
turnstiles.

I did witness people gaining entry to the ground by climbing over the

walls to both sets of turnstiles.     Once inside the ground I saw no

signs directing people to the terraces. I used the tunnel last year

so I just used it again this year.     I didn't know that you could get

into the side terraces by going either left or right around the back

of the West Stand.

We walked down the tunnel at normal walking pace and you had full

movement of your upper body.     At the entrance to the tunnel there were

no stewards or policemen giving directions at all.

Once beyond the tunnel we turned right and went into pen 3.     We

managed to push our way through the crowd and I ended up at position

one as indicated on the grid, this was ray first match viewing position

(marked       (Exhibit No).    I took up this position after few

minutes.

After 3.00pm (1500) as the match had already kicked off the crowd

gradually got worse so that in the end you had no movement of your

feet or upper body.   I then felt a surge of people forwards and I

ended up at position two as indicated on the grid.

Between entry point and my match viewing point, I witnessed no

disorder other any other incidents and I saw no fans drinking in the

ground.

I was standing on the terraces with                  at position two,

the crowd crush was excessive but after a while we all managed to

move backwards and we stood by the back wall to the terracing.       It was

at this point that I saw the policeman run onto the pitch then the

players left the pitch.     I also saw people climbing over the fencing

at the front of the pens.    We were looking towards the pitch then all

of a sudden a man appeared in front of us.    I don't know where he came
from.   At first he was standing upright facing towards ourselves

and the West Stand, then he dropped to the ground, his face was blue,

he was dead when he fell to the ground.     A man pulled up his t-shirt

and began to pump his chest, this man was hysterical.     He was

eventually dragged towards the tunnel by the man who had tried to

revive him.   I would describe the man who I saw die as a white male,

approximately 28-30 yrs, no beard or moustache, he had brownish hair

which was straight over his eyes about collar length and he had a side

parting he was of stocky build and had a pot belly, he was wearing a

short sleeved white t-shirt, blue jeans and trainers.     I don't know

the make or colour of his trainers there is nothing more that I can

add which makes him stand out better.     I think I would recognise him

again if I saw a picture of him.     The position he died in is marked

with a cross on the grid, after this man had been dragged away I

helped people get up into the West Stand.

I did not see the crush barrier break in pen 3 and was not by it when

it broke, the only time I saw it was after the terrace had cleared.

Other than witnessing that man die I did not assist with anyone who

was dead or injured, I was not injured.

We stood for a while on the terrace.     I helped rip down the

advertising boards and they were passed down to the front.       The pen

was then clearing,                   stopped together so I had a walk

along the length of the terraces to see if I could see

          I couldn't go down the tunnel because the Police had blocked

the entrance, they told me I couldn't go down it and I would have to

wait on the terraces.

Well after the announcement to say the match had been abandoned we

left the ground.     This would have been about 4.15pm (1615).   We then

met up with
I witnessed nothing during the day which I consider was a criminal

offence.

After the match had been stopped and the players had left the pitch,

the loud speaker system was not used enough to inform people of what

was going on.     Especially to tell people in the middle pens to go back

out through the tunnel.     When people were first trying to get over the

fencing at the front of the pens the Police were pushing them back

into the pens.

A lot of Policemen were on the pitch, they seemed to be doing nothing

to help.   The factor I consider which contributed to the deaths and

injuries to people was the amount of people allowed to enter the

middle two pens causing the excessive crowd crush.    I feel the police

should have responded quicker and should have observed the situation a

lot faster than they did.    The signs directing you to the terraces are

not good enough, there were no signs that I saw directing people to

both side terracing.

Last year there were orderly queues outside the ground, this year it

was just chaos.    There is a need for perimeter fencing but it needs to

be re-designed, something like the French have got fencing that opens

outwards, stopping people being penned in.    I attended the match last

year.




                                                                            998
                                SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                            STATION

^M E:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 210689                                                              SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with ray girlfriend.     I am a Liverpool

        supporter and on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I went with three

           friends to Hillsborough Football Stadium in Sheffield for the football

        Association Cup Semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.           I

        went with                                                               He

        has already been seen by the Police,                     and his brother,

        whose first name I don't know.     I don't think          and his brother

        have been seen.     They went in the North Stand in the ground.

        We all travelled to Sheffield ir            car.      I was picked up here in

        Manchester at about 12.00 - 12.30pm (1200-1230).

        I am a season ticket holder at Anfield and this how I got my ticket

        for the match.     I paid six pound for it and it was to stand in the

        Leppings Lane terraces.

        After leaving Manchester we did not stop on route to Sheffield at all

        and we were not subjected to any travel delays.

        We parked the car on the Leppings Lane end of the ground on the car­

        park of a warehouse, I think it was B & Q.     We arrived in Sheffield

        at about 2.30pm(1430).
                                                                          2


On the walk down to the ground I saw a number of Liverpool fans

drinking from cans near to Leppings Lane.    Some of them were stopped

by the Police and they were told to drink up, which they did.

I did not see or receive any Police directions on the walk to the

ground.    I did not witness any disorder, fighting or drunkenness

between ray arrival point and the ground.   I would say that we got to

the entrance to the ground, that being the Leppings Lane end at about

2.45pn(1445).

Outside the turnstiles there were no orderly queues.     It was just a

mass of people.

I did not see any stewards outside the turnstiles, I just saw one

Policeman on a horse but I don't know what directions he was giving,

if any, because he was to far away.

I did not have any difficulty finding which turnstile to use to gain

entry.    All the turnstiles were clearly marked.   There was great

difficulty entering the ground because of the amount of people pushing

and shoving outside the turnstiles.

Outside the turnstiles I was standing near to some blue barriers to

the right of the terrace turnstiles.    A Policeman on foot told us the

gate had been opened to the right of the terrace turnstiles, so people

just went through the gate. I did not enter through a turnstile, I did

not witness who opened this gate, but obviously knew it had been

opened. I did witness unauthorised entry into the ground.

I saw people climbing over the wall and gate situated between the

terrace and West Stand turnstiles and also the people who had entered

through the open gate.

I did not hand ray ticket in but during the crush in the Pen, I lost it

on the terraces.

Once inside the ground, I did not see any signs directing you to your
match viewing point but I had been told not to use the middle two pens

beyond the tunnel.   Me and          who I eventually stood with on the

terraces therefore to start with went to the left round the back of

the West Stand but we saw no signs directing you to the side terraces,

so we made our way back to the tunnel.

At the entrance to the tunnel there were no Police Officers or

Stewards giving directions.   My passage along the tunnel wasn't too

bad, you had movement of your upper body.

Between my entry into the ground and taking up my first match viewing

point, as indicated on the grid as position One (marked         )(Exhibit

No          ), I witnessed no disorder or other incidents at all. I

took up my first match viewing point with           just before kick-off,

as the players were already out on the pitch.

We stood in Pen 4. I did not see or was not near the barrier that

broke in Pen 3.

As soon as we entered Pen 4, after leaving the tunnel, you had very

restricted movement of your upper body and arms.     It was obvious that

there was already too many people on the terraces in these middle two

pens.

I experienced crowd crush as soon as I got onto the terraces.

At around kick-off or not long after, there was a strong surge which

caused people to move forward but there was no movement back.     I

don't know what caused this surge.

After taking up our first match viewing position, we had not been

really standing still at any one point.    We were always being pushed

forwards.

Just in front of me at about the position marked with a cross on the

grid, there was a white man in his fifties stood in front of me.      He

had his back to the pitch and was facing the West Stand.    He was
________________________                                                   4

trapped in front of a barrier.     I, with others, tried to pull him off

the barrier but he died in our arms.     I was then pushed

forwards with a surge of people.     I let go of this man and the force

of the crowd moved me away from him.     I did not see him    again.

As already stated, he was a white male in his fifties. He had grey

hair which was balding at the front.     He was not wearing glasses and

he did not have a beard.

I can't remember if he had a moustache.     He was wearing a red 'V'

necked jumper with a red and white shirt underneath. I don't know

what kind of trousers or footwear he had on. There is nothing more

that I can describe which would make him stand out any more. I don't

out any more.   I don't think I would recognise him again.

I remained in the position as indicated on the grid as No 2 for what

seemed to me to be a long time before the crowd relaxed.     Me and

       eventually got out of the Pen by climbing over the fencing to

the left of Pen 4. We left the ground at about 4.30pm(1630) of our

own accord.

During the incident I did not witness anything that I consider to be a

criminal offence.

I would consider that the fences to the front of the terracing was a

factor in the deaths and injuries to people.    As the fencing is angled

back towards the crowd at the top, this hindered people getting out of

the Pens quickly.     Also the gates at the front of the pens are too

small and there is not enough of them.     I was not injured at all

during the tragedy.

In relation to my views on how the incident was handled after the

match was stopped, I don't think enough was done to get people out of

the front of the pens. The emergency services had a lack of equipment

and there seemed to be a lack of coordination between them.     I could
        not see the point of why a line of Police Officers was put across the

        centre of the pitch.    These Officers should have been used to get

        people out of the pens and help people on the pitch.

        The front fencing had to be pulled away by hand.    I was surprised that

        no equipment was available to cut away the fencing if the wire mesh

        was removed straight away with cutting equipment, then people would

        have been able to get out of the pens quicker.

        Liverpool fans should have been given the larger Spion Kop aid of the

        ground and the allocation of tickets is wrong.

        If the gate outside the ground by the turnstiles had not have

        been opened people would have definitely have died outside the

        ground.    Once inside the ground, there are no clear directions to

        direct people to the side terraces.

        If there had been clear directions then me a n d _______ would have stood

        on the side terraces.

        I did not attend the same match last year.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   210689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  POL PC
                                                                            STATION

^pdVE:

 ADDRESS:


 AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

 OCCUPATION:


 Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
 by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
 it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
 prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
 to be false or do not believe to be true.


 DATED: 031189                                                              SIGNED)



            I am a single person currently residing at the above address.      I am a

            student at                                                 My address

                                                         I am currently taking a

            year off from my studies and I am due to re-ccmmence my studies at



            On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA

            Cup Semi Final Football match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

            at the Hillsborough Football ground in Sheffield.

            I attended as a Liverpool supporter and have supported them all my

            life.    I used to attend matches regularly up until the age of

            fourteen.    Now I only attend matches whenever possible, which

            isn't very often.

            I obtained my match ticket from_________ .    The ticket was for the

            Leppings Lane terracing and cost me six pounds.

            I travelled to the match with the following people.

            (   1)
                                                                              2


At the time of Hillsborough,                  ias working in Sheffield, he

had a job at          In Hillsborough.          also had temporary digs in

Sheffield.      I travelled frar               to Sheffield by train on the

morning of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), arriving at
                                                     at                digs at

about eleven o'clock.      I can't remember the address of the digs.

When I arrived there,                     were already there.    They had

travelled to Sheffield on the Friday night and stopped at________

overnight.     At about quarter to twelve (1145), all four of us caught

a bus from           iigs to Hillsborough High Street, not far from the

ground.      We got off the bus at about five to twelve (1155) and

walked to the ground, having a look at the souvenir sellers on the way.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles at about half past twelve

(1230).
At that time, it was very quiet at the turnstiles.         There ware a few

people milling about in the general area and the odd person going

through the turnstiles.      I don't remember seeing any policemen or

stewards outside the turnstiles.         We all entered the ground via

different turnstiles shortly after twelve thirty (1230) I handed my

ticket in to the turnstile operator and was given the stub portion

back.

From the time that we got off the bus in Hillsborough High Street and

during the walk to the ground, there were a few Liverpool supporters

about, but not that many.          I did not see any disorder or any

drunkenness.      I do not remember seeing any people drinking alcohol.

Once inside the ground, there were policemen searching supporters as

they came through the turnstiles.          I wasn't searched but___________

was.      I do not remember seeing any police or stewards outside the

 turnstiles.

 It was quiet inside the ground as well, there just being a few people
                                                                           3


milling about.    It was our intention to watch the match frcm behind

the goals and we could see the central tunnel that runs underneath the

stand.    This tunnel appeared to be the only way to the terraces and

the obvious way to get behind the goals.    I did not see any signs

indicating any other way to the terraces.      I had not been to that

ground before and I don't think any of the other lads had either. We

each purchased a match programme and went along the central tunnel

towards the terraces.

We had a free passage along the tunnel, it was very quiet.      I do not

remember seeing any policemen or stewards at the entrance to the

tunnel or anywhere inside it.

I did not see any form of disorder or any drunkenness inside the

ground.

At the aid of the tunnel we all went to the right hand side and into

what I now know to be pen number three.     I can't remember the exact

time that we entered the pen, but it was before one o'clock. (1300)

It was very quiet in the pen at the time we entered, there being

about fifty other people scattered around the pen.     We walked down

the terracing and stood near to the front for a while and then walked

further back up the pen, towards the centre.     We took up a position

about two thirds of the way up the pen towards the rear and about ten

to twelve feet from the dividing fence between pen three and pen four,

which was to our left.    I have marked this position on the separate

grid plan using the figure one.    We all sat on the steps and read

our programmes.

It was after two o'clock (1400) that the pen started to fill up. The

pen was filling steadily and the crowd was gradually building up to

the extent that we could no longer sit on the steps.      By about two

thirty (1430), it was quite packed inside the pen, but just like any
_______________________________                                             4


normal match crowd.   There was the usual pushing and shoving but

nothing more than normal.   It was frcm two thirty (1430) onwards that

it was becoming more and more packed inside the pen as people

continued to enter the pen frcm the tunnel.     There were also steady

surges in the crowd which were beginning to move me about slightly.

By now, I was slowly becoming separated frcm the other lads as a

result of these steady surges.      I remember seeing the players on the

pitch having their pre match kick about.      That was at about two

thirty(1430) and at that time I was still in the vicinity of position

one, but slowly being moved away frcm there by the movement in the

crowd. At a time that I would estimate to be about ten to three (1450),

there was a strong surge frcm the rear.     Up until then, there were

just steady surges, but this was one strong surge frcm the rear.        I

remember looking back towards the tunnel and saw a lot of people

entering the pen frcm the tunnel.    This strong surge carried me

forwards down the terracing and to the right.     This forwards movement

stopped when I became pinned up against the end of a crush barrier,

the left hand side of a crush barrier, that's as you look at the

pitch.   I realise now that this crush barrier was the second one down

the pen, about half way down and near to pen two.     At the same time

that I became pinned up against the end of that barrier, I also felt

crushed in by the crowd and unable to move.      It was then that I

realised that something was drastically wrong in the pen.      I have

marked this position against the crush barrier using the Figure One A

(1A). I would estimate the time of getting to position One A (1A) to

be about five to three (1455), because I remember seeing the players

ccming out and lining up for the kick off.      I had the crush barrier

against my stomach and wanted to get away frcm it but couldn't due to

the intense pressure frcm the crowd.      I couldn't climb over it and
                                                                           5


didn't want to climb under it because if I did I probably wouldn't

have got up on the other side.     I was trapped up against this barrier

for about ten minutes during which time I was having great difficulty

breathing.     I have no recollections of events on the pitch as I

couldn't see the pitch and my only concern was trying to get away frcm

the barrier.    After nine or ten minutes, I remember an obvious

reaction by the crowd around me who appeared to be trying to jump up.

I think this must have been the time that Peter BEARDSLEY hit the

Forest crossbar, although I didn't actually see it at the time.      It

was shortly after this that I managed to wriggle away frcm the end of

the bar and get clear of the crush barrier.     By      nowI could see

people getting out of the pen by climbing over the front perimeter

fence and also the dividing fences.    However itwas    still a crush in

the pen.     I could not see the players on the pitch, the match had

obviously been stopped.     I remember seeing that the gate in the front

fence was open and a few were getting out through it.     There was a

strong forwards movement by the crowd towards the gate and I was

carried forwards down the pen by this movement.      I was still having

difficulty with my breathing and I remember that at seme stage

somebody's hand was in my mouth and preventing what little breathing I

had.     Because of this, I had to bite the hand to get it out of my

mouth.     It was a slow forwards movement because not many people were

getting through the gate.     While being carried forwards I remember

hearing somebody say 'There's people down, get back, get back'.        I

did not actually see the people that he was referring to.      It took

between fifteen and twenty minutes to get towards the front of the

pen.     I must have been carried diagonally down the pen, because I

ended up against the front fence and the gate was about five feet away

to my right.     There were still a lot of people trying to get through
                                                                              6


the gate.     People were using ray back and shoulders to climb up onto

the perimeter fence.     This position at the front of the pen, I have

marked on the separate grid plan using the Figure two.         I got to

position two at about three thirty (1530).         I was in position two for

about another ten minutes before the pressure really eased off and I

found myself with space.      I had been looking towards the pitch when

the pressure really eased off and I turned around to look back 15) the

pen to see if I could spot ray friends.     As I turned around, I saw a

person lying on the ground, to ray right.        I was still about five feet

away frcm the gate, which was to ray right as I looked towards the

pitch and the person lying on the ground was five feet to ray left,

towards the comer of the pen, near to pen four.         The person was

lying on his back with his legs nearest me.        He was near to the wall

at the front of the pen, lying parallel with it.         I could see that

his face was purple and his eyes were closed.        The man was still and

ray first thoughts were that he was dead.        This was the first body

that I had seen and suddenly realised the gravity of the situation.

Hie person lying at the front of the pen was a white male with brown

coloured hair which may have been curly and below the ears.        He was

clean shaven as best I can remember.      He was aged twenty five to

thirty and was about six feet in height.         He was a well built person

with a large stomach, between fifteen and twenty stone.        He wore a

white casual shirt, the one with the collar which may have had stripes

at the top.      It was a short sleeved shirt.      He also wore blue denim

jeans.      He wore training shoes which were white.

After seeing this person, I walked back up the terracing and sat down.

I then spent a few minutes looking towards the pitch to see if I could

spot ray friends.     I did not see what happened to that person lying at

the front of the pen, by now I was concerned for ray friends.        I
eventually went out onto the pitch area to look for ray friends at

about ten to four (1550).    I eventually met up with         after about

five minutes and within about another five minutes we both met up with

         I didn't assist any dead or injured people while I was on the

pitch.

We decided to leave the ground at shortly after four o'clock,(1600)

thinking that      may already have left.      Having left the ground, we

met      outside in the street.   We then returned to         s digs in

Sheffield. Throughout the course of the afternoon I did not witness

anything that I would consider to be a criminal offence.




I did not see a crush barrier break neither was I aware that a crush

barrier had broken while I was in pen three.

In relation to the person lying at the front of the pen and

previously described in this statement, I have marked the approximate

position of the person on the separate grid plan using the Figure

three.    I produce the separate grid plan (Ex No       )(Ex Ref______ .

I feel that on the day there should have been proper signs directing

people to the terraces i.e. the side wings and also stewards in the

area of the pens who should have realised that the pens were full and

directed supporters away frcm the central   pens.     There was an
                                                                                     8

        obvious lack of communication between the Police apparently, officers

        inside the ground were not informed that gate ' C was being opened and

        people were being allowed into the ground.        Officers inside the

        ground might have been more quickly aware of the problems inside the

        pen had they known about the influx of people through gate 'C'.

        There was no obvious means of escape frcm the pens, the gate at the

        front was much too small and for people at the front of the pen it was

        very difficult to climb over the front perimeter fence.

        In relation to position One A (1A) where I was pinned up against a

        crush barrier, I think the location of the barrier previously

        described in this statement was wrong.        I would say that the barrier

        that I was crushed up against was the barrier about half way down and

        nearer to pen four.      This was a two section barrier and I would have

        been pinned up against the extreme right hand side of the barrier, as

        you look at the pitch.        Figure 1A refers to this position on the

        separate grid plan.




                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:     031189

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                 PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                         1012
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130589                                                          (SIGNED)



        I am a season ticket holder of Liverpool F.C.     On Saturday 15th April

        1989 (150489), together with                and their father and

                   I travelled by car to the Hillsborough Football Ground.      I

        purchased my ticket a six pound standing ticket for Leppings Lane frcm

        Anfield.     On the journey to the ground we stopped at the Cat and

        Fiddle Public House on the Cat and Fiddle pass.    There wasn't much

        problem on the journey until we got to Sheffield because of the volume

        of traffic.

        We arrived in Sheffield about 2.30pm (1430) - 2.35pm (1435).       We

        parked the car by a "Do it All".    We saw seme Nottingham Forest fans

        walking to the ground and followed them.    We arrived at the entrance

        to the ground about 2. 50pm (1450).    There was just a mass of people

        it extended back about 100 yards.     The bridge over the river was

        conjested.     I asked a Policeman where to enter the ground and he

        pointed to the turnstiles.    Hie turnstiles had been shut somebody said.

        I saw that the large gate had been opened to the right of the

        turnstiles and just followed the others through.     I could see fans

        climbing over the top of the turnstile and a Steward was helping them
                                                                           2


over, I saw two or three enter the ground like this.    No-one looked at

my ticket at all and I retained all three sections.     Infront of me I

saw a tunnel which lead to the back of the goals.     I entered the

tunnel, it wasn't too badly packed a middle aged fan said that we

wouldn't get in that it was packed but I didn't pay attention and

carried on.     I entered the terracing on the left hand side of the

tunnel, I first entered at a point indicated on the attached grid

reference Jl.    The pressure around became greater and greater I was

just moved around involuntary.

I was by now alone. It was just prior to kick off that I had

entered.   The movement in the crowd was substantial and the pressure

intense.   To my left approximately 7 feet away and slightly

at an angle lay a middle aged man who was heavily built in the region

of 18 stone, I was positioned at grid reference P7 and he was lying at

grid reference Q6 with his feet closest to me and he was behind a

barrier with behind him trying to keep the crowd off him.      I thought

he had fainted but the fans round him were shouting intensly for help

he was obviously seriously injured.     A tanoy announcement was made and

I left the ground about 4.30pm (1630) - 4.40pm (1640).     In conclusion

I would like to say that generally the game was badly organised,

ticket allocation for Liverpool was inappropriate, the tunstiles at

the ground were inadequate being unclear in nature of directions.

It may have been prudient to have clearer directions on the ticket

itself.    Hie tunnel itself has a slope at the end which I feel is far

too excessive and only compounds the problem of crushing.      While

crushing was taking place Police officers were saying to "Push back"

which was totally inpossible to do.     As a result of the crushing I

received bruising to my ribs but I didn't attend hospital.

Following the incident I have found the press coverage far too
        explicit.



                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:   130589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     PC




                                                   1015
Incident     102     060390 OP8463        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER S2332

                                                                               Station

 Surname              EASTWOOD

 Forenames            WILFRED

 Age                  65                      Date of birth

 Address              EASTWOOD CONSULTANT, 23, KINGFIELD RD
                      SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S119AS

 Occupation           ENGINEER CONSULTANT

 Telephone

 IC                   Height                  Build

 Hair colour

^air type
 Eyes                                         Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses              Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                                           Signed


           I, Dr Wilfred EASTWOOD, Ph. D., F. Eng., F.I.C.E., F.I. Struct, E of

                                                       will say as follows

           INTRODUCTION

           1.      I am 65 years old.   I am Chairman of Eastwood & Partners

           (Consulting Engineers) which I founded in 1972.(000072) The firm has

           offices in Sheffield and London.      I taught at the University of

           Sheffield frcm 1954 - 1970 (000054-000070) as a Senior Lecturer and

           then became Professor and Head of the Department of civil and

           Structural Engineering.      I worked as Managing Partner for Husband &

           Co, Consulting Engineers, frcm 1970 (000070) to 1972 (000072). I am a

           past President of the Chartered Institution of Structural Engineers, a

           past Chairman of the Council of Engineering Institutions, and past

           Chairman of the Commonwealth Engineers' Council.       I am an Honorary

           Doctor of Engineering in the University of Sheffield.       Eastwood &
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S2332

Partners is an unlimited ccmpnany which has about ninety technical

staff, including seven Directors and six associates with a total staff

of just over 100 .

2.   I will adopt the following abbreviations in my report

"The 1975(000075) Act"       =     Safety of Sports Ground act 1975.

                                    (000075).

"The 1976(000076) Guide"           Hie 1976(000076) Edition of the

                                   Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

                                    (Football).

"The 1986(000086) Guide"            1986(000086) Edition of the Guide

                                   to Safety at Sports Grounds

                                    (Football).

"The Club"                         Sheffield Wednesday Football

                                   Club.

"SYCC"                        =    South Yorkshire County Council.

"SCC"                         =    Sheffield City Council.

"The Firm"                    =    Eastwood and Partners.

"Mr STRANGE"                       John STRANGE CEng, FIStructE,

                                   Associate in the Firm.

3.   This statement is intended to be read in conjunction with a bundle

of copy documents extracted frcm the Firm's files which accompanies

this statement.    When referring to an individual document, I shall

add the relevant page number in the bundle.

4.   I have been involved with football stadia including Hillsborough

for many years.    My first contact with Hillsborough was in the late

1950's(000050) whilst I was a Senior Lecturer at Sheffield

University.     I advised them on minor matters.   My major involvement

with football stadia came when I joined Husband & Co as Managing

Partner.     That firm were consulting Engineers to the Club, Sheffield

United F. C., Southampton F. C., Nottingham Forest F. C., Swindon Town
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S2332

F. C. and Rotherham United F.C.    Whilst at Husband & Co I took

particular responsibility for their work at these grounds and I was

involved in the construction of new stands at both Nottingham Forest F.

C and Swindon Town F.C.     During this period there was the disaster at

Ibrox Park.    In the aftermath of this disaster, I was involved in

liaison with the Police concerning capacity of football stadia.

Handrails and crush barriers were the subject of much discussion and I

designed equipment to test crush barriers which was used at the stadia

of the six football clubs mentioned above.

5.    It must be remembered that all this took place before the

1975(000075) Act and the 1976(000076) Guide.    Both the 1975(000075)

Act and the 1976(000076) Guide were a product of the "Wheatley

ccromission" of 1972(000072) which was set up to examine the safety of

sports grounds following the Ibrox disaster. Sir Walter Winterbottom,

former Manager of the England Football Team, chaired a working party

to advise the Wheatley Canmission.    That working party spent a day

with me discussing safety at football stadia.

6.    Eastwood & Partners are retained as Consulting Engineers to the

Club, Sheffield United F. C. Sunderland F.C., chesterfield, F.C, and

Rotherham United F.C.    The firm also does occasional work for Hull

Rugby League F.C. the Sheffield Sports Stadium which has Greyhound

Racing, Rugby League and until this season had speadway and also the

County Cricket Ground at Scarborough.

7.    I am a very interested football supporter and have two seats in

the south stand at Hillsborough very close to the West Terrace.      I

attend matches frequently, usually with my grandson, who is now aged

12.    He has been attending matches at Hillsborough with either me or

his father since he was aged 8 and I have never had occasion to feel

that we were in the slightest physical danger, or that the Police were

in any difficulty.      The most recent fairly large crowd prior to the
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S2332

F.A. Cup Semi Final on the 15th April 1989 (150489) was the natch

between the Club and Liverpool on 14th January 1989 (140189).     I

attended the match that day and the Liverpool fans were in the West

Terrace.     I pass the Leppings Lane end turnstiles every time I enter

the ground.

RETAINER OF EASTWOOD & PARTNERS

8 . The firm was first retained by the Club as Consulting Engineers in

1978(000078). The only formal letters regarding that retainer are

those to my firm from the Club dated 25th October 1978 (251078) and

1st December 1978 (011278) (pages 4 and 7).    The firm were to act on

behalf of the Club in their dealings with the SYCC and/or the

Sheffield Metropolitan District Council Hillsborough in respect of the

structural aspects of the ground following its designation under the

1975(000075) Act.

9.    I have been Director in charge of all work done on behalf of the

Club.    During our continuous retainer since December 1978(001278) I

have been ably assisted by Mr STRANGE of the firm.    He was a Senior

Engineer, and has been an Associate of the firm since about

1982(000082).    He has been a regular attender at Hillsborough since he

was a boy.

10.     Pages 1/2 in the bundle are a list of all the jobs which my firm

has done for the club since December 1978(001278) (page 3 lists those

particular jobs which may be relevant for the purpose of the Inquiry

and from the files relating to which have been abstracted the

documents of which copies appear in the attached bundle). The jobs

did not only involve work required under the 1975(000075) Act, but

also general up-grading and modernisation of the ground.     Almost every

year there has been some significant improvement of the ground.

11.     In liaising with the Club I have found that they have been very

willing to spend money to improve the ground and I have found that the
                                                                  PAGE        5
                                                                  S2332

Club's Board of Directors in particular have been very easy to work

with.    Mr. H. MCGEE has been Chairman of the Club throughout this

time, and he has taken a keen interest in safety matters including

attending sente of the meetings with the Working Party (which I shall

describe in paragraph 16 of this statement). I have had frequent

personal contact with him.    He has always stressed the need for the

ground to be safe and has been a driving force in getting work done.

12.     Of the Directors, Mr WHITEHEAD was the Director with special

responsibility for the ground at the time of the early meetings.       He

played an active part until he ceased to be a Director in

approximately 1983(000083).     He was succeeded by Mr K ADDY and Mr E

BARON. They have a particular responsibility for ground matters as

Directors.     I have had frequent meetings with them cm major matters

and have found their attitude to be very co-operative at all tiroes.

13.     There have been three club Secretaries since the firm was first

retained by the Club in 1978(000078). The first was Mr E ENGLAND.        He

was a highly experienced man and was much involved in the works at

the ground.     He was succeeded by Mr R H CHESTER who was also an

experienced Club Secretary having previously been Secretary at

Sheffield United F. C. and Lincoln City F. C.     The present Secretary

is Mr G MACKRELL.     I have always found it very easy to work with him.

THE 1975(000075) ACT, THE 1976(000076) AND 1986(000086) GUIDES AND

THE "WORKING PARTY"

14.     It may assist the Inquiry if I make sane comments about

the relevant details of the 1975(000075) Act and the 1976(000076)

Guide.     Both the 1975(000075) Act and the 1976(000076) Guide came

about following the "Wheatley Report" into the Ibrox disaster.       The

1975(000075) Act contains no technical details.     These were all to be

found originally in the 1976(000076) Guide. The current edition of the

guide was published in 1986(000086).     However, for most of the time I
                                                                  PAGE    6
                                                                  S2332

was working under the 1976(000076) Guide (not I believe 1973(000073)

as referred to in error in the preface to the 1986(000086) Guide).

15.   Section 1 of the 1975(000075) Act permits the Secretary of     State

to designate as a stadium requiring a Certificate, referred to in the

Act as a "Safety Certificate" any Sports Stadium which in his opinion

has accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators.    As indicated the

original retainer of the firm by the Club in 1978(000078) followed the

designation of Hillsborough as such a stadium.    Section 2 of the

1975(000075) Act sets out the required contents of Safety

Certificates.   An application for a Safety Certificate is made to a

Local Authority (as defined in the 1975(000075) Act) and is governed

by Section 3, which also requires that copies of the application be

sent to the Chief Officer of Police and the Building Authority for the

area in which the stadium is situated.    These bodies are consulted

about the terms and conditions to be included in the safety

Certificate.

16.   A working Party was set up in Sheffield to deal with such

applications which involved representatives of the Police, Fire

Service, Building Surveyors Division and the Legal Department of the

Local Authority.   The relevant Local Authority was SYCC until

1986(000086) when the SCC took over.     Representatives of the Club

would also attend seme meetings of the working party when the Safety

Certificate concerning Hillsborough was discussed.

17.   The Guide is a voluntary code and has no legal force (see

paragraph 1.1 1976(000076) Guide and paragraph 1 of the 1986(000086)

Guide). Neither of the guides is rigid, and they both contemplate

that deviation from their recommendations will not necessarily detract

from the overall safety of a ground.     A flexible approch is

encouraged in order to take account of the particular circumstances at

individual grounds.   The relevant criterion when assessing the
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S2332

adequacy of safety for spectators in new work or re-construction is

that of a reasonable degree of safety.    Both Guides use the vrords "it

would be unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek the

absolute safety of everyone attending the ground."     (see paragraphs 1 .

4 and 1.5 of the 1976(000076) Guide and Paragraph 8 of the

1986(000086) Guide).    The 1986(000086) Guide goes on to state in

Paragraph 6 that "Guide does not attempt to set a minimum standard"

for any particular ground.    Patter, it attempts   "to take account of

the constraints and difficulties with are present within" existing

sports grounds,    (see paragraph 7 1986(000086) Guide).

18.     I shall deed later in this statement with the provisions in the

Guides regarding such matters as crush barriers, perimeter and radial

fences.    However, I set out here the relevant paragraphs in both the

1976(000076) and 1986(000086) Guides.



Item                 1976(000076) Guide             1986(000086) Guide



Terraces             Paragraph 7                    Chapter 8



Terrace

Steps                Paragraph 7.4                  Paragraph 92-95



Radial

Fences               Paragraphs 7.6                 Paragraphs 101-

                                                    103 and Table 2

                                                    Chapter 9



Crush Barriers       Paragraph 7.7, 12              Chapter 9

                     13 and Appendix C              and

                                                    Annex C
                                                                  PAGE     8
                                                                  S2332



Perimeter             Paragraph 7.9                Chapter   15

Fences



Estimation            Paragraph 15                Chapter 16

of safe

ground capacity



Egress time           Paragraph 6.5               Paragraph 56



19.      There are no material differences between the 1976(000076) and

the 1986(000086) Guides with regard to their conments on terraced

steps and crush barriers.    Other sections have been extended following

the Bradford fire and to take account of their application to sports

grounds other than football grounds.    The section regarding radial

fences has been extended so that paragraph 103 now states that such

fences " should be of the strength of the crush barriers." Paragraphs

7.9.1 and 7.9.2 in the 1976(000076) Guide regarding perimeter fences

have been replaced by new paragraphs 214 and 215 in the 1986(000086)

Guide.    Finally additions have been made in the 1986(000086) Guide

concerning estimation of safe ground capacity.   However the basic

formulae remain the same. The 1986(000086) Guide contains examples of

use of the formulae where as the 1976(000076) Guide did not.

CRUSH BARRIERS

20.   When the firm was first retained by the Club in 1978(000078)

there were barriers at the Leppings Lane end of the ground but they

were fewer in number than recommended by the 1976(000076) Guide.       I

cannot speak frcm my own knowledge, but I believe that these barriers

had been installed in 1965(000065) at the time when the West Stand was

constructed just prior to the use of Hillsborough for Group Matches in
                                                                  PAGE    9
                                                                  S2332

the 1966(000066) World Cup, or at an even earlier date.

21.   I refer to my firm's plan No. 1610/64E.   This is dated January

1980(000180), but has been updated over the years to reflect changes.

The original barriers which were in place in 1978(000078) are marked

in red on the plan.   They were insufficient in number to canply with

the recommendations as to spacing of barriers in paragraph 7.7.2 of

the 1976(000076) Guide.

22.   Such spacing recommendations are contained in paragraph 12 of the

1976(000076) Guide.   They are dependent upon a number of factors:     The

gradient of the   terrace; the area of the ground in which theyare

situated ("peak   viewing areas" or "other viewing areas"); andthe

strengh of the barriers.

23.   Under paragraph 12.2 of the 1976(000076) Guide Peak viewing areas

are described as the most popular    parts of the terraces such as behind

the goal areas.    The central pens at the Leppings lane end of

Hillsborough fall within such category.

24.   As will be seen from the tables under paragraph 12 of the

1976(000076) guide, (and Table 1 at page 38 of the 1986(000086) Guide)

barriers may either be Class A or Class B as defined in the tables

under paragraph 13.2 of the Guide.    Class A barriers must be designed

safely to resist a force of 5.OkN/metre width (3401bs / foot width).

Such barriers must be capable of resisting a test load of 6.0 kN/

metre width (4001bs / foot width) in accordance with Appendix C of the

Guide.   The equivalent design and test loads for class B barriers are

respectively 3.4kN/metre width (230lbs / foot width) and 4.3kN/metre

width (2901bs / foot width). ' It is to be noted that the test loads

are overloads being approximately 20%     and 27%   greater than the

respective design loads.

25.   When the then Secretary of the Club, Mr ENGLAND, wrote to my firm

on 25th October 1978(251078) (page 4) he sent a copy of the guidance
                                                                 PAGE 10
                                                                 S2332

notes issued by the then Licensing Authority under the 1975(000075)

Act, S.Y.C.C. (pages 5-6).    Paragraph 5 of those notes refers to the

need to test crush barriers by an approved method and in the presence

of appropriate officers of the Licensing Authority.

26.   In the first instance my firm considered the number and spacing

of the existing barriers in regard to which (and of course other

matters) we reported to the club on 12th January 1979 (120179) (pages

10-22).   I refer in particular to the sub-paragraph (b) under the

heading "Standing Accommodation" (pages 14-15).

We were then uncertain of the strength of the original barriers and in

particular whether they were Class A.    We did, however recommend the

installation of extra barriers to permit a capacity of 7,200 persons

on the West Terrace (including the lower level at the North-West

comer) which, it should be remembered, in 1978(000078) was not sub­

divided into pens by radial fences (with the history of which I shall

deal later in this statement). Our calculations of capacity, in the

light of our reccmmendations for extra barriers, was carried out in

accordance with the relevant formular in paragraph 15.4 of the

1976(000076) Guide.       In our report to the Club we sunmarised our

reccmmendations (page 21-22).    The second recommendation involved

making firm proposals to the relevant authorities for the installation

of new crush barriers together with computation of capacity.      The

details of our calculations are recorded in a document dated January

1979(000179) (page 23).

27.   Our scheme for new barriers was prepared on the basis that they

would be Class A and that where necessary existing barriers would also

be brought up to Class A.    The spacing was designed by reference to

the table in paragraph 12 of the 1976(000076) Guide, taking account of

the gradient of 140.

28.   With the approved of the Club we submitted our formal report to
                                                                    PAGE 11
                                                                    S2332

the Police, Fire Service and the Licensing Authority on 17th January

1979(170179) (pages 24-32).    The relevant section dealing with the

West Terrace is to be found at pages 27-28.    With the report we

submitted our drawing No.     1610/2X showing the position of the

existing barriers and that of the proposed new barriers.

29.   The working party met on 2nd April 1979 (020479) and the Minutes

(pages 33-37) record under Section B in respect of the West Terrace

that the proposals were accepted with regard to the new barriers.         On

8th June 1979 (080679) S.Y.C.C. forwarded a Schedule formally

confirming all matters which had been discussed within the working

party and which S.Y.C.C. felt required attention (pages 43-49).

Paragraph E2 records the agreement by the Police of the capacity of

7,200 persons in respect of the West Terrace provided that the

additional barriers were installed.

30.   The work in the latter respect was put in hand.   The new barriers

are marked in blue on plan No. 1610/64E.    The barriers were

designed by my firm (a different design from that of the existing

barriers) and we supervised the work of installation.

31.   During the events in question on the afternoon of 15th April 1989

(150489) two spans of a total length of about 4.3 metres of barrier

No. 124A on plan 1610/64E collapsed under the crowd pressure.       The

horizontal rails of part of barriers 128 and 137 were permanently bent

but the barriers remained upright and effective.    All these three

barriers were existing barriers in 1978(000078), when the firm was

appointed. None of the new barriers designed by the firm either failed

or suffered significant permanent deformatioin.

32.   Work on construction of the new barriers and maintenance/

strengthening of the original barriers was carried out between June

and November 1979(000679-001179).     All the existing barriers were

tested prior to the strengthening work in order to define which
                                                                 PAGE 12
                                                                 S2332

needed improving.    All the improved barriers and the new barriers were

tested after completion of the works.     The firm carried out tests in

accordance with Appendix C of the 1976(000076) Guide.

33.   In order to carry out the tests we designed and had constructed

at our own expense a testing "rig." A photograph of the rig will be

found at page 59A.   Our rig incorporates a system of pin joints to

ensure that the inposed load is spread reasonably uniformally along

the barrier rail. This is important because without such a system the

middle of the rail, under load, will deflect (move away) horizontally

with the result that the major load is then taken up by the part of

the rail closest to the stanchions where of course the ability of the

barrier to resist pressure is at its greatest.

Misleading results would then be obtained.    Which is not the case with

our rig.

34.   During the course of testing we had been liaising with the

Building surveyors Department of SCC, as the appropriate member of the

working party (see for example our letter of 19th December

1979(191279) - page 59).

35.   On 28th January 1980(280180) my firm prepared a final report with

regard to testing (pages 60-63).    Under paragraph (b) of the section

headed " Crush Barriers" - page 61) we describe the result of tests

carried out to the existing barriers and the works of repair/

maintenance which had been implemented.    We also record that all the

strengthened barriers had been re-tested satisfactorily as also had

been the new barriers. We did not re-test those barriers which had

already passed the initial tests.    In this context I refer to the test

as being that applicable to Class A barriers.

36.   S.Y.C.C. indicated that they wished to have l/5th of the total

number of crush barriers throughout the ground tested each year so

that each individual barrier should be tested once every 5 years.      On
                                                                   PAGE    13
                                                                   S2332

15th July 1980 (150780) my firm wrote to S.Y.C.C. (pages 64-65) to

indicate that it would be easier to test a block of barriers

constituting l/5th of the total number at the ground rather than to do

so on a more randan basis.   We had previously discussed this proposal

with              Of SCC's Building Surveyors Department (a member of

the working party) and he agreed.   S.Y.C.C. agreed; see their letter

of 18th July 1980 (180780) (page 66 ).

37.    Within the relevant 5 year cycle, indeed after 3 years, the

barriers in the West Terrace were tested again in 1983(000083).      I

refer to the firm's report dated 29th June 1983 (290683) to _

          (pages 95-96).

38.    I should explain at this point that with the installation of new

barriers in all terraces within the ground, the firm carried out a

process of re-numbering of barriers in January 1980(000180) as

recorded on our drawing No. 1610/64E.    All reports thereafter,

including that of 29th June 1983 (290683) refer to the new numbering.

I would also mention that the firm no longer has copies of the

detailed record sheets in respect of the testing of the individual

barriers in 1983(000083). It will be seen, however, from the last

paragraph of our letter of 29th June 1983 (290683) to                    that

these were sent to him at the time.

39.    Again in accordance with the 5 year cycle, the barriers in the

West Terrace were tested in 1988(000088).    As part of the firm's own

checking procedure, it so happens that just beforehand we arranged for

an independent company, Sheffield Testing Works Limited, to check the

calibration of our rig.

40.    The calibration was carried out on 8th July 1988 (080788).    The

certificate dated 15th July 1988 (150788) and the record of the

calibration tests are to be found at pages 195-197.     It will be seen

that the gauges were shown to be working correctly. The rig was then
                                                                   PAGE 14
                                                                   S2332

used to test the barriers on all terraces at the west end of the

ground.   The individual test records are at pages 198 - 205.   We

reported to the Club on 2nd August 1988(020888) (pages 206-208).      All

barriers in the central pens including that which failed and these

which deformed slightly on 15th April 1989(150489), met the

requirements of the 1986(000086) Guide (which as I have indicated

remain unaltered from those of the 1976(000076) Guide).

PERIMETER AND RADIAL FENCES

(a)   Perimeter Fences

41.   The perimeter fences were already in position when the firm was

first instructed in 1978(000078).   I am not sure when they were

erected, but it was probably soon after theIbrox disaster.      The

fences are at the east and west ends of the ground only.   There are no

perimeter fences in front of the north or south stand, which have

relatively low reinforced concrete walls.

42.   By the provisions of paragraph 7.9.3 of the 1976(000076) Guide,

because spectators could lean on the perimeter fences, we deemed them

to be crush barriers and so they had to be strengthened. The

perimeter fence at the front of the Vfest terrace was a vertical wire

mesh fence about 2.7 metres high.   It was strengthened in 1979(000079)

both by the provision of bracing against the existing perimeter

concrete wall and the anchoring of the wall itself with inclined steel

stays fixed to concrete block foundations. This work was required

and approved by the working party as set out in the list of matters

requiring attention prepared in June 1979(000679) by S.Y.C.C. at

paragraph G.l (page 45).

43.   At some later date the club arranged for cranked extensions to be

fitted onto the top of the perimeter fence leaning towards the

spectators at an angle of 45(degrees) with the steel mesh cut so as to

leave spikes sticking out of the top.   The firm was not asked to
                                                                 PAGE 15
                                                                 S2332

advise on this change and we were not involved in its design or

installation.   I believe that it was installed at the request of the

Police, but I have no documentary evidence of this.

(B) RADIAL FENCES

44.   By the early 1980's(000080) it was becoming a cannon practice to

try to separate visiting supporters and hone supporters.    The Club

were keen for such a separation and I believe that such view was

shared fully by the Police.   I wrote to S.Y.C.C. on 2nd September

1981(020981) (pages 69-70) to say that I had been asked by the club to

arrange for the installation of two radial fences in the west terrace.

These two fences are marked 1 and 2 on plan 8945/1A.     The relevant

provisions in the 1976(000076) Guide are found at paragraph 7.6.

45.   There were advantages perceived by the Club in installing radial

fences.   It meant that they could have both home and visiting

supporters in the west terrace but that they could be segregated.       It

would also assist the Police in crowd control.   As indicated in my

letter to S.Y.C.C. dated 2nd September 1981 (020981) (page 69) gates

were proposed at the rear of each fence to allow access for policing

during matches as well as for maintenance.   I pointed out in the

letter that the gates would be left open but fastened back, to

connect the areas during a game if adjacent areas were to be occupied

by supporters of the same team.   Approval for the installation of the

two radial fences was given by S.Y.C.C. in their letter of 14th

September 1981(140981) (pages 76-77).   The approval was subject to the

condition (paragraph I.e. at page 76) that the gates at the rear of

the fences should be under Police control.

46.   The installation work was carried out by a firm of contractors,

Blessvale, in October and November 1981(001081-001181)     In places the

crush barriers passed through the radial fences and there was

discussion between Mr STRANGE and Mr ENGLAND about this, as recorded
                                                                   PAGE 16
                                                                   S2332

in the memorandum of 4th November 1981(041181) (page 79).      There was

further discussion between them about the relevant barriers on 13th

November 1981(131181) (page 81). The Police wanted those barriers

which passed through the radial fences removed because otherwise

spectators might use them to climb over the radial fences.     Neither

the Club, nor Mr STRANGE wished the barriers to be removed because to

do so might have affected safety. If the relevant barriers had been

removed, an uninterrupted "channel" would have been created along the

radial fence from the top of the terrace down to the perimeter fence.

Also, spectators tend to congregate at the top of west terrace rather

than at the bottom by the perimeter fence because their view will not

be obscured by the small mesh of the perimeter,   it was agreed in the

discussions on 13th November 1981 (131181) that the barriers would

remain in position for the next match to see what happened.

47.   The next discussion between Mr STRANGE and Mr ENGLAND took place

following the match on 17th Noventer 1981 (171181) (page 82).     The

Chief Constable had seen the barriers in position and was content

that they should remain because there had been no problems at the

match,   it was, therefore, agreed that the barriers would remain in

position passing through the radial fences as they are today.

48.   I wrote to S.Y.C.C. on 14th December 1981 (141281) (page

83) updating them on progress regarding the installation of the

radial fences and security gates.   S.Y.C.C. replied on 20th

January 1982 (200182) (pages 84-85).   That letter recorded doubts

still being voiced by the Police concerning the crush barriers which

passed through the radial fences.   I therefore wrote to S.Y.C.C. on

26th January 1982 (260182) (pages 86-88 ) with my views as to why I

felt that the relevant barriers should not be terminated short of the

radial fence.   I pointed out the aspects of safety and segregation

which were involved and felt that what had been done was a "reasonable
                                                                  PAGE 17
                                                                  S2332

compromise between the various interests." These matters were

discussed at a meeting of the working party held on 4th February 1982

(040282) (pages 89-91).     It was agreed at that meeting that it was

preferable from a safety point of view to retain the crush barriers

which passed through the radial fences.

49.   The installation of two further radial fences in the west terrace

were considered in 1985(000085).     These were part of the

reorganisation of the west terrace which I shall refer to in more

detail later in my statement.    For the moment, I shall concentrate on

the radial fences.

50.   I wrote to the Club on 2nd April 1985 (020485) enclosing the

firm's drawing No 6705/2 which provided for one further radial fence

adjacent to one of the existing radial fences to create an obvious

corridor of "no mans' land" (Pages 107-108).     (This further fence is

numbered 3 on drawing No. 8945/1A). The drawing was forwarded to S.Y.

C.C. on 9th April 1985(090485) (pages 109-110) with a request

that the working party consider the proposals at an early date.

A copy of the drawing was forwarded by the Club to the Police.

The Police response was to suggest a central fence to divide

the middle section of the west terrace, rather than to creat the "no

mans land." This is recorded in my letter to the Club of 19th April

1985 (190485) (pages 113-115).     There were various discussions between

Mr STRANGE and Mr CHESTER concerning the location of a further radial

fence as recorded in the memoranda of 20th April 1985 (200485) and

25th April 1985 (250485) (Pages 116-117).

51.   S.Y.C.C. provided their comments in their letter of 2nd May 1985

(020585) (pages 123-125).    The Police suggestion of a radial fence to

separate the central area of the terrace was accepted, but a different

location for the fourth radial fence was suggested.    There was further

correspondence and discussion concerning the location of these fences
                                                                 PAGE 18
                                                                 S2332

during May and June 1985(000685). On 13th June 1985(130685) I met

Chief Superintendent MDSELEY and Councillor SMITH (who I believe was

deputy chairman of the Police Committee at that time) to discuss the

further radial fences.   The outcome of this meeting was recorded in my

letter of 17th June 1985 (170685) to the Club (pages 138-139).     Chief

Superintendent MDSELEY was favourably disposed towards the creation of

a "corridor" of "no mans' land" with a gate to the pitch, following

the experience of his officers at the recent match between the Club

and Liverpool F.C.   the corridor would provide an easy access for the

Police to the pens on either side, via the gates at the rear of the

radial fences.   I wrote to the Police on 25th June 1985 (250685) about

these proposals (page 142).   Mr STRANGE then received a telephone call

from the Police on 27th June 1985 (270685) (page 144) in which there

was further discussion about the radial fences necessary to create the

corridor "no mans' land" and also a central radial fence in the

west terrace.    I added a manuscript note to Mr STRANGE'S memorandum

of the telephone call agreeding that a central fence should be

installed for the time being, provided that it did not make the

packing of spectators in the West terrace "impossible".

52.   Application for planning consent was made by a letter dated 5th

July 1985 (050785) (pages 145-148).    Detailed drawings were submitted

to S.Y.C.C. on 25th July 1985(250785) (pages 153-154).    The relevant

drawings are numbered 6705/6 and 17.   The proposals were agreed by S.Y.

C.C. in their letter of 30th July 1985 (300785) (pages 155-156),

subject to the addition of extra gates.    I wrote to S.Y.C.C. on 1st

August 1985 (010885), (pages 157-158) to clarify the position

regarding the extra gates because I was unclear what SYCC required.

There was a meeting of the Working Party at the ground on 7th August

1985(070885) (pages 160-162) which amongst other matters discussed the

extra gates. The positions of the extra gates were duly clarified
                                                                 PAGE 19
                                                                 S2332

and agreed and I confirmed the position to the Club in my letter

dated 15th August 1985 (150885) (pages 163-165).     The two extra

radial fences were subsequently installed that summer.

(c) GATES

53.   There are seven gates through the perimeter fence of the West

Terrace.    These are shown on drawing 11424/2.   When the firm was

appointed Nos 1,2,4 and 6 were certainly already in place and have

not been modified in the mean time other than by the addition of a

quick release bolt so as to ensure that the gates could be opened

quickly and easily in emergency even if the gate is subjected to the

same pressure as a crush barrier. (This type of bolt is fitted to all

gates in the perimeter fence at this ground).

54.   We also believe that No. 5 is also an original gate (pre 1978)

(000078) but when the access corridor was created by installing an

additional radial fence in 1985(000085), steps were added on the

inside to provide easier access for the Police.

55.   The origin of gate 7 is not known.   It is not recorded as being

in place in our drawings of the ground in 1978(000078).    We have not

been able to find in our files any record of it being constructed

under our control. There is a possibility that it has been there

since before we became the Club's consulting engineers, but we think

it more likely that it was constructed on the Club's instructions

sometime between 1980(000080) and 1988(000088).     We know that it was

in place in 1988(000088), because when we ordered the quickly release

bolts for the gates in 1988(000088) (to which I refer in paragraph 61)

it was discovered that we had ordered one less than was required.     An

extra one had to be made.

56.   The gate number 3 was constructed under our control in

1985(000085).    It was specifically requested by Police, and was

approved by the licensing authority before installation.     It was made
                                                                    PAGE 20
                                                                    S2332

to match gate No. 4, which was in the other half of the old central

pen.

57.    The width of each of the gateways is as follows



Gate No.          1       2       3       4        5      6          7

Date installed pre       pre              pre     pre     pre       not

                  1979   1979     1985     1979    1979   1979      known

                (000079)(000079)(000085) (000079)(000079)(000079)



Width between

posts (m)         0.63   0.94     0.85     0.83    0.84   0.72      0.77



58.    The width of gates in the perimeter fences had been the subject

of discussion on various occasions between 1978(000078) and

1985(000085).    The Police and the fire service both have an interest

in this matter. From the Police point of view, they are most likely

to need the gates to get onto the terrace to quell unruly behaviour.

Various senior officers have said over the years that the gates should

not be too wide because that would make it easy for troublenakers to

spill out onto the pitch if the Police open the gate to get into the

terrace. The fire service are naturally mindful of the possibility

that the gates may have to be used for evacuation of the terrace in

an emergency.    Hence, at Bramall Lane ground where there is a stand

part of which has some timber in its construction, the gates from

the terrace in front have been made wider than normal, so as to

assist rapid evacuation of spectators onto the pitch.

59.    It should be remembered that all relevant times, the 1976(000076)

Guide, which contains no recommendation as to width of gates in

perimeter fences, was in force.    The 1986(000086) Guide suggests at

paragraph 215 that such gates should be a minimum of 1100 mm wide.
                                                                   PAGE 21
                                                                   S2332

The size of the gates in the perimeter fence at Hillsborough was of

course    approved by the Working Party.   As indicated the Police in

particular have said that they do not want gates which are too wide

because of the risk of spectators rushing onto the pitch at tunes when

the gates may be opened by the Police to gain access to the terraces

for crowd control purposes. All gates have been discussed with the

Police and Fire Service at least once a year.     The Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club has always willingly provided whatever gates have been

requested by the licensing authority.      We as the Club's engineers have

prepared drawings and specifications to give what we understood was

being requested, and the drawings have then been submitted to the

licensing authority.    The drawings have been considered by the woking

party, including Police and Fire Service, and have been approved.        The

Club have then had the gates constructed, and installed under our

supervision.

60.   Although the gates are not marked, they are very obvious.        They

cannot be operated from the inside.     They are designed to be under the

control of the Police.    Therefore, they can only be operated

from the pitch side.     Once the gate has been opened by the Police its

position is obvious.

61.   I personally had a concern about the ability to open the gates

with pressure of spectators against them (they originally had simple

bolts).    Of my own initiative in 1987(000087) I designed a "quick

release machanism"     The design can be seen from the drawings prepared

by Mr STRANGE in August 1987(000887) (pages 190-191).      This design was

forwarded to SGC on 19th August 1987 (190887) (page 189).      They

replied on 15th October 1987(151087) suggesting that a prototype be

manufactured and fitted to one of the gates for testing purposes.

This was done and a meeting was held on 25th February 1988(250288)

with SCC and the police to see the prototype in operation.       The
                                                                   PAGE 22
                                                                   S2332

prototype was approved and installed in   all gates on the perimeter

fence.    We have recently tested the opening of gate No. 3 with a test

load applied to it of 6kN/metre.    It could be opened with the arm

extended so as not to be in line with the gate when it suddenly

opened.

TUNNEL RAMP TO WEST TERRACES

62.   I understand that it has been pointed out by Counsel for the

Inquiry that part of the floor of the tunnel, leading to the West

Terraces slopes downwards towards the pitch at an inclination which is

greater than 1 in 10 the figures mentioned in paragraph 87 of the 1986

(000086) Guide (formerly psaragraph 9.7.2 of the 1976(000076) Guide).

63.   The tunnel and ramp were already in existence when the firm was

commissioned by the Club in 1978(000078) to assist in obtaining the

safety certificate.    The tunnel had been constructed as part of the

West Stand development in time for the World Cup games in

1966(000066).

64.   The firm has carried out a survey of the levels within the

tunnel,    these are shown on the attached drawing 11424/3.   It will be

seen that on entering the tunnel from the direction of the turnstiles

there is an upward slope for about 4m.    There is then a smooth

transition leading to a downward slop which gradually increases to

about 1 in 12 at 12.5 m into the tunnel, about 1 in 8 at 14.5 m, and

finally at about 1 in 6 for a 3m length between 16 and 19m.    The ramp

then levels out to a quite gentle inclination where it passes between

the gates at the entrance to the terrace. The ramp is steeper than 1

in 10 over a length of about 6m.

65.   Although I had been very heavily involved in safety work in

football grounds in 1970-72(000070-000072), including the Hillsborough

ground, the invitation to help the Club in 1978(000078) was the first

occasion on which I had used the 1976(000076) Guide.    In studying it I
                                                                   PAGE 23
                                                                   S2332

made manuscript notes of important points.     These notes were placed on

file.   Attached at page 6 (A) is a photocopy of one of the two sheets

of notes which I wrote. It will be seen that the recommendation

concerning slope of ramps is one of the points in the 1976(000076)

Guide about which I made a special note.

66 . On 3rd Noventer 1979 (031179) as evidenced1in my letter of 27th

October 1978 (271078) (page 6 (B)) I met the Chairman of the Club, Mr.

MCGEE to discuss our appointment.     I also made a detailed inspection

of the ground.     Amongst the many matters which I remarked was the part

of the ramp which had a slope of more than 1 in 10.     It was noticeable

that instead of creating a constant incline, which would have had a

slope of about one in 15.4m, the designer had chosen to

align the floor of the tunnel so that there was an upward slope to a

hump, followed by a     downward slope which was therefore steeper than

would have been necessary without the hump.

67.   At that meeting I was given a list of drawings of various parts

of the ground.     This list had been provided in September 1977(000977)

by Husband & Co.     The Club's previous consulting engineers at the

request of Mr. R. WHITEHEAD a director of the Club, (pages 6 (C) to

6 (K)). It will be seen that the list of drawings refers almost

exclusively to     the North Stand, and to the West Stand including the

terrace and the North West terrace all of which had been designed by

Husband & Co. There are 67 drawings referring to the West Terrace

and stand, and the North West comer stand.      Those of which I

requested copies were ticked, and were included in the list which

accompanied my letter to Mr. ENGLAND dated 6th November 1978 (061178)

(pages 6 (H) and (M)).

68 . One of the drawings for which I asked was number 24A which is

entitled 'Section Through Access Tunnel'     I felt that the ramp in the

tunnel needed investigation.
                                                                         PAGE 2
                                                                         S2332

69.   I recall that the Fire Service representatives also noted the

slope in the tunnel floor at an early date.       I remember having a

discussion with them during a walk round the ground in one of the

early meetings. It is possible this was on the occasion of the very

first meeting of the Working party with the Club representatives at

the ground on 13th December 1978 (131278).       The Fire Service were

represented at that meeting, according to a note on our file (page

9 (A)) by                and                    There are no minutes of

this meeting on our file, and I believe it was mainly for the purpose

of inspecting the ground and expressing preliminary views regarding

safety works.   However, there were various subsequent meetings over

the four months December 1978(001278) to April 1979(000479), with

senior members of the Fire Service at the ground, during which we

inspected the West stand and the tunnel.      Some of these were meetings

of the working Party and seme specially arranged meetings for

detailed discussions with the Fire Service, and on one occasion the

Building Surveyors Department of S.Y.C.C. as well, to discuss any

improvements which either we or they felt might be needed.         The

various meetings and inspections at the ground at which the Fire

Service were represented were as follows:-



Meeting                        Fire Service            Date

                               representatives



Working party                                           13 December 1978

(probably entirely a                                    (131278)

walking inspection)                                     (page 9(A))



Working party                  Mr.H.E. WRIGHT          2 April 1979

(Inter alia, the Minutes       j                        (020479)
                                                            PAGE
                                                            S2332

record a discussion                             (pages 33 to 37)

regarding the West

Terrace, with a request

being made for detailed

discussions regarding

the steps at the north

west comer which had

a cross-fall).



Meeting of                    Mr.H.E. WRIGHT    11 April 1979

representatives of Fire                         (110479)

Service, Building

ASurveyors Dept.,

Eastwood & Partners.

(Entirely a walking

inspection, including

West terrace).



Working Party.    It is                          18 April 1979

likely that there was                            (180479)

no formal tour of the                            (pages 38 to 41)

ground on this

occasion.    West Terrace

was discussed Minute 2B)



Meeting of Fire Service        Mr.H.E. WRIGHT    24 April 1979

and Eastwood & Partner                           (240479)

only.   Met at ground at

5.30 pm. (1730)   Complete

tour of ground during early
                                                                PAGE 26
                                                                S2332

evening.    Lighting

inspected and emergency

lighting tested after 9.30 pm.

(2130)



70.   At one of the meetings listed above, but I cannot specify which,

I recall discussing with the Working Party, three matters involving

ramps. In chronological order we first discussed the ramp through the

tunnel to the West terrace.   We then discussued desirability of

adjusting the exit from the Kop through a tunnel at the North East

comer of the ground.    Third, we discussed changes to the existing

ramp forming part of the exit from the back of the Kop.   These latter

two matters are mentioned at various times in the Minutes of meetings,

but because of the general feeling was that no change was to be made

to the ramp in the West terrace tunnel, it is not minuted.   Generally

it was only the respects in which action was required which were

recorded.

71.   Since 1979(000079), the complete working party consisting of

experienced senior representatives of the various parties involved has

toured the ground on many occasions. During the time S.Y.C.C. were

the licensing authority, these inspections were made systematically

twice per year.    Since SCC have been the Licensing authority, the

inspections have been reduced to one per year.   So far as I know,

during these ten years, there has never been any suggestion by any

msnber of the working party, or anyone else for that mater that the

ramp in the tunnel should be altered, even if this were to be

reasonably practicable.

72.   In my view there is a lack of clarity in the 1976(000076) and

1986(000086) Guides. Neither differentiates between a ramp in which

the "heavy crowd flow" is down hill, and one in which it is uphill.
                                                                    PAGE 27
                                                                    S2332

The Guides are clealy meant to cover only the case in which the

spectators have to go downhill, tightly packed, at the end of a match.

They acknowledge that the period of "greatest" (the 1976(000076)

Guide) and "great" (the 1986(000086) Guide) risk to crowd safety at

football grounds is at the time of leaving.    That is the normal

situation with spectators descending from stands or embankments to

ground level.    Exactly the opposite position applies in the case of

the ramp through the tunnel of the West Stand.

73.   When spectators leave the west terrace, there will be congestion

and jostling as they converge on the space between the two wing walls

at the start of the tunnel.    The constricting of the crowd flow at the

start of an exit route is in line with the thinking in the

1976(000076) Green Guide, paragraph 6.3, and the 1986(000086) Guide,

paragraph 50.   Once the spectators have entered the parallel sided

tunnel, the flow will settle down to a steady rate.    There is a gentle

upward slope for a distance of about 4m between the wing walls and

then the tunnel walls, before the main ramp is reached.    When the

spectators are going up the ramp to leave the ground they will be

safer than if they were walking downhill. It is to be expected that

if the ramp had a downward slope and someone tripped, it would be very

difficult for the people inmediately behind to stop to give him time

to recover. Furthermore, the people even further behind have a

downhill momentum which will be difficult to resist.

74.   If the same density of spectators were leaving the ground, along

a route of the same width, but with no slope, conditions would be

reasonably safe.    If someone trips, it will be easier for the people

behind to slow down or stop momentarily to let him recover.    But if

the same density of spectators were going along a route of the same

width, but with an upward slope as here, conditions are likely to be

safer still.    If someone falls, the person immediately behind will
                                                                  PAGE 28
                                                                  S2332

find it much easier to stop, and also to bring to a halt the people

who are a little further behind.

75.   In my view it would probably be safer to progress in heavy crowd

of people up a 1 in 6 slope, than to be in the same crowd going down a

1 in 10 slope.

76.   Spectators entering rather than leaving the West terrace, do, of

course have to progress down the slope which over about a 3m length is

at 1 in 6 , and for a further 3m is about 1 in 8 . But the rate at

which spectators enter the ground is controlled by the turnstiles,

the maximum rate at which they can be expected to enter is perhaps

equivalent to filling the ground in say one hour or rather longer.

There should be no "heavy crowd flow." They will be fed down the ramp

in limited numbers over an extended period (contrast evacuation of the

ground in an emergency). Individuals, or little groups of people, are

in no danger in passing down a 3m wide ramp which has a slope of 1 in

6 over a short length.   If one of them did trip and fall there would

be no question of a mass of people piling on top of him.

77.   Paragraph 88 of the 1986(000086) Guide (paragraph 9.7.2. of the

1976(000076) Guide) says "The maximum gradient acceptable will depend

on the ramp's length, purpose and usage but a ramp subject to heavy

crowd flow should preferably not exceed a gradient of 1 in 10".    The

Guide also brings into account 'the ramp's length.'   In the present

case the total length of ramp which has a slope of steeper than 1 in

10 is only 6m, and the length which is steeper than 1 in 8 is only

about 3m.

78.   Apart from these matters, in considering whether it was possible

for the ramp to be broken out and replaced with one of constant slope,

there were structural considerations. I surmised that the consulting

engineer who designed it had presumably had a reason for giving it an

initial upward slope when entering from the turnstiles.    I do not now
                                                               PAGE 29
                                                               S2332

have the drawing of the tunnel which was loaned to me in

1979(000079).   This and others were returned t o _____________pnder

cover of a letter dated 14th November 1978 (141178) (page 6(0)).       I

recollect however that the drawing showed that the ramp needed to

avoid the foundations of the tunnel walls.   The rear part of the

tunnel clearly existed before the West stand was created in about

1966(000066).   The brick walls in the rear half are old, and are

obviously part of an ealier structure, whilst new brick walls were

constructed in the front (terrace) part of the tunnel.

The foundations of the older walls are at shallow depth so that the

ramp could not be sloped down without chopping off the edge of the

foundations, and also having to underpin them.   This would have been

complicated even hazardous to a degree, and expensive.   Questions of

difficulty or works and cost did not however enter the equation, frcm

my point of view, but rather the fact that any alternative arrangement

(reversing the slope or even levelling it) would not have led to

greater safety.

79.   For example, another way to reduce the slop of the steepest 6m

length of the ramp would have been to break out the relevant section

and to introduce some steps. But in my view that would have produced

a hazardous situation.   Indeed both the 1976(000076) and 1986(000086)

Guides say 'The gradient should preferably be constant and not broken

by steps' (paragraph 9.7.1 of the 1976(000076) Guide and paragraph 87

of the 1986(000086) Guide).

80. To summarise, the Guides should not be misinterpreted.   The

guidance regarding the slope of ramps is expressly stated to apply to

ramps which have a downward slope when being traversed by a heavy

crowd flow, that is at the time of leaving the ground not when filling

it.   The circumstances are obviously much safer when the heavy crowd

flow is going uphill as in the case of the tunnel.   Bearing in mind
                                                                  PAGE 30
                                                                  S2332

the relatively short length of ramp which is steeper than 1 in 10, and

the fact that when the ground is filling up spectator flow is light,

because it is controlled by turnstiles, I believe that the ramp is

consistent both with the spirit and the letter of the guide.



GENERAL REARRANGEMENTS AT LEPPINGS LANE END (TURNSTILES, ETC)

81.   In the summer of 1981(000081) Mr. ENGLAND approached the firm for

a discussion of the entrance arrangements at the Leppings Lane end of

the ground.   Ws opened a file on 13th August 1981(130881).    The

arrangements as they then existed can most easily be seen fran a

drawing number 6705/1 (page 146) which was in fact prepared by my firm

much later in 1985(000085).    I should mention that the wall shown on

the drawing running from turnstile No 23 is slightly mis-drawn.        In

fact it runs to the column (the small square) shown on the left

(south) side of the drawing.   The drawing should be read in

conjunction with notes prepared by Mr STRANGE in or about August/

September 1981(000881/000981) which describe the then system in force.

82.   The two sketch drawings numbered 3563/1/ and 2 prepared in August

1981(000881) (pages 73-74) show my firm's preliminary ideas for

alternatives involving extra turnstiles and, to varying degrees,

segregation of crowd once access had been gained via the turnstiles.

83.   So far as I am aware the initiative for this study came from the

Club, though it is possible that one of the interested authorities

had raised the matter without our knowledge.   The Club were of course

interested in crowd control/management in all parts of the ground, not

just in the spectator areas, including the areas of access to the

turnstiles.   Egress from the ground was also considered.     Indeed

paragraph 6.2 of the 1976(000076) Guide says that the period of

greatest risk to crowd safety is at the time of leaving the ground.

84.   In the event, the firm was not asked to develop its embryonic
                                                                    PAGE 31
                                                                    S2332

schemes any further in 1981(000081).     I presume that, the Club did not

see the matter as being of priority at that time.     This was

understandable in my view.     It must be remembered that they were

carrying out extensive works to the ground overall year by year

(described by me earlier in this statement). At the time they were

also in the Second Division with the consequence that attendances at

their hone matches were smaller than they were after their promotion

to the First Division. Nor to the best of my own knowledge had there

been any serious difficulties at matches with regard to ingress to or

egress from the Leppings Lane end of the ground.    Neither in      (

1981(000081) nor later in 1985(000085) was it ever suggested to me by

the Club or by any other body represented on the working party that a

scheme of rearrangement was required to alleviate any difficulties of

that sort.

85.   In 1985(000085), by which time the Club were in the First

Division, Mr CHESTER, successor to Mr. ENGLAND as Club Secretary,

wrote to me on 22nd February 1985 (220285) (page 100) resurrecting the

question of posible improvements at the Leppings Lane end.       I do not

have any specific recollection but believe that the letter followed a

brief mention of the matter in informal discussions a day or two

beforehand.

86.   A meeting was arranged with Mr. CHESTER on 6th March 1985

(060385).     My staff prepared a rudimentary sketch showing the existing

lay-out (page 101).     Before the meeting I sketched a possible

alternative lay-out by marking up the sketch as shown at page 102.      A

new drawing showing those amendments was prepared for the purpose of

my meeting with Mr. CHESTER (page 103).    At that meeting I made

further manuscript markings on the sketch (page 104).

87.   I then worked up a scheme (drawing 6705/2) two versions of which

appear at pages 105 - 106.    Three copies were sent to Mr. CHESTER
                                                                 PAGE 32
                                                                 S2332

under cover of ray letter of 2nd April 1985(020485) (pages 107-108).

The principles, as reflected in ray letter of 2nd April 1985 (020485)

involved the segregation of home and away supporters not merely within

the ground itself, but also after access had been gained via the

turnstiles (as indicated, this was of particular concern to the club

and, as I understood the position, the Police). Flexibility was also

provided by the possibility of allocating either a large or a small

viewing area to visiting supporters.    With the separate "channelling"

to the various divided parts of the west stand and terraces account

had to be taken of the need to provide extra lavatories and

refreshment areas.

88.   As will be apparent frcm our drawing No. 6705/2 (page 105) and

drawing No. 6705/1 (the then existing layout) (page 146) we proposed

six extra turnstiles.     Two of the existing turnstiles, numbered 17 and

18, were to be demolished.     By dividing the remaining sixteen by an

additional internal fence incorporating gates (one fence already

existed) Nos. 1/6 would serve the north stand, Nos. 7/12 the north­

west terrace and Nos. 13/16 part of the seated area of the west stand

(that stand was itself to be divided into two). A new bank of

turnstiles (numbered 17/21 on drawing 6705/2) was proposed to serve

the central area of the terrace with a new wall being constructed frcm

the comer of turnstile No. 16 in effect to make a fundamental

division between turnstiles 1/16 and the areas into which they fed on

the one hand and the rest of the turnstiles on the other.    For those

turnstiles to the south we suggested a further three with internal

fences which would constrain the spectators to go up the stairs to the

southern half of the stand seating.     The remaining turnstiles led to

the south-west terrace.     Each of the areas so created was to have exit

gates of the appropriate width to permit evacuation of the ground in

less then eight minutes.
                                                                  PAGE 33
                                                                  S2332

89.    Under cover of a letter dated 9th April 1985 (090485) drawing No

6705/2 showing the proposals was sent to S.Y.C.C. for consideration by

the Working Party (pages 109-110).    It will be seen that Mr. CHESTER

had already supplied a copy of the drawing to the Police with wham he

had been in discussion concerning the proposals.    This is in line with

my understanding that, of all the authorities concerned, it was the

Police who were most involved because of their particular interest in

crowd management and control, especially the segregation of heme and

away supporters.

90.    On 12th April 1985(120485) Mr STRANGE had a coversation with Mr.

CHESTER as recorded in his note which appears at page 111.      It will be

seen that the Club were still considering the question of the number

of turnstiles to be incorporated in the scheme.

On 17th April 1985 (170485) Mr STRANGE had a discussion with___

              a senior assistant on Mr. CHESTERS staff with particular

responsibility for ticket sales.     Mr STRANGE'S note appears at page

112.               suggested that there should be a total of 34

turnstiles: a further four to supplement the existing six serving the

north stand, an extra two to supplement the six which we had suggested

should serve the area assigned to home standing supporters, and a

reduction of one in the two banks of turnstiles to be used by visiting

standing supporters. ________ wished the turnstiles to be in pairs.

91.    We duly revised the drawing of the proposed scheme.   On 19th

April 1985 (190485) Mr STRANGE wrote to Mr. CHESTER enclosing drawing

No. 6705/3 (pages 113-115).    As will be seen from such drawing we

accurately reflected                suggestion for numbers of turnstiles,

and we included necessary alterations to proposed walls and fences to

ensure segregation and channelling of supporters.

92.    On 20th April 1985 (200485) Mr STRANGE had a telephone

conversation with Mr. CHESTER who indicated that he was still not
                                                                 PAGE 34
                                                                 S2332

satisfied that the number of proposed turnstiles was right.    He was

still having discussions with his colleagues at the Club (page 116).

93.   On 25th April 1985(250485) there was another telephone

conversation between Mr STRANGE and Mr. CHESTER (page 117).    by then

Mr. CHESTER had returned a copy of drawing No.6705/3 with various

manuscript markings of his own.    We cannot now find in our files that

particular copy.   We believe that it will have been used by our

draughtsman,              to revise the negative of drawing 6705/3 to

produce drawing 6705/4 (it will be seen that the signature and date

are identical in both drawings).    In all probability the marked up

copy received from Mr. CHESTER was then destroyed.   Mr. CHESTER had

suggestd that there should be an area in front of the turnstiles to be

used by visiting supporters separate from those areas leading to the

turnstiles to be used by home supporters.   He wished to have gates

enclosing this area. He also proposed four banks of three turnstiles

together with a gate which he suggested might be used to let

spectators into the ground at all ticket matches.    It will be seen on

Mr STRANGE'S note that the latter wrote "disaster" in square brackets

against this suggestion. The square brackets indicate that this was Mr

STRANGE'S reaction to that particular suggestion.    I should also

explain that as I am Chairman of the firm and also Director in overall

charge of work done on behalf of the Club, Mr STRANGE'S notes of

telephone conversations are all placed before me.    They have the dual

function both of recording what had been discussed and incorporating,

always in square brackets, Mr STRANGE'S comments/views where

appropriate in order that I shall be aware of these before he and I

come to have our own discussions. In the circumstances Mr STRANGE did

not indicate to Mr. CHESTER his personal view of the proposal that a

gate should be used to permit entry to the ground for all-ticket

matches. If anybody was to communicate those views, then it was for
                                                                  PAGE 35
                                                                  S2332

me to do so.   Moreover, the moment was not appropriate because we were

still working on our proposals.   Anyway we knew that once a scheme had

been agreed in principle with the Club it would have to be submitted

to the Working Party, a process which indeed we had already begun, as

I have indicated, on 9th April 1985 (090485) by sending our drawing

6705/2 to S.W.C.C.

94.   Following the conversation with Mr. Chester on 25th April 1985

(250485) we sent to him new drawing No. 6705/4 on 26th April 1985

(260485) (pages 118-119).   On 1st May 1985(010585) Mr. CHESTER

telephoned to ask for our "guess" of the likely cost of implementing

the scheme in its then form (page 120).    This was for the purpose of a

meeting of the Club Board of Directors due to take place the next day.

On the following day, 2nd May 1985 (020585), we delivered our letter

(pages 121-122) with our broad estimate.    This was #66,600 in respect

of the proposals for changes to turnstiles, fences and gates appearing

on drawing 6705/4 (including the proposed radial fence on the west

terrace), such figure to include professional fees; and    #60,700;

again including professional fees, for the necessary consequential

works to lavatories and refreshment areas under the west stand.       We

also mentioned certain other separate works.    However, in relation to

the re-organisation scheme to the total cost estimate was    127,300.

95.   On 2nd May 1985 (020585) S.Y.C.C. confirmed (pages 123-125) that

our earlier proposals submitted to them in the form of drawing 6705/2,

which by now had been overtaken, was generlaly acceptable to the

working party subject to an additional gate being provided between

turnstile No. 16 and the wall proposed to abut it as shown on drawing

6705/2.   Requirements for minimum widths of gates in the areas outside

the stadium itself were also indicated, I understand at the request of

the Fire Service.    The relevant measurements are shown in manuscript

on the copy of drawing 6705/2 which S.Y.C.C. returned to us (page
                                                                    PAGE 36
                                                                    S2332

125).    Other conditions were also imposed concerning radial fences and

extra gates in the perimeter fence (aspects with which I have dealt

elsewhere in this statement).

96.   At this time we were involved in discussions with the Police

primarily concerning the radial fences.       We were due to have a meeting

with them on 8th May 1985(080585). On the previous day, however, we

received a telephone call from Mr. CHESTER (page 120) to indicate that

the Club's Board felt unable to expend       #120,000, on the general

scheme as it was then proposed.

97.     On 13th May 1985 (130585) Mr.    CHESTER wrote to me asking for a

meeting at Hillsborough "to consider the full implications, operations

and costings" of the proposed scheme.       It should be remembered that

this was the Monday following the Saturday on which the fire at

Bradford City Football ground had taken place.       I duly met Mr. CHESTER

on Friday 17th May 1985(170585).        It is my recollection of such

meeting that Mr. CHESTER voiced the concern of the Club's Board at the

likely cost of the proposed scheme.        He was looking for areas where

savings might be effected.     He said that the scheme needed to be

considerably simplified, also that the existing turnstiles (twenty-

three) were adequate in number, but he requested that two of the

turnstiles which served the west stand should be re-allocated to the

north stand.

98.     At this juncture, it is appropriate to give my understanding of

the Club's position with regard to the cost of ground improvements. I

believe that the club had build up a reserve for the proposed works of

re-arrangement at the Leppings lane end and for other major works in

the ground.     The fire at Bradford Football Club took place as

indicated on Saturday 11th May 1985 (110585).        The south stand at

Hillsborough had timber decking.        The Club therefore realised, after

the Bradford fire, that works would have to be carried out to the
                                                                   PAGE 37
                                                                   S2332

south stand.    In the event the decking had to be covered with

continuous steel sheets with non—slip surfaces at a cost of       #59,280

exclusive of professional fees.    This was a new cornu,tment which, of

course, had to be and was met promptly.

99.    Moreover, during that 1984/85(000084/000085) season the firm had

reason to inspect the cantilever roof of the south stand which was

leaking. When some of the roof sheeting had been removed we found that

the main bottom chord steel member of the cantilever trusses were

badly rusted.    There had been significant loss of metal.    It was

essential in the interests of safety that removal of the rust and

repainting be carried out during the Summer of 1985(000085).       The cost

was    #67,900 exclusive of professional fees.    Curing of the leaks cost

another    #12,640.

100.    After the meeting with Mr. CHESTER on 13th May 1985 (130585) , I

was away for a few days and was unable therefore to inform Mr STRANGE

of what Mr. CHESTER had discussed with me.       Mr STRANGE'S note of a

telephone conversation with Mr. CHESTER on 22nd May 1985(220585) (page

132) refers.    The writing at the foot of the note is mine, indicating

to Mr STRANGE that he and I should set aside time for discussion on

28th May 1985 (250585).

101.    By 4th June 1985 (040685) we had prepared a revised scheme in

line with Mr CHESTER'S requests.    The scheme is illustrated in

drawings numbered respectively 6705/5 and 6705/8A (pages 135-136)

which were sent to the Club under cover of our letter of that date

 (page 133-134).

102.    The difference between the two drawings is merely that in

drawing 6705/5 existing turnstiles Nos. 17 and 18 were to remain but

the alternative in drawing 6705/8A involved their removal and the

realignment of the fence which at that tune ran from the comer of

turnstile No. 18 to the iron gates which formed the boundary of
                                                                   PAGE 38
                                                                   S2332

Hillsborough itself adjoining Leppings Lane.   As my firm's letter of

4th June 1985 (Q40685) indicates, we had discerned a potential "pinch

point" when spectators were leaving the ground.   Were turnstiles Nos.

17 and 18 and the fence to remain in position the scheme in drawing

6705/5 would provide inadequate space for spectators leaving the south

stand, the south west terrace and the west stand.   The exit time would

have been in excess of the eight minutes reccmnended by the

1976(000076) Guide.    The revised scheme in drawing 6705/8A gave a

greater width (an extra iron gateway) for spectators leaving the

ground at that point. We also proposed that the realigned fence should

be constructed from metal sheets so that heme and visiting supporters

would be unable to see each other as they queued to enter the ground.

103.   On the 12th June 1985 (120685), Mr. CHESTER of the Club

acknowledged our letter and the accompanying drawings showing the

alternative schemes.    He was due to be away until 19th June

1985(190685) and he asked me to liaise with the Police and/or S.Y.C.C.

(page 137) to ascertain their views.    We were uncertain, however,

which scheme he wished us to put forward.    On 17th June 1985 (170685)

Mr STRANGE rang             of the Club seeking clarification but she

was unable to help (page 140).     Upon Mr. CHESTER'S return he informed

us that the club preferred the scheme shown on drawing No. 6705/8A.

Because of the particular interest of the Police in any proposed

re-organisation, on 25th June 1985 (250685), we submitted a copy of

our drawing No 6705/8A to them requesting ccnroents (page 142).

Approval was given orally by Inspector CALVERT in a telephone

conversation with Mr. STRANGE on 27th June 1985 (270685).       We sent a

full set of drawings to Mr. CHESTER with our letter dated 8th July

1985 (080785) (page 151) and told him of the oral approval of the

Police.

104.   On 5th July 1985 (050785) we had submitted a Planning
                                                                  PAGE 39
                                                                  S2332

Application for the scheme to SCC as the Local Planning Authority

(pages 145-148).    On the same day we had also submitted an Application

for Building Regulation approval to the Director of Design and

Building Services of SCC.

105.   At that stage the firm were involved in urgent and intensive

work in the preparation of detailed working drawings both to place

before the working party and for use by the contractors who were to

carry out the work.    The applications for Planning Permission and

Building Regulation approval required only the submission of outline

drawings.   S.Y.C.C. were, however aware of our Application as will be

seen from their letter to us of 18th July 1985 (180785) (page 152).

By 25th July 1985 (250785) we had prepared the necessary detailed

drawings which we submitted to S.Y.C.C. under cover of our letter of

that date (pages 153-154).   Approval of the working party given at

their meeting on 29th July 1985 (290785) and was intimated to us in

S.Y.C.C's letter of 30th July 1985 (300785) (pages 155-156) to which I

have already referred in detail in connection with fences.     Paragraph

(b) of that letter refers specifically to seme aspects of the

proposals in connection with the turnstiles and to realignment of hand

railing.

106.   There followed a meeting of the working party at the ground on

7th August 1985(070885) at which the Deputy Secretary of the Club and

I were present.    Minutes are to be found at pages 160-162.   The

working party were able to witness the construction of the new works

which were being carried out to a very tight programme so as to have

them completed by the start of the next season later in August.      They

were duly completed in time.

107.   At a meeting of the working party on 22nd January 1986 (220186),

after more than half a season of experience, the Police reported that

the Scheme for the revised segregation arrangements at the Leppings
                                                                 PAGE 40
                                                                 S2332

Lane end "worked well on by far the majority of occasions"    (page 173).



TESTS TO CRUSH BARRIERS FOLLOWING THE EVENTS OF 15TH APRIL 1989

(150489)

108.   I was not at the match on 15th April 1989 (150489) . I arrived

at the ground at approximately 4.40 pm( 1640) and carried out an

inspection in the immediate aftermath.   With the club's approval the

firm did tests on sore of the crush barriers the next day, Sunday 16th

April (160489).   The crush barrier of which two spans collapsed and

those of which one length of the horizontal rail had visibly deformed,

had not been designed by my firm, but were original barriers

(probably from 1965(000065) or earlier).    The radial fences and

perimeter fence were all in tact although there was seine deformation

of the framing of the perimeter fence.     I understand that parts of the

wire mesh on the perimeter fence were cut away by spectators and/or

the rescue services on 15th April in order to gain access to the

terracing and to allow spectators to escape onto the pitch.

109.   The two barriers which were permanently deformed on 15th April

Nos. 128 and 137 were tested in turn.    In each case the load was

applied in increments of one quarter of the test load until the test

load of 6kN/metre specified in the 1986(000086) Guide was reached.

The forward deflection of the barrier was measured.     It was found to

be behaving elastically, with the deflection increasing proportionally

to the applied load.    The deflection was within the range expected for

a barrier of this type which is in good condition.     When the load was

released, the deflection of the barrier was fully recovered.     It

should be noted that sane permanent deflection is allowed by the

1986(000086) Guide (the recovery only needs to be 75%     - see Annex C

of the Guide). The test load was reapplied so as to give the three

cycles of loading, each of five minutes duration, specified in Annex
                                                                              PAGE 41
                                                                              S2332

       C.      Each time the load was removed, there was full recovery.

        110.     It was then decided to determine the approximate load which had

       been applied to the barriers during the incident on 15th April. It is

       possible to infer what this load had been by reloading to the point

       where the barrier ceases to behave elastically.        The load at which it

       starts to behave plastically and therefore begins to develop permanent

       deformation, is in effect the load which had been applied on 15th

       April(150489).

       111.     Barrier 128 was the stronger of the two.     It began to deform

       plastically at a load of 9kN/metre.      This is 1.8 times the design load

       of 5kN/metre, and 1.5 times the test load (it will be recalled that

       the test load is itself an overload).

        112.     Barrier 137 was not quite so strong.    It began to deform

       plastically at a load of approximately 7.5kN/metre.        This is 1.5 times

       the design load and 1.25 times the test load.

        113.    These test results on the two barriers which suffered seme

       permanent deformation on 15th April (150489), but continued to

        function, show that their strength was very comfortably above the test

        load required by the 1986(000086) Guide.        It was not possible to apply

       the test load to the barrier which collapsed, but in view of the fact

       that it had very satisfactorily carried the test load in July

        1988(000788) , it is reasonable to believe that it failed on 15th April

        1989 (150489) because it was subjected to a significantly greater

       crowd pressure than is envisaged in the 1986(000086) Guide.




                                                          WILFRED EASTWOOD SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

            TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
Incident    102   050390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER S670C

                                                                           Station

Surname           GUEST

Forenames         HAROLD

Age                53                       Date of birth

Address           DEEPCAR PSTN     F2


Occupation        POL PC1421

Telephone

IC                Height                    Build

Hair colour


#
Eyes
    ir type

                                            Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                        Signed


           I am a Police Officer in the South Yorkshire Police at present

           stationed at Deepcar.

           During the last four years I have worked all football matches at

           Hillsborough Football Ground.    My duties consist of working in the

           video room in company with Chief Security Officer, Mr IOCK.

           Under the ground regulations in respect of the amount allowed in each

           section of ground, it is my duty to check with the computer, the

           number of persons who have entered and then the number of persons

           outside the ground about to enter, to make sure that no more persons

           are allowed into that area than the regulations set.     If there are, to

           inform Control to arrange for turnstiles to be closed and for the

           persons outside the ground to be moved to an area where there is

           sufficient rocm to accommodate them.      This is very important at a no

           ticket match where the numbers attending are not known in advance.
                                                                  pact:    2
                                                                  S670C

On a ticket match this role becomes a watching brief with the main

concerns being persons turning up at the match without tickets.      The

video room is situated near to the players' entrance on the South

Stand.   My duties are to liaise with the Club and the Police.    Any

problems which may arise on behalf of the Club are passed over to Mr

LOCK, and involving the Police are forwarded by radio or telephone

through to the control room.

In this rocm there are twenty TV monitors which are covered by cameras

which are strategically placed around the ground to cover all 95

turnstiles.   There is also a TV monitor which can be operated by a

switch which will operate and show any view by the cameras from the

main Police Control point situated between the West and South Stands.

There is also a computer which shows all 95 turnstiles and can tell at

any time during a match how many persons have passed through each

turnstile at any given point.

Each section of the ground is shown in separate columns, each column

shows a number of turnstiles for that area and how many persons have

passed through each turnstile and at the bottom of each column the

total is shown for that area of the ground.

There are six areas of the ground recorded on the computer and at the

end there is a total shown for the full attendance in the ground.       The

computer scans all turnstiles and is updated every two and a half

seconds.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I was on duty for the Semi-Final

between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, and ccnmenced my duties at

10.00am (1000) on that date.    At about 12.45pm (1245), after the

turnstiles were open, I switched all video recorders on to record all

the fans as they were entering the ground via the turnstiles.

During the afternoon leading up to the kick off time at about 2.15pm

(1415), noticed that the crowd appeared to be slow in arriving at
                                                                PAGE     3
                                                                S670C

the turnstiles.   I am not sure of the size of the crowd but believe it

to be 25,000 and 30,000.

At 2.40pm (1440), that same date, I checked with the camera which

covers the Penistone Rd area and noticed that there were very few

people in the Streets and on checking the computer it was showing 19,

000 plus in the Spion Rop.   When each area of the ground gets near to

capacity the totals start to pulsate, the total capacity for that area

of the ground being 21,000, which told me that nearly all the

Nottingham supporters were in the ground and it was near to full

capacity.

1 then switched to the camera that was covering the Leppings Lane end

of the ground and noticed that there was a large gathering of fans in

that area.   I could see that the fans were spread frcm the turnstile

entrance right back into Leppings Lane, fully blocking the road.     I

would estimate that there would be between 3,000 and 5,000 fans.

I made a check of the computer and saw that the figures for the Wsst

Stand were pulsating and showing near to capacity and the Leppings

Lane figures were showing approximately 7,000 which would be near to

capacity and the computer would be at a point to start pulsating.

The figures on the computer start to pulsate when the capacities get

to within 15% (percent) of the total.

As I looked at the scene I could see the crowd getting larger and many

at the back of the crowd were surging forward pushing violently

towards the turnstiles.    From that point I could also see Police

Officers trying to get the crowd into sane sort of order but they were

being pushed to one side out of the way.    I saw several missiles being

thrown towards the Police.   A large contingent of the fans were

climbing the walls over the top of the turnstiles, and they were

landing on the asbestos roofs on the inside of the ground and jumping

on to people who were on the inside of the ground to break their fall
                                                                   PAGE    4
                                                                   S670C

as they landed.

On the South Stand of this area, I saw a mounted Policeman being

pushed on his horse down towards a large double door which leads into

the rear of the West Stand.

During all this, I could hear several Officers, including

Superintendent MARSHALL, requesting further assistance in that area,

for the double doors to be opened in order to let fans into the

ground to save a major incident outside, also for the match to be

delayed for a further fifteen minutes.    At this point I noticed that a

large door situated on the South Side of Leppings Lane was open, and

there was a surge of about 1,000 fans run into the ground. I could

tell from the noises on the radios from the officers in that area that

the Liverpool fans were very boisterous and excited and appeared to be

heavily intoxicated with drink.

I then turned to the camera that was inside the ground and covered the

area of the West Stand and it was obvious that the situation was

getting out of hand and people were being pushed up against the

fencing on the perimeter of the ground.

At the point where things seemed to be getting out of hand outside the

turnstiles, I tried to use my personal radio in order to contact

Police Control that further Police assistance was required urgently at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground, but each time I tried to use the

radio I was blocking others already using the radio, so I did not

try further to use it.

I then tried to use the internal telephone system to contact Police

Control but again each time I tried the line was engaged and could not

get through.   At this point Mr LOCK then left the video room in order

to organise some safety measures with the security personnel.

Also present during this time in the video room was a Mr Roger

HOLDSWORTH.    He is the person who installed all the videos and
                                                                  PAGE    5
                                                                  S670C

computer system.   As he could also see what was taking place, he also

left the room in order to assist in any way he could.

I could see that all available Officers were being sent to this area

of the ground to assist with the injured and (tying.

By this time injured persons were being brought to the players'

entrance of the ground and I assisted in treating people in that area

and arranging for ambulances to be directed in that area to ferry the

injured to hospital.

I can say that during the time prior to the major incident the Police

personal radios were working very well but during the day there

appeared to be sane distortion and some messages could not be read

clearly.    I would like to add that in my opinion, the main cause of

this major incident was caused by the Liverpool fans arriving at the

match too late and being under the influence of drink and trying to

enter the ground without tickets.    It was obvious that looking at the

crowd outside the ground prior to kick-off, there were several

thousands that were attempting to enter without tickets at all cost to

the safety of other Liverpool supporters inside the ground.

During the incident, I was trying to concentrate on messages being

received on the Police radio network but did not listen to what was

being transmitted on the back to back radio system owned by the Club,

as I knew Mr LOCK would deal with any situation that had developed.

After the incident I made a note of all the people that had entered

the ground as shown on the computer and they are as follows:

Spion Kop               19,906

North Stand              8,109

South Stand covered      4,740

South Stand uncovered    3,255

Leppings Ln              7,038

West Stand               5,618
                                                                         PAGE
                                                                         S670C

         TOTAL                 48,666

         These numbers would not give a true reading of the exact amount of

         persons entering the ground due to the gates being opened and

         several hundreds entering the ground without tickets and trying to

         gain access, by any means.




                                                       C GUEST PC1421 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:

^jTCNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
                                                                            STATION

^V M E :


 ADDRESS:


 ACT / DATE OF BIRTH:

 OCCUPATION: ELECTRONIC ENGINEER


 Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
 b y me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
 it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
 prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
 to be false or do not believe to be true.


 DATED: 030589                                                              SIGNED)



           I am employed by M W Technology Ltd who have a contract with Sheffield

           Wednesday F C to provide the computer turnstile equipment and CCTV.

           On Saturday 15 April '89 (150489) I was at Hillsborough frcm about 10

           am (1000).     I was in the computer room with Roger HOULDSWORTH, Mr

           LOCKE and PC GUEST.     To the best of my recollection one of us was in

           the computer rocm frcm 10 am (1000) until 6 pm (1800) which is when I

           left.     We left on occasions throughout that time but individually,

           never all together.

           Throughout the day I was watching the monitors and also listening to

           the Police control.     I was there in case any fault occurred with the

           equipment.

           I recall PC GUEST switched on the video recorders about 12.30 pm

           (1230).    They rewound after a few minutes and whilst I did not check

           that they were all recording I cannot recall him saying anything

           untoward about the recorders.

           After the incident I was not involved with the deceased or the

           injured.     I remained in the computer roan.   PC GUEST was in the room

           with me but Mr LOCKE and Roger HOULDSWORTH were out of the room.       They




                                                                                         1063
r




             came back at intervals but I can't say what time.

            After the incident seme of the ground stewards came to the room asking

             for Mr LOCKE.

            I recall that the cupboard housing the video recorders was shut but

            not locked.      I did not see anyone remove any tape from that cupboard.

            I can recall that Roger HOUU3SWOR3H ejected the cassette tapes but he

            did not take them away, he left them in the machines.

            In general terms the stadium was in chaos after the incident. People

            were in areas of the ground where they wouldn't normally have been
            allowed.

            I did not see anyone go near the video cupboard other than the persons

            I have mentioned.

            I left the ground about 6 pm (1800).

            I have no knowledge of any tapes from the ground.

            I have a key for the computer room and the alarm system.




                                                                             SIGNED
    STATEMENT TAKEN
              PLACE:

    ^         TIME:               DATE:

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         KEVIN V TOPE DCI




                                                                                        1064
Incident     102   060390 OP8463       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S3199

                                                                          Station

 Surname

 Forenames

 Age                                       Date of birth

 Address


 Occupation        DISC JOCKEY

 Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

 Hair colour

^air type
 Eyes                                      Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages 8

 Dated                                                             UNSIGNED Signed


           I#                                                                    will

           say as follows

           I was b o m on                                  I am a self employed

           professional Disc Jockey and for the last 5 years have been engaged in

           private work mainly for Hotels and Pubs.

           I first became involved with Sheffield Wednesday F.C. when I did a

           private function in the Riverside Suite three seasons ago.    The

           management liked me and asked me to come in for an interview for club

           announcement.    I was interviewed by Dick Chester and got the job.

           I am self employed and have no written contract with the club.      I just

           turn up for all home matches and reserve games.     I have four people

           working for me, one full time and three part time. The full timer will

           cover for me at the club if I am away, although I have only missed

           three or four matches in the 3 years that I have been club announcer.
                                                                    PAGE     2
                                                                    S3199

I do not get paid for matches but as a result of my involvement with

the club I receive all contracts for functions at the club and free

advertising on the electronic score board and in the match programme.

I am a Sheffield Wednesday supporter and would attend all hate matches

in any event.

I operate from a room directly beneath the police control box and I

have a good view of the ground.    The only part that I cannot see is

the area just past the player's tunnel between the tunnel area and the

touch line.     I cannot see to the back of the ground towards the

turnstiles at Leppings Lane. The Police in the room above me have a

better view as they also have windows to the rear.

On a normal match day I arrive between 1.30 and 1.45 pm (1330 - 1345

hrs).   I do the job on my own but I can bring a couple of guests if I

wish to and I can ask for complimentary tickets.        I have an identity

pass and a car park pass.    When I arrive at the ground I call

initially at the Young Owls Office and I pick up details of train

times and away prices and any other information which I am required to

read out.     I then drive to my parking bay             I enter the ground

through the gates behind the DJ 's box and walk under the South Stand

to the central office.     From there I pick up a programme and other

papier work including team lists, birthday requests and any other

announcements.     I then return to the D.J.'s box.     I bring my singles

case of records with me.     I also have a few tapes.     I put on a tape as

back ground music whilst people are arriving and then I go to get my

lunch in the Riverside restaurant.     I go back to the DJ 's box at

about 2.15 (1415 hrs).     At about 2.40 (1440 hrs) I start making

announcements and welcome the supporters.      At about 2.50 (1450 hrs) I

read out the team lists.     When the game starts I go and sit in the

South Stand.

Just before half time I go back to the DJ 's box and ring the Office
                                                                    pas:    3
                                                                    S3199

for details of half time scores at other clubs.     Whilst I am waiting

for these details I read out any birthday requests, Young Owls news

and forthcoming fixtures.     I then read the half time scores.    When the

teams come back out for the second half I go and sit in the South

Stand again.     I return to the box just before half time.     If I am

needed to make announcements during the match itself a steward will

fetch me.     However this is very rare but to give an example I may be

required to make an announcement if a supporter has to return tone

urgently because of family illness etc.     If that does occur I will

wait until there is a break in the game and then make the announcement.

I do not attend the pre-season briefing and I have never had any

briefing sessions with the Police.     The Police share the same P.A.

system with me.     We share the system and speakers but they have

another microphone and they can override me at any time whether I am

speaking on my own microphone or playing music.

I do not give announcanents with regard to emergencies.        That is

entirely in the police hands.     They do however liaise with me

generally and keep me appraised of what is going on.     However, if the

police want to announce something they do not tell me they are going

to do so.     They simply make the announcement and after they are

finished I carry on with whatever I am saying.     I have a good

relationship with the Police. I have no control whatsoever over the

making of announcements with regard to crowd control, pitch invasions

or bomb or fire scares.     Those matters are dealt with entirely by the

Police.     As soon as they begin to make announcements ray microphone is

shut off.

At the end of the game I announce the full time scores, play a couple

of records and finish off.     I never give information out regarding

traffic conditions in the area and any such announcements will be

made by the Police.     I then pack up ray gear and go home.    I return
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S3199

the keys to the D.J.'s box to the girl who operates the score board.

She generally opens up for me before I arrive.     If she is not there

the Police have a spare key or, rarely, I can collect a key from the

Office.   When I arrive I switch on and check my microphone.   The

amplifier will already be turned on because the Police are using the

system.   At the end of the game I lock up the office but, as I have

said, the police have a spare key and they can get in later to turn

off the amplifier.

I now turn to my involvement in the events which occurred on 15th

April, 1989 (150489). I drove to the ground on the morning of the

match but I was not admitted because the camera crew were using my

parking space.     I therefore parked briefly outside the ground and went

to the office.    There I was given a different pass to enable me to

park behind the gymnasium which is situated behind the North stand.

This was at about 12.30 pm (1230 hrs). I parked my van and then

walked onto the pitch area and walked around the pitch from the north

east corner.     I walked along the track beside the pitch in front of

the kop and around to the player's tunnel.     From there I walked

through the tunnel and into the office.     I picked up my paper work as

usual.    I did not need to pick up anything from the Young Owls office

because this was not to be a Wednesday game.     I then went up to the

Riverside suite to have my lunch.    At about 2.15 (1415 hrs) I went up

to the D. J. 's box.   I cannot now remember if I collected the key or

if it was already open for me. I put on a tape at about 2.15 pm

(1415 hrs). I noticed that the kop was filling up and that at the

sides of the West terraces there were very few people.     In fact there

were very few people on the West terraces at all.     There were a few

people in the stand.     I played music until about 2.40 pm (1440 hrs).

As far as I can remember the Police were not cutting in on me.

However I was not paying a great deal of attention.    When I am in the
                                                                  PAGE      5
                                                                  S3199

DJ box and after I have put a record on I sometimes stand outside to

have a chat with someone, maybe the catering staff or a steward.      I

do not always take much notice of what the Police are doing.

I do not recall whether the Police made an announcement at 2.30 (1430

hrs). There is always a lot of noise from the ground and the gate.

Even if an announcement had been made I might not have heard it.      In

my opinion my equipment is much louder and clearer than the police

equipment.   My equipment is generally quite good although possibly it

might not be possible to hear an announcement from the top of the kop.

The crowd do not necessarily listen to announcements which are made by

me or by the Police unless something is being said which they

particularly want to hear.   For example the crowd tend to be quiet

when the team lists are being read.

After 2.30 pm (1430 hrs) I was not paying any particular attention to

the pitch or to the crowd as I was telephoning to obtain information

such as team changes.   I did notice that the ground was filling up

generally but I saw nothing to worry me.   My box is sound proofed so I

did not really listen to the crowd or to what the police were doing.

At about 10 or 8 minutes before 3.00 pm (1450 - 1452 hrs) I read out

the team lists. This takes about 3 minutes and the teams come out

onto the pitch at about 2.55 (1455 hrs).   I now noticed that the

ground was getting busier and was becoming very noisy.     However all

seemed to progress normally up until the kick off.      This is my busiest

time and I have to concentrate on what I am doing.      I was watching the

pitch when the teams came out and I had had no contact with the

police.   I did not notice any problems in the crowd.     I made my final

announcement over the microphone to the effect of "Enjoy the game and

I will see you at half time for the half time scores".      This would

have been 1 or 2 minutes before the game started.    The teams were

still warming up when I went down to find a seat in the South stand.
                                                                    PAGE       6
                                                                    S3199

I walked down the first gangway to the open air part of the South

Stand.     I was looking for a seat.   I normally have a seat reserved but

I did not have one for this game.      Indeed I have never had a reserved

seat for semi finals.     If I could not find a seat I had intended to

watch the game from the D.J.'s box.

When I got to the South Stand I did not even get as far as sitting

down.     People were still arriving and I had to wait see whether there

would be a spare seat.    The game kicked off at about this time.         At

this point I noticed that the crowd in the West terrace seemed to be

surging.    However, I was watching the game and not the terraces.        My

attention was drawn to the terrace area again when a shot from the

Forest team hit the cross bar.     I then looked across the goal and

could see that there was trouble.      I thought that the crowd was

getting excited.    When the ball was cleared from the goal area, Bruce

Grobbelaar, the Liverpool goal keeper, seemed to be pointing at the

gates and the crowd.     He was trying to get the attention of the

Police.    A Policeman with a flat cap went into the penalty area to

stop the game.     By this time there were people on the pitch and on the

tracking between the goal and to the sides of it.

At this stage the Police were making announcements but I do not know

what was being said.     If I had listened carefully I might have been

able to hear what the announcer was saying but there was a lot of

noise and I was talking to someone anyway.

I saw that people were injured and collapsing onto the pitch.         I

helped to clear the first gangway in the south stand.     This was to

enable stretchers and makeshift stretchers (hoarding) to pass through.

Stretchers were being carried by fans and by St John's ambulance men.

I did not notice any Police carrying stretchers.

I went up to the Police box when the first ambulance appeared on

the pitch. The time was perhaps 3.10 (1510 hrs). I began to listen to
                                                                  PAGE     7
                                                                  S3199

what   the Police were saying on the P.A. They were asking fans on

the pitch to make way for an ambulance. I went straight up to the

Police box to ask if they wanted me to make any announcements. The

police announcer is called       and he does the announcements at every

match. First of all he told me that there was nothing that I could do

but I then explained to him that my microphone might be louder than

his and he decided to give it a try.     I therefore went downstairs and

repeated what he had said.   This is to the effect of    "Could all fans

on the pitch move to the sides to let the ambulance across the pitch,

please".

The Police telephoned me itrmediately that I had made this

announcement. I spoke to        and he told me not to make any further

announcements.

I then went back to the South stand and I watched the scenes. I also

helped to keep the gangways clear.     I was wearing my ID and fans kept

coming up and asking me to make announcements to help them find

relatives and friends.   The fans were upset, crying and very angry.

One got hold of me and was shaking me.     I went to ask the Police what

I should do but was told to leave the matter with them.      It was

obvious that they did not want me on the air but they were using their

system anyway and I would have been cut off.

I went back down the steps from the Police box and told the fans that

the Police would be dealing with announcements.     I then went back to

my place in the South stand.   I helped to keep the entrance clear and

put the seats flat to assist the exit of stretchers. The Police were

also assisting.   I was watching people being given the kiss of life

and I saw some bodies covered up and carried across the pitch by fans.

Seme Liverpool fans ran down the middle of the pitch towards the

Forest end.   I then saw the Police form a cordon across the full width

of the pitch and the Liverpool fans were sent back.     I was standing on
                                                                  PAGE     8
                                                                  S3199

the South stand at about 3.30 to 3.45 (1530 - 1545 hrs) when I heard

Kenny Dalglish making an announcement on my microphone.     I went back

to the D.J. 's box and watched him finish his announcement.    I do not

know who took him up to the box.    He was caning over very clearly.      He

was telling people to calm down so that the injuries and fatalities

would not escalate.    He seemed to be saying that the game might be

started again.    After he had finished I went back down to the South

Stand.    I was simply trying to make myself available if necessary.

At about 4.30 (1630 hrs) I went to collect my box of records from the

D. J. 's stand.   After I had collected them I went to the Riverside

suite for a cup of coffee and to try and calm down.      I was watching

what was happening on the TV set.    There were very few people left in

the ground by then.

At about 5.30 (1730 hrs) I went to collect my van to go home.      I

walked back around the pitch and past the gym.     I saw stretchers with

people laid out.    I collected my van and drove home.    I did not come

back to the club for a couple of weeks as a couple of jobs were

iimtediately cancelled. Upon my return I found the D.J.'s box exactly

as I had left it.

In my opinion the Police microphone should at least be as clear as

mine.    My equipment is in fact owned by the club who are responsible

for it's upkeep.    I have never used the Police microphone as I presume

that the Police are responsible for the upkeep of their own equipment.

If I find any faults in my equipment I simply report the matter to the

Office and repairs are arranged immediately.     On the day of the semi

final the equipment was in full working order.

I have not been interviewed by the Police and they have not requested

a statement from me.

This statement is true to the best of my information and belief.
                                          PAGE
                                          S3199

         Signed



         Dated



         Witnessed




                                 UNSIGNED SIGNED

^^EATEMENT TAKEN


           TIME:         DATE:

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160689                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.      I

           am a lifelong supporter of Liverpool Football Club and a member of the

        Heart of England Supporters Club.       I travel to all home games and

       most away matches.

           I attended the F.A. Cup Semi Final between Nottingham Forest and

       Liverpool which was staged at Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday 15

       April 1989 (150489).        I went to the game with my father,

           and a local young lad called                 All three of us travelled

           to the game in a coach party which was organised by             the

           secretary of the Heart of England Supporters Club.

       The coach picked us up in Coventry at 9.30 am (0930 hrs) on the day of

           the match.   It then continued to Nuneaton, Hinkley and Leicester,

        picking up club members at these locations.       From Leicester the coach

       went via motorway to Sheffield.        During this part of the journey we

       were held up on a number of occasions by contraflow systems and

           roadworks etc.

       We did not make any steps for refreshments.

       As we approached Sheffield along the motorway the Police directed us to
a turn off which was different to the one that the Nottingham coaches

were taking. We weren't stopped on this occasion, I think the

policeman recognised that the coach was full of Liverpool supporters.

We left the motorway at a junction at least two turn-offs further on.

We were then stopped by police at a large traffic island they informed

the driver that he couldn't take the route he wanted to and

that he would have to follow a designated route for Liverpool

supporters.

We then followed sign posts until we came to a wide stretch of road

where   police were conducting checks for alcohol on coaches and mini

buses. We were halted and the coach was thoroughly searched, baggage

included by two police officers. They found no alcohol at all and

placed a peel off type sticker with a tick on it onto the nearside

window of the coach close to the door. The whole check took about

twenty minutes.

I can't recall what time it was at this stage but we were all becoming

concerned about the time. We were running well behind schedule.

We were then allowed to continue but were then stopped on another

three occasions by Police. On two of these occasions we were pulled

over and             and the coach driver had short conversations with

Police before the coach moved on. On the other occasion two

policemen boarded the coach and made a fairly quick visual check for

alcohol. He then informed us that we would not be able to take the

larger type of inflatable toys into the ground.    One of the lads on

the coach then visited the toilet as he was unable to wait any longer.

This check took about ten minutes, most of the time taken up while we

waited for the Police to come to the coach.

On the last police check, which was one of the shorter ones, a

Policeman got on the coach and directed the driver to a point close to
the ground where the latter knew where he was. The Policeman who was

senior in rank then got off the coach.

I have omitted to mention that whilst en route to the game we had also

encountered Police on the M69 who were checking Chelsea supporters who

were travelling to the game at Leicester in coaches and minibuses.

We were held up for about five minutes at this location before they

realised we were Liverpool supporters and allowed us to proceed

without searching the coach.

The coach driver stopped close to the ground in Leppings Lane. He

spoke to a Policeman and asked if he could drop us all off. The

Policeman said that we would all have to travel with the coach to the

designated parking place and walk back to the ground. He said it was

best that we all knew where the coach was parked. One of our party,

       suffers with                 and can only walk short distances.

He asked the Policeman if it would be okay if he got out but his

request was refused.

I don't recall what time it was but the Leppings Lane area was not

particularly crowded, athough there were lots of people drinking pop

etc.

The coach then followed police directions through an industrial estate

and for a distance of about a mile and a half before reaching a

section of road which had been set aside for Liverpool coaches. We

all then left the coach and began the walk to the ground. This took

about twenty minutes. I did not see any disorderliness, fighting or

drunkeness during the walk.

On arrival at the ground my father and myself split up from

         who had a ticket for the West Stand terracing. We both had

tickets for the West Stand seats, which we had obtained from Liverpool

F.C. through            and the Heart of England Supporters Club at a
cost of #12.00.

My father and myself then went to the turnstiles for the West Stand

seats. I would estimate that the time was about 2.10pm (1410). We

knew exactly where we were going as I've been to the ground on about

six occasions. There was a short queue at the turnstiles but we

weren't held up for any length of time. I would have expected it to

be far more difficult than it was, finding from my past experiences of

big matches at Hillsborough. I was searched by Police prior to

entering the turnstile. I found nothing at all unusual about the

situation at the Leppings Lane outside the ground. There were fewer

Police than I would have expected. Having entered the ground we went

straight to the steps leading to our seats. Again I knew exactly

whre I was going and didn't need to look for signs. At the foot of

the steps there were between six and eight stewards checking tickets.

It struck me at that time that there was no need for that many to be

there. We went up the steps, purchased a cup of tea and were then

directed by a steward to our seats which were in the front row,

slightly to the right of centre. I remember that the time was 2.20pm

(1420).

At this stage pens 3 and 4 below us were very full.   Pens 1 and 2

were worryingly empty I thought. Pens 6 and 7 to our left were

moderately full but not at capacity.

I looked down and saw              standing in Pen 2 at the front of

the terrace at the comer with Pen 3. I could see a girl in her late

teens standing in Pen 3 toward the front. I recognised her from

previous Liverpool matches.

In the crowded pens below us the fans began hitting a beach ball

around. At one time the ball went onto the pitch and a Policeman or

Policewoman threw it back in. There was a very pleasant atmosphere.
________________________________                                          5


At no stage did I see anyone drinking alcohol in the ground.      I did

not smell liquor on anyone's breath at all.

Slightly to our left was a helmeted Policeman who was looking down

from the seats at the pens below. I am not sure in what sequence

events occurred but I recall seeing a young male person being held

aloft by supporters in Pen 3 and passed around in no particular

direction. Initially I thought it was a stupid prank but I then

noticed that he wasn't moving at all. This occurred at about the

time when the players were on the pitch warming up (not the warm up

directly before the match - the casual one which takes place well

before kick-off time).

I remember a man approaching the Policeman to my left and pointed down

at the crowded pens. He said something along the lines of 'It's too -

crowded down there'. The Policeman replied that the situation was

under control.

I think this man must have gone away for a short while. I then

became aware of his voice again. He was talking to the same

policeman and was in a very distressed state. He said that he'd got

relatives or friends in the pens and that they should be closed off.

I can't be sure but I think he mentioned two daughters. The

Policeman appeared frustrated and held his hands out and shrugged.

He replied 'I have no communication' or words to that effect. His

attitude seemed to have changed frcm one of officiousness to one of

hoplessness.

Up until kick-off time I did not see anyone climbing out of the

crowded pens. I knew they were too full but that is the usual

situation at Leppings Lane when Liverpool fans occupy the terraces.

The game had been ccrrmenced a few minutes when I became aware of

supporters climbing out of the crowded pens and onto the pitch. I
                                                                         6

saw one Policeman blocking one of these supporters. For a few

fleeting moments I thought it was a pitch invasion but then almost

immediately I realised it was a case of overspill.

I looked down into Pen 3 and saw a small gate being opened in the

front fence by Police. There was then an inmediate surge towards the

gate.My initial reaction was that the Police had made a mistake but

I later realised that the surge had been started by pressure frcm the

rear of the pen and not by people trying to get to the open gate. I

distinctly remember seeing a grey haired man who had been standing

midway up the terrace to the left of the gate. Immediately after the

gate had been opened I saw him standing sideways on close to the gate.

I was amazed at the distance he'd travelled during the surge. Had it

been an empty terrace he could not have run that fast. He had

travelled in a diagonal left to right direction across an area where I

would have expected him to have come across at least three safety

barriers. Although I realise that safety barriers must have been

demolished I didn't actually see any go down.

After the surge stopped the supporters were jammed solid and

motionless. Police were trying to pull people out of the open gate.

One Policeman climbed to the top of the fence and was shouting to

people to get back. He became angry when people wouldn't. A

colleague looked at him and shrugged. All along the fence there were

Policemen desperately trying to do something but not seeming to know

what.

To my right I saw people pulling supporters up frcm the pens below. I

became aware of people climbing over the side fences into Pen 2.

I was reluctant to pull supporters up myself because in the past I

have witnessed it and have always thought it was done by friends of

standing supporters to give them seats. I realise that I may have
_______________________________                                          7


been wrong in the past and that these supporters may also have been in

a crush. Within seconds I realised I'd got to help and I began

reaching down and pulling people up.

I must have helped to pull between six and ten people up. One of them

was a lad about ten years old and he was being held up by a man I took

to be his father. Ifcst of the fans I helped were exhausted to such an

extent that we had to straighten them up and then sit them down so

they could regain consciousness.

The ten year old lad I later saw outside the ground at a phone box. I

asked him where his dad was and he said he couldn't find him, I can't

remember what his father looked like.

During the time that we were pulling people up I saw the crushed

supporters ease back. I then saw    a huge pile of bodies at the front

of the terrace jammed against the concrete wall. The pile appeared

to be about ten deep and the bodies were completely lifeless. As far

as I was concerned they were all dead. Previously people in the crush

had looked to have blue complexions. These people had yellowy brown

complexions. I can't remember what any of the bodies looked like as

regards clothing etc.

I realised that there was littlemore I could do and took my father up

to the rear of the stand. We had a drink and for the first time I

heard a loudspeaker announcement asking people to leave the pitch. We

then left the stand and inmediately outside we saw between twelve and

fifteen bodies all in the recovery position but unattended. I kneeled

down with the intention of administering first aid to one of the

bodies but a St Johns ambulance man came up to me and just shook his

head. I knew then that it was too late and there was nothing I could

do.

With regard to the way the incident was dealt with I feel that the
        rank and file Policemen did the best they could bearing in mind the

        chaotic situation. They ware acting on their own initiative and were

        not being directed at all. The conduct of the Senior Police Officers

        was very poor. There appeared to be no line of comnunication down

        through the ranks and Policemen, particularly outside the ground were

        unsure as to what had happened. Many of them outside were surly. I

        think they would have been more sympathetic had they known how

        devasted the supporters felt.

        I feel strongly that if terraces are to be sub divided into pens with

        lateral dividing fences, then each pen should be numbered and have

        it's own turnstile. Tickets should clearly state what pen they give

        admittance to.

        I am aware that Carl and Nicholas HEWITT who were both on our coach

        died in the tragedy. I did not see either of them after we left our

        coach in Sheffield.



                                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:   160689

®CNES£
     5S TO SIGNATURE:                   POL PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                       STATION

^M E:           ROSS MARK
                WRIGHT

ADDRESS:
                              UMBERLEIGH, DEVON,

AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 26

OCCUPATION:     SELF EMPLOYED PAINTER AND DECORATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I neke
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 080589                                              R M WRIGHT (SIGNED)



        I am a supporter of Liverpool Football Club and am a member of the

        Cornwall Liverpool Supporters Club, an official supporters club.

        On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489) together with about forty to

        forty-five other members of the club I travelled to Sheffield to see

        the Liverpool v Notts Forest Semi-Final. We travelled by coach. I

        don't know the name of the coach firm but it came frcm Truro. I

        obtained my ticket frcm                who is the Secretary of the

        Supporters Club I belong to.    It cost six pounds and it didn't say

        anything about which Stand it was for - it simply stated, "Liverpool

        End" or "Liverpool Area"    I can't recall exactly which.

        There were no delays on the way to Sheffield and we travelled non-stop

        up to Sheffield.    There were no real traffic delays apart frcm when we

        go to Sheffield itself and then just slight delays down to normal

        traffic.

        Once inside Sheffield I noticed a lot of pubs open and supporters

        drinking outside.    Mostly were Nottingham Forest Supporters but I

        remanber one pub where seme Livepool Supporters were drinking outside.

        We arrived in Sheffield at about 1.30 pm (1330) to 1.45 pm (1345).
WRIGHT                 ROSS MARK                                           2


Unlike last year there didn't seem to be any directions for us to

follow and eventually we parked at around 2.15 pm (1415) in a road

about two-and-a-half to three miles away, North of the ground.     There

were probably about 25 other coaches parked there.     I don't know the

name of the road but I remember it was opposite an industrial estate

and there was a Gateway Supermarket, a Queensway Store and a Comet

Store.

On the way frcm the coach to the Ground there was no Police escort and

no Police giving directions.    Some Police were about but they seemed

to be standing about just chatting amongst themselves.

I didn't see any disorder fighting or drunkenness on the way to the

ground, everyone seemed in a happy mood.    There were the odd few

Nottingham Forest fans amongst the Liverpool fans but there was no

trouble. I got to the ground sometime between 2.45 pm (1445) and 2.50

pn (1450).   There was a fairly heavy crowd outside the gates leading

from Leppings Lane into the Ground.    The crowd was becoming heavier

towards the trunstiles (1 to 16).     I aimed for the middle of these

turnstiles but due to the crush of the crowd I was pushed off to the

left hand side.    Eventually I went through turnstile number 5,

something like that I didn't see any Police giving directions outside

the turnstiles at all.   There were three mounted Police Officers just

sitting there on their horses doing nothing despite fans asking them

to do something.   There was a Police Landrover with a PA System

telling everyone to take their time and that everyone would get in.       I

didn't see any Stewards at the turnstiles at all.

The crowd meant that I just had to go with the general movement of the

crowd, everyone was packed tightly together.     I expected the mounted

Police to try and disperse the crowd but I didn't see them

trying to do anything like that at all.
WRIGHT                 ROSS MARK                                             3


I saw some fans asking about five or six Police Officers on the Ground

side of the gate to the left of turnstiles 1 to 16 to do something

about the crush.   They were told to either, "Piss off." or    be

"Nicked."

I eventually entered through a turnstile and ray ticket was handed in.

I didn't see any gates open other than the turnstiles and I didn't

witness the opening of any gates.      I did see maybe 15 or more fans

scaling the walls to the side and above the turnstiles and I'm sure

that some Police Officers the other side of the wall were helping them

over.

Once through the turnstiles I didn't see any signs directing which

way to go.   I knew the tunnel opposite the turnstiles led straight

down to behind the goalmouth as I'd been to the same semi-final in

1988 (000088) at Hillsborough but because of the crush outside I knew

that there was no way I was going to go behind the goal mouth.       I knew

that by going off to the left I could get around to Pen number seven

and get a good vantage point.

I didn' t have any trouble at all in getting to Pen 7, there were no

signs and no Police Officers or Stewards telling us which way to go,

but having been there in 1988 (000088) I knew which way to go.       I was

surprised at how few people were going off to the left.     I only

counted about eight people going up the steps to Pen 7.     When I got to

Pen 7 although there   were a lot of fans in there       I was surprisedhow

easy it was to get a   good vantage point.

Between getting through the turnstiles and into Pen 7 I didn't witness

any disorder and I didn't see anyone consuming any alcohol.

Being in Pen 7 I didn't see, and couldn't see really, much of what was

actually going on in   Pens 3 and 4.    I didn't see     a barrier breakin

Pen 3, obviously I wasn't   by it.     There was no crush in Pen 7 and I
WRIGHT                 ROSS MARK                                           4

didn't see any fights or anything like that at all.     It was about 2

mintues past 3 (1502) when I finally took up ray vantage point in Pen

7.

One minute everyone in Pens 3 and 4 seemed to be surging and

chanting etc but suddenly it started to go quiet.

Eventually I began to realise that people over behind the goal were in

trouble and people were beginning to try and climb out, out onto the

pitch behind the goalmouth.   Some were being pushed back in by

the Police.    I saw some Police Officers letting some people out of

gates onto the pitch and some Police Officers pushing people back in

through the gates.    I also saw people being passed out over the

fence, they were obviously in a bad way and some looked dead.

I saw some people reaching up, grabbing the overhang of the fence

with their hands, trying to pull themselves up and out.    Some

Police were banging the hands of these people to make them let go.

Some Police were just standing about whilst some, like two women

Police Officers were getting stuck in trying to help people.

I was disgusted by some Police Officers who were standing over

somebody who was obviously dead.   They were laughing and joking with

one another.

The Police generally seemeed disorganised, as if they didn't know what

to do.   There didn't seem to be anybody in authority directing

them into some sort of organised action to help the people in the

pens.    Eventually I heard an announcementover the PA system telling

people to stay where they were and not     to     go outside so as    toprevent

the emergency services getting the injured out.     I stayed in the

Ground until about 4.30 pm (1630) when I eventually left of

ray own accord.   I felt it was wrong in   one way that we had        to

remain to see the horrific sights that we had to watch.
WRIGHT                 ROSS MARK                                           5


I didn't see anything that I would consider to be a criminal offence.

Generally I feel that unlike last year there was a lack of direction

to the ground which could well have caused a lot of people getting to

the ground late.   Also I believe that last year the pubs were shut so

if alcohol did have anyting to do with it it would

have helped if the pubs had been closed down.

There seemed to be a general lack of control by the Police outside the

ground and it seemed fron ray own personal experience that when

asked to do something they were either not interested or were

downright rude.    It also seems to me that the Police were slow to

react and more surprisingly when it was obvious what had happened and

sane police were doing what they could others still just stood around

doing nothing.

It was just before I got through the turnstile that a man in    front of

me suddenly stopped and turned.    I was right up against him and I was

being pushed through by the crowd as he stopped I was

pushed against him and ray muscles in ray left shoulder were sprained

and twisted.
        WRIGHT              ROSS MARK


                                            R M Wright SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   INSP 2699 CALVERT

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                        LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATIONS


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                           (SIGNED)



       At about 11.15 am (1115) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I

       left bane in                 Toxteth, with my son,                    , who

       is                                                              and

                                                                      in one car,

       and

                                                              in the other car.

       We all support Liverpool PC and we all had tickets to the Semi Cup

       Final at Sheffield.           arranged the purchase of the tickets

       because of his contacts in the Club.

       Five of us had    6 tickets but        had a   14 ticket for the stands.

       We didn't stop anywhere on route to Sheffield.       We had all we needed

       with us.

       We travelled via M62 but we turned off to Salford, Manchester, I think

       it's A508 turn off and then we took the main road out of Manchester

       into Sheffield.

       There was a load of delays along this road and we couldn't figure out

       why because there were no roadworks.     We were held up at about

       12pm (1200) until 1245pm (1245).     We turned off and went into
Sheffield through the Snake Pass.

We arrived in Sheffield at about 2.30pm (1430).   On the way to the

ground there were a number of Police diversions but there were no

Police escorts to the match.

We came in along the A61 Penistone Lane way and          knew a parking

place about three minutes walk from the ground.

On the way to the ground we saw a number of Notts Forest supporters

singing and chanting but there were no signs of violence and it was

the same as I walked from the car to the entrance in Leppings Lane.

I got to the gates at about 2.40pm (1440) and there was thousands of

people waiting outside the outer entrance but there were no orderly

queuing and it was a free for all and chaos outside.

All the Police I saw outside these outer gates was one Policeman on

a horse and he didn't stand a chance of controlling the crowds.

I was worried that we wouldn't get into the grounds for the start of

the match and I think the rest of the crowd were in the same mind.

There were no stewards that I could see outside the outer gates the

Police horse seemed to panic at one point and went out of control and

that's when I felt the crowd surge forward because I was in the middle

of it at that time.

I went in through the outer gates and when I got to the outer

enclosure I looked around and I had lost my son          I had never

experienced anything like the crowds and the pressure from the people

before and I panicked.

I just wanted to get away from the crush so I got up on a wall to my

left and this was between the North Stand and the entrance to the

terraces.

I got up on the wall and I was determined not to get down even though

I couldn't find my son, until the crowd had gone down.
I shouted into the crowd for       but I couldn't find him.

I saw a Policeman come around from the side of the wall where the

turnstiles to the terraces were and he shouted to the crowds that the

gates were open and I remember the time was 2.55pm (1455), when he

shouted this.

Hie crowds started to filter off around the comer and then I jumped

down and followed the rest around the comer.

There were people still going in through the turnstiles but after the

Policeman shouted the majority of the crowd went around the comer in

through the side gate and I followed them.

They were blue old type corregated gates that we went through and it

was about 10 feet (10') wide.   As I walked     through I sawmyson

inside the ground near to the gates and hewas crying.

The first and only thing we could see was the goal area through the

tunnel there was no directions telling you to get to the left or right

around the stands.   I couldn't see any stewards or Police directing

people before the tunnel but there was a steward and a group of Police

near to the gates but they weren't giving directions.

There wasn't anyone gaining entry illegally to the grounds at this

time over the wall but there were people on the walls outside getting

out of the crush, there must have been about a dozen or so.

We walked towards the tunnel entrance and got about 20 feet (20')

down and it was just full of people and they didn't appear to be

moving.

I still had my ticket with me and I wasn't      asked to showitby

anyone as I entered in through the gate and I saw the crowd and

decided that nobody was going anywhere.

I turned around with the rest of the group and decided to go to the

stands and this would have been about 3pm (1500)   when the match
_________________________                                                4

started.

We walked back and saw some swing open doors to the stands which were

open and we walked through.

I didn't see these gates open when we got in at first all you noticed

was the tunnel when you went in.

There were no trouble or fighting inside the turnstiles and we walked

easily through these gates into the entrance to the West Stand.

There were four Police and two Stewards on the stairs checking tickets

but there was too many people going through and we weren't asked.

We went into the stands and ended up about twelve seats back about a

quarter of the way back from the left hand side as you look at the

pitch. This was at about two minutes past three (1502) when we sat

down and the match had started.

The stands were full and we were sitting about two or three to a seat.

One bloke came up and said we were sitting in his seat.

When I looked down into the terraces I could see the crowds wedged

into the fences at the front of the pitch.

I knew something bad was going on and I wasn't taking much notice

of the match.

As soon as we sat down I saw people climbing over the fencing onto the

pitch.     I couldn't see any surge from the crowds towards the front but

it was basically a big build up of pressure at the two pens below at

the back of the goal.

There were quite a few people climbing over the fencing onto the pitch

and these were falling down onto the ground when they got over.

There were a number of Police on the pitch with St Johns Ambulance and

some supporters and most of these were helping the people injured.

After about 2 or 3 minutes after I sat down I saw a Policeman go

over to the referee and stop the match, the whistle was blown and all
_______________________________                                            5


the players went off.

I saw some of the fans on the pitch run over towards the the back of

the ground to my left and start pulling down the placards and

advertising boards and run back the the goal with them.

Seme of the fans and Policemen started tearing at the fencing in Pen

No. 3 trying to pull it down but there was total confusion and

some of the Police were trying to pull the fans off that were pulling

at the fencing.

I also noticed that as some of the peqple climbed over they were

knocked back by Policemen.

Hie fencing in Pen 3 right behind the goal got pulled up and I

realised that there were bodies being brought out through the gap.     I

must have counted about five or six bodies being took out.

I noticed particularly one girl that must have been about 20 years

old and one Policewoman banging at her chest trying to start her heart

again.

It soon started to fill up on the pitch and I saw Ambulancing coming

onto the pitch and saw a number of firemen with oxygen breathing

apparatus helping the injured.

There were lots of people on the pitch and there was getting more and

more as the time went on.

I noticed there was a line of Police on the half way line and there

was chanting from the Notts Forest End and I saw some of the fans frcm

the Liverpool end run up towards the opposite end but this was before

the Police line was formed.

I only stopped for about 5 to 10 minutes watching the crowd and

all that time I never saw any of the gates opened in the fencing to

relieve the pressure on the crowd.

I turned around and walked out of the stands towards the entrance
                                                                         6


where I came in.

I saw a number of bodies lined up outside the turnstiles against the

wall near to the river on the way which would have been about 3 .30 pm

(1530).

I never heard any loud speaker announcement to leave the grounds but I

could hear the tannoy but couldn't make out what they were saying

because it wasn't loud enough.

After the match was stopped I don't think anyone knew what was going

on and they couldn't handle what was happening, anyway after they did

realise   it was just panic.

I didn't know anyone that was killed at the match at the time but I

later found out that there was a local lad killed.

The fact that the fencing around the ground obviously lead to cause of

the people being killed.

I feel that because of the number of supporters the Liverpool team

have the gates should have been reversed and they should have had the

Kop End of the ground.

I've been to the ground before four times before last year, which

was the Semi Final against Liverpool and Notts Forest and I left at

the same time as I went to this match and exactly the same way and

there were no hold-ups and everyone got there early and there was no

trouble getting into the ground, but this time everyone seemed to be

arriving at the ground late for some reason.

Last year there was no crushes as I experienced going this time.

When I was outside the ground at the outer entrance I thought that I

was going to die in the crush, and after the gates, that's why I

climbed on to the wall     I've never experienced anything like that

before at a football match.

I love Liverpool but I was willing to stop on that wall until 5 o'clock
        (1700) if need be just to get away from that crowd.

        If they hadn't opened the gates to the ground someone would have died

        outside, I'm sure of it.



                                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:    020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                PC
                                                                          STATION
 NAME:          PETER
0               WELLS

ADDRESS:


AOS / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     RETIRED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 013 pages, each signed
by   i is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                            (SIGNED)



         I am a married man living at the above address with ray wife.

         I am a retired Fire Officer and have been for the past thirteen months.

         I am a Divisional Superintendent of the St Johns Ambulance Brigade

         and have been since 1983 (000083), but have been involved with the St

         Johns since 1961 (000061), as an Associate Member and a full member

         since 1977 (000077).    I have also been a First Aid Instructor since

         1978 (000078). Over the past four years I have been responsible for

         the overall organisation of the St Johns at the Sheffield Wednesday

         ground at Hillsborough.     The arrangements for league matches are for

         twelve to twenty St Johns Officers and one ambulance but for longer

         matches, like Semi Final fixtures, I would expect up to thirty

         Officers and two ambulances to be in attendance plus back up from the

         County Ambulance Service.

         Up to this year, I have had involvement with two previous Semi Final

         fixtures and other large organised events and our arrangements have

         also proved adequate.

         On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended the F A Cup Semi Final

         Fixture, Liverpool and Notts Forest, with ray wife,
WELLS                  PETER                                                 2

        (Nursing member) and______________ (Ambulance member)

travelling in our own ambulance, registered number             and

arriving at the ground at about 1355 hours.      We travelled from our

Headquarters, 131 Psalter Lane, Ecclesall, to the ground via Penistone

Road, and at that road I saw large groups of Notts Forest fans, both

walking to the ground and in vehicles.    All these fans were in a

carnival type good mood and I saw no trouble.

I can say that on passing the various Public Houses, along our route,

I saw persons outside consuming drink, so I therefore assumed that

they were full inside.    I also saw a number of fans, few in number,

drinking from cans, which I presumed to be beer.

All the Licensed Houses we passed were either on Penistone Road or

adjacent to it.

We entered the ground via the car park entrance off Penistone Road

North, and to the rear of the South Stand, where the Ambulance was to

be based.

We all left the ambulance and reported at the First Aid Room, where

the majority of our members were already in attendance.     The St Johns

members usually involved work from half an hour or so prior to start

of normal matches till the end but for longer matches like Semi

Finals, we usually attend 1300 hours or so till the end.

Upon the arrival of the rest of the members, all the members were

allocated positions by                (Div Supt) and by 1415 hours,

all members were in their allocated positions.

I and my team were allocated to POINT Z, the corner of the SOUTH STM©

and SPIQN KOP.    My team consisted of myself,                  (ambulance

member) and my wife,                                         and

        Nursing members). I was in possession of a radio, as was my

wife, which gives contact with all four comer points and the radio
WELLS                  PETER


in the First Aid roan.   My radio is the control point.

 In addition to the two ambulances we had in attendance, one being at

the rear of the South Stand and the other being outside the First Aid

Room, we had two stretcher trolleys, one in my comer and the other

directly opposite in the comer of the West and North stands, where

            was.

Wider normal circumstances this gives us the availability of a

stretcher trolley at either end of the ground.

In addition to these, we have back up of two more per ambulance plus

four wire mesh stretchers in the First Aid Roan.   Each ambulance

contains a full kit as per our normal County ambulances.

At about 1445 hours, I toured all four comers to check all was in

order and finding it in order, I returned to my original position.     I

did check with each comer that they were aware of the emergency

procedure on hearing "MR MEADOWS REQUIRED IN THE POLICE ROOM."

I was satisfied they were all conversant with the procedure, which

involves me having contact with a Senior Police Officer who then

takes control of us.

Upon my return to Point Z, it was noticeable that the KOP and SOUTH

STAND were more or less full whereas the WEST ST M ® contained less

people than I would have expected at that time, but the centre pens

of that stand were relatively full.   On reflection, I recall that

these pens had been noticeably full since our arrival.

The teams came out and shortly before the kick off I noticed that

several fans were climbing over the perimeter fence directly behind

the goal (West Stand). I would say they were climbing over an area

about the total length of pens three and four.

At this point I assumed it to be a pitch invasion or similar till I

saw our members fron each of the WEST ST M ® comers move towards the
WELLS                  PETER


centre.    Especially, I noticed Philip SAXTON moving back and forth,

and fans giving me the impression they were relieved to be out of the

pens and making to go back to assist others.

By this time the kick off had taken place.       No message had come over

the radio and so I made my way down there, where I could see about a

dozen or so Police Officers at the fence and our members helping fans

over the perimeter fencing.

I went to a point of the perimeter fence slightly to the right of the

junction of pens two and three.    Upon arrival it was obvious that

fans were being crushed against the fence by their congested faces,

obviously difficulty in breathing and distress.      To me it was

obvious that a lot of people were going to die due to the numbers

behind them.

I could hear Police Officers shouting and pleading for the fans to go

back.    I jumped up on the hoardings to lend my voice to it, but

became aware that it was impossible for them to go back due to the

sheer numbers.

At this point I was aware of four girls who stood out from the rest

of those at the front due to the purply blue colour of their faces.

I immediately attempted to clear

                           their airways open.    I did this by forcing

my hands through the fencing and into their mouths.      I attempted to

tilt one girl's head back but was unable to do so because of the

crush.    All I could do was to hook the tongue forward to try and

clear the airway but due to the pressure they were unable to breath

as their chests were being compressed.

I realised that oxygen may be of assistance and on turning I was

aware of the remainder of my group being in attendance and a young

lad being placed on the trolley.
WELLS                  PETER                                                   5


With the assistance of some Police Officers, I tried to pull the

mesh part of the fencing down but was unable to do so as the pressure

of the fans was too great to gain any leverage.     During the course of

this, a piece of concrete struck the fence about head height,

slightly to my left, causing me to be showered with fragments.        I

cannot describe the size of it due to an instinctive reaction to duck.

Realising the fencing was not going to move, I turned to see a Police

Inspector using his radio and I heard the words 'Major Disaster'.          I

asked him if he knew the whereabouts of any tools to cut the

fencing.   He shook his head and continued to use his radio.

With _____________     I ran to our ambulance, returning with one

oxygen cylinder (a type F cylinder containing 1360 litres with a

preset valve on the top with two settings of medium and high.       Medium

gives 2 litres per minute and high 4 litres per minute.        It is purely

a giving set not a resuscitator).

Back at my original    position at the fencing,I fed the tube through

the fencing.    Afterremoving the face mask to those I could     see and

reach, picking those that appeared most distressed.    The setting was

on high, where I switched it on and that's how it remained.

The first person I gave oxygen to was the young girl I'd helped

earlier by hooking her tongue out                          \    Her arms

were pinned to her side by the pressure of people and her face was

pressed tight against the fence.

                                    I                  held her tongue

forward to keep the airway clear, as I attempted to feed the oxygen,

via the tube.    The cylinder I'd placed near to the fence and the tube

is approximately three to four foot long (3'to 4'). I shouted to the

girl and she looked at me.     She then gave a horrible gurgle, rolled

her eyes up into her head and died.     This girl was aged in her
WELLS                   PETER


twenties, with dark hair, wearing a dark coloured coat and was

positioned about two feet to the right of the stancheon between pens

two and three. It was the right side of her face which was pressed

into the fencing. It is my assumption she died, as she gave the full

appearance of so doing.     I was convinced and moved onto assist others

along the fencing. Meanwhile the gates had been opened and the Police

were trying to drag people out but couldn't due to the tangled web of

people's arms and legs.

At this point I went to the gate on Pen 3, where four or five Police

Officers were trying to get people out.     One fan had fallen,

attempting to get out, in the gateway, and was trapped half in half

out by the volume of other persons trying to get out.    He was

screaming in agony as his leg (possibly his right leg - I think) was

trapped due to someone falling over his lower leg and others falling

over that person.

After a while the gateway was cleared and people were being slowly

removed through the gateway and over the fencing.    The ones who could

walk were being cleared towards the centre of the pitch and treated

by our members, etc.     Those that were in need of resuscitation were

being laid out where there was available space.     Everywhere I looked

I could see resuscitation being carried out by Police, St Johns, fans

and people who said they were doctors. I only saw one person whcm I

knew to be a Doctor, and that was the Club Doctor, Dr PURCELL.

At this point people (Police Officers, etc) had entered the gateway

and were bringing people out.     Some were walking, seme were

unconscious and some apparently dead.     I turned my attention to

those that were breathing but in difficulties, with a view to

administer oxygen.     However, I was called across by a man, who I have

since discovered after seeing his picture in the press and
WELLS                 PETER


television, to be Dr PHILLIPS, to go to him by him shouting that he

required oxygen for a casualty he was working on.

I went across and knelt by the casualty, feeding the tube from the

oxygen cylinder into him.     After clearing the airway I noticed the

casualty's chest start to rise, which indicated to me that oxygen was

entering the lungs.   Meanwhile Dr PHILLIPS was thumping the chest of

the casualty, in my opinion over zealously, and at the same time

shouting, "COME ON YOU BASTARDS".

After a short period he said something to the effect, "It's no use

we've lost him."   I moved on.

I can only describe that person as a white male, aged 20/30, 15

stone, 5'8/10 tall.

Over the following period of time I gave mouth to mouth to two

people, assisted one of our members, A/M,            \ by doing chest

compressions, until a Doctor told us we were wasting our time, try

someone else.   I then returned to administering oxygen.

It was around this time that I could see that things were easing as

fans, ambulance, Police, etc, were removing people on stretchers,

pieces of hoarding and anything that could be utilised.

During the time I was going round administering the oxygen, I saw

        my wife, looking very dejected, with vomit all down her front

and blood on her face.    In view this I told              I would

fetch the ambulance from behind the South Stand and start helping the

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service to ferry people to the

hospitals and requested          to crew with me

I collected the ambulance and as I was leaving the car park,

joined me.   We drove to the loading point at the rear of the Police

Control Box and then became aware of problems that had occurred in

the tunnel beneath the West Stand.    With the assistance of the
WELLS                PETER


Police, I reversed the ambulance towards LEPPINGS LANE.

We were loaded with a male fan with suspected internal injuries, and

a female fan who had been crushed and suffered with Asthma.

En route to the Northern General Hospital, escorted by Police motor

cycles, the girl encountered breathing difficulties and had to be

sustained.

We dropped those off and returned under Police escort.

Upon our arrival back ambulance crews from Notts and Derby were in

attendance and we were put into a standby position.

It was at this moment on checking my watch, I saw it was 1730 hours.

We went to the First Aid Room and helped out there.   After collecting

kit, etc, and tidying up, we left at about 1815 hours.

I would like to say that during this incident I came across our

members, Police and fans valiantly trying to save lives by mouth to

mouth, even though the casualties were vomiting and bleeding.

They were not deterred.   Seme of our cadets were assisting to hold

open airways and comforting casualties.

Seme of the casualties were so badly injured by crushing that their

chest wall had collapsed, making heart compressions inpossible.

I would further add that the conduct of the LIVERPOOL fans who

assisted was fantastic, as were the efforts of the Police, Doctors

and indeed our own St Johns members.

Apart from the concrete incident and another where seme fan(s) made

seme lewd comments about a female casualty, I saw no other

obstructive behaviour.

With regard to the Police Inspector I mentioned earlier, I cannot

describe him but I 've seen him before at Sheffield Wednesday matches

and I feel I could pick him out if required.With regard to the

administration of oxygen, it has been reported by
WELLS                 PETER


Dr PHILLIPS in the press that the oxygen cylnder he was provided with

was empty.   This is totally untrue, I was, as I've said earlier, the

person with the cylinder.     I checked it prior to leaving HQ as part

of ray driver's duties and can say it was almost full.    A full

cylinder on a high setting will last five hours, 40 minutes, that's

the contents of 1360 litres divided by 4 litres per minute.        I still

have the cylinder on the ambulance and it shows half full.      I will

retain the cylinder   (Ref FW/l)(Ex No             ) if required.

With regard to alcohol, I did not see any alcohol consumed within the

ground nor any brought in.

Prior to the match commencing, around 1455 hours, I was told by a

Police Constable that there was an attempt to delay the kick off.        I

informed              at Point 1, the comer of North Stand and Spion

Kop, personally as I couldn't get through on the radio due to the

spectator noise.

At this match we had twenty five adult members, five senior cadets

and three junior cadets on duty.

I produce a photocopy plan (Ref FW/2) (Ex No             ) of the ground

on which I 've marked ray position at the time prior to kick off with a

mark 'A' and also the position of the young girl I mentioned from Pen
                                      /

three as 'B'.
        WELLS             PETER


                                           P Wells SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:     020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

 NAME:        JOHN EDMUND
)             SHREWSBURY

ADDRESS:      BBC, KINGSTON HSE, RICHMOND WAY
               LONDON, WEST 14

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:   TELEVISION PRODUCER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
b y me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                           JOHN SHREWSBURY (SIGNED)



         I am a married man and I live at

         an employed by B.B.C Television as a producer and work on all

         sporting events but particularly golf and football.

         I am the series producer for all Match of the Day football matches

         throughout the 1988/89 (000088/000089) season.     I have been covering

         football matches for the last eighteen years and I have been series

         producer for Match of the Day for the last five years.

         It was decided that the F.A Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and

         Nottingham Forest and played at Hillsborough Football Ground was to

         be the Match of the Day for that weekend and accordingly I made

         arrangements to cover and record the match.     In consultation with the

         management of Sheffield Wednesday Football club I decided where each

         of the cameras was to be positioned within the ground.    On this day I

         had available to me eight cameras.     Three of the cameras were on the

         main rostrum in the South Stand.     Another was on the track

         approximately eight yards to the left of the players tunnel as you

         face the pitch.    This camera was operated by a first name of

         Camera five was positioned level with the eighteen yard line at the
SHREWSBURY              JOHN    EDMUND                                             2

West End of the ground.        It was in the stand itself (South Stand)

some 12 feet about ground level.         This was operated by

Camera 6 was a similar position at the Spion Kop end of the ground

and operated by another operator who I can't remember at present.

Camera 7 was at the rear of the West Stand on a specially

constructed rostrum.     The cameraman was                      Camera eight

was a hand held camera operating between the Spion Kop Goal to the

Players Tunnel.     The cameraman was

I myself was in the Ifobile Control room.       This vehicle was in the car

park of the football club between the West and South Stands.          In

this control room I have a monitor for each camera and in the van I

had an assistant,                   and an engineering manager,

_____ . It is my job from this location to transmit the pictures

back to Television Centre.       It is my choice which of the eight camera

pictures I transmit back to Television Centre.

On this day there were four broadcasters, the match commentator John

MOTSQN Match of the Day presenter Desmond LYNHAM and Jimmy HILL.

Also there was Grandstand reporter                         All four were

either on the camera rostrum or on the grandstand.        All would have

had the best view out of all the B.B.C staff.

On the day itself I arrived at 10.30 am (1030) and ensured everything

was in order and held a rehersal at 11.00 am. (1100)       Here John MDTSON

discussed with me his introduction to the match itself.         His

introduction was to depict a large capacity crowd on a sunny afternoon.

I therefore knew that I had to transmit certain views of the crowd.            I

returned to the mobile control room following lunch and the time would

have been about 2.15 pm. (1415)

At 2.30 pm (1430) I took control of the cameras and concentrated on

preparing the introduction from this time on we prepared the opening
SHREWSBURY              JOHN   EDMUND                                        3


to the match.   The cameras look around for the shots we need and John

M3TS0N runs through his opening commentary. He would have done it at

least twice. At about 2.45 pm (1445) John MOTSGN spoke with me about

the introduction and said that he could not call it a capacity crowd

because the pens at each of the West Stand were almost empty.     I have

a facility to talk to him without the conversation being recorded.       I

agreed with him. At about the same time I could see that the Liverpool

supporters in the West Stand looked excited and were surging forward.

I remember requesting the Video Tape assistant producer to record the

excitment, as it was at this time in case it was to be used at a

later stage. At this time it appeared nothing more than excitment and

I continued with the introduction followed shortly afterwards by the

teams coming onto the pitch.

I concentrated on the monitors in the control room and in particular

the start of the match.     One of the cameras did show people climbing

the fence but it was only one or two and did not appear unusual.       The

first I knew that something was wrong was when I saw the policeman

run onto the pitch and speak to the referee.    As normal whilst the

match is in progress the cameras concentrate on this alone.     I had

been informed by one of the two stage managers that people were

coining over the fence at one end of the ground but I did not pay

attention to this until the policeman came onto the pitch. Once that

I saw that the players were coming off the pitch I directed the

cameras to the crowd in the West Stand so that I could see what was

happening.   As soon as I saw the pictures of the crowd I realised it

was a major incident.     People were desperate and panicking to get

over the fencing and not in the normal manner that I have seen many

times before when they just want to get onto the pitch.

I carried on with the pictures and was informed that Grandstand was
SHREWSBURY             JOHN   EDMUND                                         4


to cone to the pictures live because of the incident.       This was

transmitted and I continued doing so for the next two hours.        During

the whole of the disaster I monitored my cameras for the entire time

and could clearly observe what had happened.       At no time did I leave

the control vehicle after I entered it at 2.15 pn (1415) and I have no

direct knowledge of what happened outside the gates at the Leppings

Lane end of the ground.

During the afternoon I transmitted on several occasions live pictures

of the disaster but paid attention not to show people fighting for

life or pictures showing people in a worse state.       It was difficult

not to show people in a distressed state as everyone was so

distressed at the incident. The main priority was to show what was

happening but without dwelling on personal tragedy. I do recall one

of my stage managers                   Informing me that he was jostled by

a distraught spectator at one point during the afternoon.       One other

point comes to mind.   During the afternoon we were to transmit live

from the players tunnel an interview live with Graham KELLY of the

Football Association but spectators saw us and were clearly upset and

a Police Officer who I do not know informed my stage manager to stop

the proposed interview.   It was eventually done inside the stand.

For information my second stage manager was

A further point another camerman was at the West End of the ground

filming independently for Match of the Day but he was not under my

direction. He was

Where I talk about the pens at each end of the West Stand it would

actually be more correct to say they were only half full.
        SHREWSBURY          JOHN   EDMUND


                                                JOHN SHREWSBURY SIOIED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     INSP.7250 S R BURROWS
                                                                       STATION

 NAME:        JOHN WALKER
ft            M3TSQN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     BROADCASTER AND JOURNALIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by ne, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                             John Motson (SIGNED)



         I am a football commentator with BBC Television and have been for the

         last 18 years. I have travelled extensively watching football and

         reporting the game at home and abroad during that period and have

         vrorked inside nearly all the football grounds in England.

         On Saturday April 15th 1989 (150489) I was located in Sheffield to

         cover the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham

         Forest.   I had covered the same match at the same Hillsborough ground

         a year earlier so I was familiar with the ground and its surroundings.

         I arrived at the ground at 11 am (1100) that morning and made contact

         with my producer, John SHREWSBURY.   Together we went through our pre­

         match rehearsal routine with the cameramen, and I inspected my

         commentating position on the camera rostrum which is situated on the

         roof of the South Stand.   From there I have an excellent view of the

         inside of the arena, but I cannot see the crowd outside.

         Between 12.15 (1215) and 1.30 (1330) I was inside the reception area

         watching the football previews on television.   At 1.35 (1335) I made

         my way into the dressing room corridor to check the personnel for

         the match as and when the teams arrived.



                                                                                  1110
MOTSON                 JOHN WALKER                                         2


I went into the referee's room to check the team sheets which is our

normal custom, and while I was there the referee was visited by a

senior Police Officer.   I did not listen intently to their

conversation because I assumed it was private and I was still jotting

down names on my board of notes, but it sounded as though they were

talking about what the referee would do if there was an emergency.

They had a procedure vrorked out with a code vrord I gathered.

After speaking to players and coaches on both sides I left the

dressing rocm corridor at 2.20 (1420) and made my way upstairs, via

the back of the South Stand and a walkway, on to my camera position.

I used a small hut at the end of the rostrum to make my final notes

while Desmond LYNAM recorded his links to camera for that evenings

'Match of the Day" programme.

When Desmond had finished I moved into my seat in the centre of the

platform, and put on the headphones to ccmnunicate with John

Shrewsbury.   We had vrorked out a pre-arranged sequence of camera shots

and commentary for our introduction when the teams ran out.      As they

were not due out until 2.55 (1455) we rehearsed this sequence at 2.45

(1445) or maybe a minute or two later over again.   During one of

these rehearsals I stopped my prepared vrords over John's picture of

the Leppings Lane End, where the Liverpool fans were standing on the

terraces and sitting in the stand above.

The reason I stopped was that part of my script talked about 'an all

ticket capacity crowd' but I suddenly spotted that two 'end' sections

of the Leppings Lane terrace were only just over half full.      There

was plenty of rocm in these two 'wing' sections which I have since

gathered are numbered 1,2,5,6 and 7.   There were several steps near

the front of these sections with nobody standing on them, such was

the amount of space.   However, I must also stress that the two
MOTSON               JOHN WALKER                                          3


central sections, which I later learned are numbered 3 and 4, were

fully occupied and gave the usual impression of a solid, heaving mass

of fans who were chanting, singing and clapping.   I said to John

Shrewsbury I was surprised there was so much space in the wing

terrace, and he moved the camera across to prove the point.    I said I

thought it looked as though two thousand ticket holders had not

turned up.

I later learned they were still outside the ground waiting to get in.

At this time, around 2.45 (1445) or 2.47 (1447) I was not aware of

any panic in the crowd, although the cameras producing the pictures

as well as myself were on the rostrum seme distance away, and I would

not have been aware if certain individuals were experiencing

discomfort at this time.

When the teams ran out we went through our prepared script but I don't

remember using the vrord capacity and in any event John Shrewsbury

used a 'shot' of the centre section of the Leppings Lane terrace to

illustrate the Liverpool support.   Neither of us were aware of

anything untoward and the pre-match preliminaries took place as

normal both on the field and in the television control room.

By now I have to say I was concentrating only on the pitch because

the teams were getting ready to kick off as the clock moved round to

3.p.m. (1500)   At no time did I hear or see anything that suggested

the kick off might be delayed.

I started my normal match corrmentary at the kick off, and proceeded

to describe the opening three or four minutes play.   After about four

mintues I heard John Shrewsbury say in my headphones that one of his

cameras had spotted seme 'crowd problems' at the Liverpool end and

that when the ball went out of play we would have to reflect the fact

that fans had ccme and were continuing to ccme over the fence.
MOTSQN                 JOHN WALKER                                         4


In this same period of sixty seconds, at the other end of the ground,

Peter Beardsley hit the crossbar and there was a huge roar from the

Liverpool end.    I was later told by the referee that the crowd surged

violently forward towards the perimeter fence at that point.

I was still watching the game, because the ball remained in play and

Nottingham Forest broke away to attack the Leppings Lane end.    We were

in the sixth minute of play.    As the ball ran towards the Liverpool

goal on the far side of the field I was aware there were spectators

on the pitch, standing in the goal area to the left of the Liverpool

goal as I looked.    They had obviously spilled over from the Leppings

Lane terrace.

At this same moment a police officer wearing what looked like a
                                 *
coloured bib over his uniform ran on to the pitch while the ball was

still moving, ran up to referee Lewis and clearly told him there were

problems in the crowd.    Obviously I could not hear what he said, but

it was serious enough for the referee to stop the game instantly and

take the teams off the field. One or two players looked bewildered

including Steve Nicol of Liverpool, who was surrounded by several

supporters from the overspill who seemed to be stressing to him that

there was a serious problem.

Now that the game was halted I continued to commentate on what I

could see of the disturbance.   There were now a growing number of

spectators on the pitch and others were climbing the barriers.    There

were police officers in front of the perimeter fence who at this

point appeared to be trying to wave the fans back.

I must stress that from where I was sitting, seme 60 yards (60 yds)

away and in a very high position, it looked at first like a genuine

'overspill' as though people had climbed out to avoid being

overcrowded.    I had seen that happen on many grounds in the past,
rOTSON                  JOHN WALKER                                           5


and quite often within a matter of minutes the police re-locate them

in another part of the ground.

At this point I stopped irry recorded 'Match of the Day' carmentary and

within a matter of two or three mintues 'Grandstand' our live

afternoon Sports Progranme came across for an actuality report from me.

Obviously I had no direct information from down on the pitch but John

Shrewsbury told me in my headphones that it was understood the crush

had been caused by a door/gate being forced open and fans without

tickets rushing into the back of the already crowded central area.        I

did my Grandstand report on these lines and stressed that we had no

evidence of any hooliganism.

At this point I would like to state that several more 'Grandstand'

reports followed, done by me with interjections from reporters down

near the pitch, at regular intervals during the afternoon.     I cannot

remember precisely what facts emerged in each account, but they are

all on the videotape submitted to the inquiry by the BBC.

Fran my position it was difficult to assess the extent of the incident

for several minutes, simply because my view of the terrace was now

partially blocked by police officers and fans who had ccme over the

fences.     I was certainly totally unaware of how serious it was.

However, from the way certain people were now lying down on the

pitch, or wandering about dazed, it was clear there were seme

injuries.    What I also noticed was that there was absolutley no

overcrowding in sections 1, 2, 6, or 7 which I mentioned earlier

seemed under-full.     I wondered why those in the over crowded central

section were unable to move sideways to avoid the crush, then realised

that the 'side fences' running down the sectioned areas did not appear

from my view to have any 'side gates' which could be opened in an

emergency.    I did not see any stewards or police standing near the
MOTSON                JOHN WALKER                                          6


side fences to suggest they were moving spectators out of 3 and 4

into the safety of the adjacent areas.

After a few minutes it seemed that the police at the front of the

terrace, who were now being reinforced by others coming from the

other end of the ground, were opening the emergency door at the front

of the perimeter fence.    I could see people being carried out and

stumbling out of their own accord.    A lot of fans seemed to be helping

each other because at this point the emergency services had not

arrived and the police and St John Ambulance crews looked as though

they badly needed reinforcements.

It also became clear, although I cannot be specific now about the

exact time, that the police were starting to tear at the actual

fencing to try to create a wider exit.    Then an ambulance made its

way round the pitch to the Leppings Lane end.

At this point I remember seeing one stretcher carried across the

pitch.   Then seme of the supporters on the pitch who were unhurt

started to run to the perimeter advertising boards, tear them down

and carry them across as makeshift stretchers.   Many fans were

carried away on them to the far end of the ground - I assumed they

were either injured or concussed and were being taken to a first aid

post or to an ambulance.

As time went on, and I was not checking my watch, further

reinforcements arrived including the fire brigade.   The central

terrace at the Leppings Lane end, and the goalmouth immediately in

front, was now a mass of bodies.    I saw chests being pumped and the

kiss of life being administered but most of my view was with the

naked eye because the television monitor was now switched to

'Grandstand'. There was snooker on the screen but I had to watch that

picture occasionally and listen to that sound so that I knew when to
MOTSON                  JOHN WALKER                                        7


start my next insert.    What little extra information came to me was

via John Shrewsbury.    By now three members of our team, Desmond

Lynam,                   and Jimmy Hill, had gone downstairs to the

tunnel/pitch area, but initially could not enlarge much on what we

already knew.    They are in a better position than I to reveal how

things developed from there and what statement were or were not

forthcoming.

By now the pitch was full of people, with the police forming a line

to prevent Liverpool fans running down towards the Forest end.

Initally the Forest fans had misunderstood the situation and chanted

at the Liverpool fans for invading the pitch.    When they realised what

had happened they behaved sympathetically and seme helped to remove

the perimeter boards and carry away injured supporters.

My regular 'Grandstand' reports can be checked against the

transmission time to reveal at what point I gave the first news of

fatalities.    The first figure I gave way five, then later in a two

minute summary I announced we feared there were 20 dead.    But even

when I submitted my last live report before Grandstand went off the

air at five 0 clock (1700), the estimated figure was 50.

I would say this illustrates that the enormity of the tragedy was

never apparent to those of us watching from other parts of the

ground.    It was fans who ran down the pitch who first started to talk

about 'people dead in there' - that can be heard on tape.

Obviously I cannot ccurcnent on anything that happened outside the

ground or in the tunnel at the Leppings Lane end as I had no view of

that.    My impression, and it can only be an impression, was that some

of the police on duty inside the ground were initially treating the

incident as a crowd overspill, but bearing in mind one of their

number ran on to the pitch with such alarm to stop the game, their
MOTSON                 JOHN WALKER                                        8


evidence may be to the contrary.     I cannot say for certain how many

police and stewards were on duty at the Leppings Lane end because

many could have been mingling in the crowd or out of ny view just

outside.    But early on they certainly needed reinforcements.

One of the reasons why I may have been slow to react myself, other

than the lack of information passed to me, is that I have grown use

to expert policing of football grounds especially since the Heysel

Disaster four years ago.    I knew that police forces across the nation

mounted a military style operation for a big games which had become

necessary owing to the large influx of visiting fans at some grounds.

I am talking generally now and not specifically about any team or

match, but the abrasive and belligerent behaviour of a minority of

supporters has meant the amount of police escorting and video

surveillance inside grounds has been a heavy presence since the Luton

and Heysel riots of 1985 (000085).

This is in direct contrast to the peaceful atmosphere in which my

father and others of his generation took us to football as children

in the ninteen fifties. The mood in the crowd changed in the late

sixties and early seventies to become more aggressive, this in turn

led to outbreaks of hooliganism and eventually to pitch invasions and

the erection of fences.    I am sure this is well documented elsewhere,

but I make the point because it was essentially bad behaviour that

caused the fences to go up in the the first place, with the

authorities 'penning in' visiting fans into segregated fenced

areas.     Ironically , the fences were hardly needed on semi-final

day owing to the fact that Liverpool fans alone stood at that end, but

they are of course permanent structures.

I do not feel there is any more I can usefully add from my own

observations on the day.   Other people in different areas are better
         MDTSON               JOHN WALKER


         equipped to explain how the central section became so over populated.

         Even now I am not sure in my own mind when panic first set in either

         before or during the game.    I am happy to be questioned further on any

         of the above.

                                        John Mbtson



                                                            John Motson SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:           DATE:      040589

^fTNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     B.A MASON SUPT5810




                                                                                    1118
                                                                         STATION

                TERENCE WILLIS
                STUART

AEORESS         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                SNIG HILL, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: OVER 21

OCCUPATION:     POL SUPT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in itanything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010689                                                T W STUART(SIGNED)



          The Superintendent (Operations) inSouthYorkshire    Policehas a

          responsibility, together with the five territorial divisions which

          have football league grounds, for attending meetings held in

          connection with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (000075).     A

          file in respect of meetings held, is maintained within the Operations

          Department of the Operations & Traffic Division, each club allocated

          its own respective file.

          The Safety of Sports Grounds Act Officers' working groups comprised of

          a legal representative frcm the South Yorkshire County Council and the

^         South Yorkshire Fire Service, District Council Buildings Officer,

          Director/Secretary of football clubs, and clubs' Safety Consulting

          Engineers, police officers frcm Headquarters and Division concerned.

          The South Yorkshire County Council legal representative, Mr David

          Vaughan, chaired all these meetings and published the minutes which he

          circulated to all concerned.

          Following the abolition of the South Yorkshire County Council (I

          believe on 31 March 1986)(310386), District Councils became

          responsible for the safety at sports grounds and became the licensing




                                                                                   1119
STUART                 TERENCE WILLIS                                      2

authority.     It was about this time that the Health & Safety Executive

became part of these working groups.

On the 2 February 1981 (020281) I was transferred to Operations

Division in the rank of Chief Inspector.    Chief Superintendent Male at

that time was the Superintendent in charge of the division and dealt

with Safety of Sports Grounds Act meetings. I would of course attend

such meetings in his absence and frcm my pocket book and copy document

file supplied by West Midlands Police, I can say that I first attended

a meeting in connection with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on

Friday 11 September 1981 (110981) at the South Yorkshire Fire Service

Headquarters at Division Street, Sheffield.

Frcm early December 1981 (001281) I was A/Superintendent (Operations)

until my promotion to Superintendent and transfer on 5 April 1983.

(050489) During the period commencing December 1981 (001281) until the

4 April 1983 (040483) I attended the following meetings in connection

with Safety of Sports Grounds Act at the Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club ground.

Date                           Place                         Document No

1.2.82     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Hillsborough

(010282)

15.4.82    S.Y.F.S. H/Quarters, Division Street, Sheffield      827

(150482)

10.5.82    S.Y.F.S. H/Quarters, Division Street, Sheffield    823/824

(100582)

24.8.82    S.W.F.C. Hillsborough                              817/819

(240882)

21.2.83    S.W.F.C. Hillsborough                              806/807

(210283)

From the 5 April (050485) until the 19 May 1985 (190585) I served in
STUART                  TERENCE   WILLIS                                   3


'E' and 'F'Divisions returning to Operations as Superintendent on the

20 May 1985. (200585)     Thereafter I attended the following meetings in

connection with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club.

Date                              Place                    West Midlands

                                                           Document No

18.7.85    Niagara Police Sports and Social Club

(180785)

22.1.86    S.W.F.C. Hillsborough                              774

(220186)

4.7.86     S.Y.F.S. Division Street, Sheffield                770

(040786)

10.7.86    S.W.F.C. Hillsborough                              769

(100786)

7.8.86     S.W.F.C. Hillsborough

(070886)

16.7.87    Sheffield Town Hall                                746

(160787)

6.8.87     S.W.F.C. Hillsborough                           735/739/743

(060887)

23.3.88    Sheffield Town Hall                               726/727

(230388)

On the 27 March 1989 (270289) I was transferred frcm Operations to my

present post in Discipline and Complaints.

I attach extracts frcm the above minutes of the meetings that relate

to discussions in respect of the West Terrace, West Stand and Leppings

Lane end of the ground.




                                                                               11
                                                                                    ro
         STUART              TERENCE WILLIS                       4


                                              T W STUART SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:           DATE:   010689

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     C.W.CALVERT INSP




•>




                                                                      1 122
Incident      102   050390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S1837

                                                                          Station

Surname             CALVERT

Forenames           CLIVE WILLIAM

Age                                         Date of birth

Address


Occupation          POL INS

Telephone

IC                  Height                  Build

Hair colour


#
Eyes
    ir type

                                            Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated               020689                                                  Signed


           From 1979 (000079) to late 1987 (000087)1 was responsible for liaison

           and in organisation of (in consultation with senior officers) police

           functions at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.     Prior to this the

           task was undertaken on an ad hoc basis, usually by a shift inspector

           or sub divisional chief inspector.    Following the publication of the

           Standing Instructions on policing football matches I took over the

           duty of liaison officer.

           During this period it became apparent that despite stewards being

           employed by the club many were failing to do anything other than

           attend at the ground and disappear if problems arose - many failed to

           wear their tabbards and others were physically incapable of carrying

           out their duty.    It was also apparent that many of the stewards had no

           real idea what they should do.    One of the problems on match days was

           that the club had no overall management of their stewards.
                                                                 PAGE        2
                                                                 S1837

In August 1981 (000081) I remember that I received a memorandum fron

then Chief Superintendent HEROLD concerning the ineffectiveness of

stewards at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

I brought Mr HEROLD's comments, and further views of my own, to the

attention of all stewards at a briefing held at Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club on 22 August 1981 (220881).     I have continued to stress

these points in all the informal and formal discussions I have held

with Stewards and the club since that time.

The situation improved with the appointment of Mr IOCK as security

officer (in 1985 (000085) I think) who on match days acted as the

club's 'link' man for their stewards and the subsequent adoption of a

personal radio system to maintain contact with their chief stewards in

various areas of the ground.

Over the period I was liaison officer I had frequent and various

contact with club officials - the secretaries usually, when I pointed

out problems with stewards - this included the clubs responsibilities

for spectators on the terraces as well as in the stands.     I am aware

this theme was frequently repeated by senior officers.     I also made

this comment to the club's security officer on several occasions.        I

gained the impression that the club believed that because, out of

necessity, the police occasionally performed the function of crowd

packing, they had no need to show interest or responsibility for the

standing crowds.

For several years to 1987 (000087) I attended the annual meeting of

the stewards, usually shortly before the start of the season.     During

the course of my presentation I outlined what the police function and

responsibilities were, what their duties were in relation to the crowd

(including on the terraces) and what the safety procedures were.

Prior to commencing my briefings - in (1984 (000084) or 1985 (000085)

I think) I obtained a copy of the club instructions to stewards which
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S1837

was completely inadequate - giving only information on conditions of

service and an outdated evacuation procedure.    I made certain

suggestions which were incorporated in new instructions for stewards.

These instructions were circulated at every annual meeting and

explained by club staff.

In 1984 (000084) I (and other officers) realised that after Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club's return to Division 1 problems were evident

at Leppings Lane turnstiles due to increase in away fans.    I suggested

with a rough sketch that the whole of Leppings Lane turnstiles - then

a crescent shape - should be demolished with new ones built parallel

to and near rear of stand with access to individual pens and to the

stands.    This was discussed with then senior officers - Chief

Superintendent MOSELEY and Superintendent LOCK - agreed should be put

to club.   Then secretary Mr CHESTER came forward with compromise as

turnstiles are laid out now - new turnstiles A/G built - in the light

of climate then prevailing on spending at football grounds accepted on

basis that anything is better than nothing.     The intention was twofold

(1) on the practice then operating to allow different sets of

supporters into different pens and (2) to give greater space at the

turnstiles.

I was greatly involved in the planning, and on the day, execution of

policing for the 1987 (000087) SEMI FINAL - LEEDS UTO. V. COVENTRY.

Leeds were allocated the Leppings Lane terraces.     This game was played

on Sunday with lunchtime kick off.    I was on duty outside the ground

before the kick off.    Despite the kick off time numerous drunks

arrived.    In planning this match, we had, because of Ieeds United's

reputation, gone to great pains to:

1 prevent fans arriving without tickets

2   taken steps to contain those Leeds fans who arrived without tickets

In the event there were no problems at Leppings Lane - that end of
                                                                       PAGE    4
                                                                       S1837

ground filled to capacity.       The only problem was Coventry fans

arriving late because of traffic on Ml.      The kick off time was

delayed.    To the best of my knowledge there was no pitch invasion.

There was, however, a pitch invasion in 1981 (000081) Serai Final Spurs

v Wolves.     This was caused:

1 by the Spurs fans purchasing Wolves tickets to the Kop terraces

    then being allowed into Leppings Lane terrace and

2   late arrival of Spurs fans who rushed onto terrace shortly after

    kick off causing surge

We took this into account this year and last by ensuring that fans who

had tickets for the Kop who were not Notts Forest fans were not

transferred to other ends of ground so capacity would be exceeded -

they were held on segregated area of Kop.

It should be noted that in 1980 (000080) Semi Final Arsenal v

Liverpool that capacity was exceeded on Leppings Lane terraces by at

least 1000 due to forged tickets - no problems experienced.       (This

terrace was at that game occupied by Liverpool supporters).

On 15 April 1989 (150489), I came on duty at Sheffield Wednesday

football ground at 9.30 am (0930) and attended briefing.       I was

responsible for two serials on the Spion Kop.      Following briefing and

refreshments I took both serials onto the Spion Kop terraces at about

11 am (1100) and briefed them.       I also briefed the stewards allocated

to the Spion Kop at about 11.30 am. (1130)     The turnstiles opened at

about this time.     It had been anticipated that Liverpool supporters

vrould enter the Spion Kop with tickets allocated to the Notts Forest

fans.   To contain them an area adjacent to the North Stand had been

set aside for them.     This assumption proved correct and by 3pm (1500)

about 500 Liverpool supporters were in the area under close Police

supervision.    The majority were not, from their accents, frcm

Merseyside.    Those from Merseyside numbered 200+, sane said they had
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S1837

obtained tickets frcm friends in Nottingham, others said from touts

both in Liverpool and around the ground.

Drink in excess was evident in a considerable number of supporters,

both Liverpool and Notts Forest.   This included those in a drunken

condition and in possession of drink.   The extent was such that I

gave instructions that only those in an extreme state would be

arrested in order not to deplete manpower.

At about 2.45pm (1445) it became apparent there was a fault on the

radio. Transmissions frcm control were becoming broken, although

still audible.   I informed control of this.   The radio fault can best

be described as a warbling/clicking - missing out one word in three.

I was on the Spion Kop at 3pm (1500) with the serials I had detailed

to supervise the area containing the Liverpool supporters. An

apparent pitch invasion shortly after kick off created a situation

which incensed the Notts Forest fans and the actions of seme of them

towards the Liverpool group of supporters suggested there would be a

public disorder situation on the Rep.   I therefore remained at this

location with my serials until the ground cleared.    I took no part in

the events on the Leppings Lane terrace.

My briefing to Stewards was for those on Kop only - also Sergeants

present and identified

I asked if worked Kop before - yes

They were told to keep aisles clear as possible

The emergency procedures were explained - all should be aware of own

responsibility

The senior steward was present - he was told if he had any problems to

speak to me

The stewards were told not to leave until ground clear

I knew the senior steward.   I had carried out annual briefing several

times and knew others by sight
                                                                     PAGE     6
                                                                     S1837

        To the best of my knowledge stewards on Kop did job

         I cannot say where they normally worked




                                                         C W CALVERT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




*                                                                                 1 128
                                                                        STATION

NAME:           TREVOR


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
b y me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020689                                                T HIGGINS (SIGNED)



           I am Trevor Higgins,




        Until July 1988 I was a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshite Police

           stationed at Wcmbwell of Barnsley Division.



        On Saturday 9 April 1988, I was detailed to supervise a serial of

        constables performing duty at Hillsborough Football Staidum.     The two

           football teams taking part were Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



        The serial was delegated duty at the rear of the west stand and in

        particular to control fans entering pens 3 and 4, that is the centre

        pens of the stand.



        During the game and because of the amount of fans within pens 3 and 4,

        I received instruction to close the gates to the entrance and

        thereafter direct fans to the two outer pens of the stand.     I cannot

        recall where the instruction came from.    Under normal circumstances
         HIGGINS                 TREVOR                                         2

         instruction came from a Serial Inspector or via radio from control.    I

        cannot say from which the instruction came.



        Bearing in mind the time lapse and having attended several matches at

        Hillsborough, it is difficult to relate detail regarding this

        particular match.




                                                            T HIGGINS SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
£          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         DS




                                                                                    1 I 28B
