                                           Sheffield Archives Ref: P q l| °[ 11( 5 ^ o (
                                                                                            M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and tim e raised                                Number
                                                                                                                D ° |Q (
T itle
         V\JiA£P-A
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions -- urgent action                                                   oft r                    Receiver
 <p T T S T                 l&
                                                                                                                 Qn33  Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated                  ^ f       f~ V

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                       Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                        Q63G
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                           O /M         SIO




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                mi
                                                            Maghull
                                                            Merseyside


 20th April 1989

 TO WHOM IT HAY CONCERN

 Dear Sir

 I as one of the victims of the terrible series of events which happened on
 Saturday afternoon on the 15th April 1989 at the Hillaborouqh Football
 Ground I feel compeled to write down my account of the same, so that they
 can be brought to light at the ensuifig^/ enquiries.

 I arrived with my two workmates at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at
 about 2.30 pm. There was a large crowd outside the closed turnstiles but
 no sort of queue had been formed by the mounted police.

 In my past experience of going to football grounds the police always make
 us form a queue. I was amazed at the lack of order in any shape or form
 in this instance.

 As I got nearer the closed turnstile it became apparent that the crowd was
 not moving quickly enough thereby causing a terrible crush. The metal
 railing gates through which I had already passed, were closed behind me by
 the police. As far as I could see this was in order to clear the immediate
 area in front of the turnstiles. This area was by now very crowded so my
 friends and I moved to one side along with a number of other people to try
 to allow the crowd to clear somewhat.

 A couple of minutes later at approx 2.50 pm the main double gates alongside
 the turnstiles were opened by the police.

 My friend and I (by this time were already seperated from our other friend)
 were allowed through these gates along with hundreds of other supporters
 without being asked to show our tickets.

 We asked police and stewards which way to go and, weredirected down the
 tunnel. When we got to the end of the tunnel we could see the immediate
 area behind the goal was already crowded.

 We had been informed by friends in work^both Liverpool and Everton fans who
 had visited the ground before that this area was dangerous so try to getto
 the sides. We tried to move over to the sides but this was impossible as
 we were forced forward by the sheer number of people behind us. I assume
 this must have been because the metal railing gates outside had been
 reopened.

   We were forced forward under extreme pressure until we reached a point of
T about 15 feet from the front fencing. Within seconds of reaching this point
I a lot of people were already shouting to the police on the touchline behind
 I the goal to do something that people were being crushed. This, in a matter
 i of seconds, turned to them screaming and pleading with the police telling
 !them that people were dying.
 The answer from the police was to push back.   This answer surely proved they
 could understand what was being said.

  Some people at the front were by now starting to climb over the fence, only
  to be confronted by the police telling them to get back. I was by this time
  terrified for my life. The kick-off must have been only Be^nP'4*^ f*h*°Y and
  nothing was being done about gettiny US out'.' it was then 1 noticed that the
. lad next to me was limp and totally motionless I could only assume he had
 'passed out or was dead.

 Then the match kicked off this was evident as I could hear the crowd cheer.
 TTW^llBBrtnT'TTBFBl minimi11 rethought I would die because I knew that nobody
 had realised what was happening and it would be sometime before anything
 would start to happen to relieve the unbearable pressure. I then stopped
 shouting for help to conserve my energy so as I could breath easier.

 Even when the game was stopped and people were starting to get out unto
 the pitch I was still terrified.

 It was about 3.20 pm before enough people were cleared allowing me to move
 back slightly. I then saw four people who were definately dead, one of whom
 I helped to be passed out over the heads of the people in front of me. I
 then moved to.the side of the terracing climbed over the side fence along
 with several other people and went down the steps, out of the small gate
 and on to the pitch.

 As 1 came to the   gate a policewoman told me to sit down     and askedme if I
 was O.K., I said   yes, just help them and pointed to the     terrace behind the
 goal.

 After a few minutes I stood up then looked around for my friends. Sometime
 later I did find them and was very relieved.

 Even at this time actually seeing people dead we had no idea that the
 eventual loss of life would be so great.

 As you can appreciate I have suffered a terrible ordeal along with thousands
 of other Liverpool supporters so I am naturally appauled to hear reports of
 police saying large numbers of fans were drunk, and hundreds didn't have
 tickets.

  If this is so, why weren't any drunks arrested, and where did they-all
  disappear to afterwards. Also how can they possible estimate that hundreds
  of fand did not have tickets when thousands of them didn't even have their
  tickets checked. Some of my friends who were in the North stand didn't have
  their tickets checked.

  This brings me to my first point, would it not be possible for all the people
  who have unused tickets no matter what part of the ground they were for, to
  be able to present them at the inquiry to the Lord Justice Taylor.

• Also the Football Association in my opinion should be brought to justice
  for the unfair way they allocated tickets. I would like the following three
  questions to be asked at the inquiry.

  Who gave the order to open the gates? Remembering if those gates had been
  forced open by fans, which was at first suggested, there would by now be a
  nationwide hunt for the persons responsible.

)Also how can police officers who must surely do regular football match duty
  ignore desperate appeals for help from the.crowd. Surely they must have
\ known they were genuine, and if theydidn't realise this why can't they be
  honest and say so.
                                          -J-




\   Finally in these times where every fan is treated as a hooligan I would like
i   to know who was monitoring the close circuit T.V.

    PLEASE DON'T LET THIS HAPPEN AGAIN.


    Yours faithfully




    P.S. 1 would be willing to appear at the inquiry.
