                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                         REF:     F/JR/DS 952
FROM:    Detective Sergeant 952 Charlesworth
                                                         STATION/DEPT:     F DIO
        Chief Superintendent Mole                        DATE;    8 April 1988


         SUBJECT:     INTELLIGENCE INFORMATION FOR THE FA CUP SEMI FINAL BETWEEN
             NOTTINGHAM FOREST AND LIVERPOOL TO BE PLAYED AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
             GROUND SHEFFIELD ON SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988


             With reference to the above FA Cup semi final, I have to report as
             follows:

             Intelligence enquiries have been made and reports have been received
             in respect of both Nottingham Forest and Liverpool supporters and
             which I will deal with separately in this report.

             NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS

             The conduct of the Nottingham supporters varies from game to game
             away from home. There has been trouble when the team have played
             at Derby, Coventry and Birmingham. The most serious of these being
             at Birmingham where there were 54 arrests, 34 of these for Public
             Order offences which was the result of fighting after the game between
             rival fans. The rest of the arrests were for drink related offences.

             When they visited Hillsborough on Saturday the 5 March 1988, only
             five Forest supporters were arrested, one for drugs, one for Public
             Order and three for drink related offences.

             Last Saturday, 2 April 1988, Nottingham Forest met Liverpool in a
             football league game at Nottingham. There were 17 arrests (all
             Nottingham supporters) for offences of drink and violence. One offence
             of a person being stabbed with a knife was reported and for which
             a Nottingham supporter was arrested.

             Special attention is drawn to [                       I born


             but this does not stop him becoming involved on match days, for on
             the 19 March this year he wa'S' arrested for his part in a street, dis­
             order when Manchester United visited Nottingham. This man can only
             be described as a pure nut ter and not only attacks rival fans but
             also attacks his own supporters who do not agree with him.

             Information has been received that he is recruiting people to travel
             to the continent for the forthcoming European Cup match. Since being
             locked up in Scotland after an international match he has become parti­
             cularly friendly with one I            11 [years
             other date of birth |                 | 5*9", medium build, brown h a i r ,
             blue/green eyes,
             is well kngwn to the Police in Scotland having numerous convictions
             for all types of offences including 15 for Breach of the Peace, and
             was released from)          prison, |       | on the                 His
             home address is                                   Scotland.

                      |was detained in Nottingham during the past two weeks and
             found in his property was a letter from)        [vho stated his intention
             of coming to Sheffield for the cup game. At this time there was also
             a letter in|           [possession from o n e |            [alias the
 8 April 1988

 Subj ec t: FA CUP SEMI FINAL BETWEEN NOTTINGHAM FOREST AND LIVERPOOL


        ivho was arrested for murder and GBH during scenes of disorder by
Chelsea fans some years ago in London. The letter was written from HMP
_________ , but information received is that |         is now out on parole
but has gone from the 22 stone he was tp a mere 10 stone. It is hoped
to have a recent photograph of           prior to the match briefing.

Looking at the records of       and                      teamed up with
this could cause us trouble. In the past                     lhas been in possession
of a bayonet and gas canisters.

A further member of the Forest supporters worthy of note is one
                     27 years,                      He was charged with
murder and affray after Middlesbrough v Forest match in 1980 and was also
arrested in Eindhoven in 1984.

Seven targets have been selected by spotters from the Nottinghamshire
Constabulary who monitor the Forest games and include          ^nd |     -
Photographs or photostat copies of these mentioned above will be made avail­
able for the briefing.

During the Liverpool game at Forest, posters showing the following were
recovered: N.I.F.E. (Nottingham Insane Fighting Elite) and RANGERS (be­
lieved to mean GLASGCW RANGERS) I.C.F. (Inner City Firm) on the 9 April,
give you the SCOUSE BUSTERS. The poster also shows the Nottingham Forest
emblem, with crossed flags of England     and   Scotland which could suggest
a meet up of fans from   the two clubs.

There are 11 exclusion orders for Forest fans, photographs              and details
of which are available    for display at   the   briefing.

  Information has been received at Nottingham Central Police Station to the
 effect that some Nottingham Forest fans are planning to ambush the Liverpool
  fans outside the ground before the match. One of the ringleaders said
  to be planning this attack is ]                                ]24 years
|_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ |Notts. described as 5'10", white European,
 slim build, brown hair, blue eyes, a photostat photograph of ______ is
 available. He has convictions for violence at football matches including
 AOABH, assault on Police and Public Order offences. An index booklet con­
  taining details, and photographs of 151 Forest offenders for sporting event
 Public Order offences will be available in the Police Room on the match
 dav for consultation.

LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS

There is very little known about the Liverpool supporters but their behaviour
this season appears to be good, apart from three games in London, one versus
Arsenal (fighting amongst rival fans) when they played Tottenham (2,000
Liverpool fans locked out and ran riot outside the ground, stealing from
shops and causing public annoyance). When Liverpool played Queens Park
Rangers (20 fans arrested for mainly drink related offences).

Photographs of five of those arrested are available, together with two
photographs of recently expired exclusion orders (1)                  |and
 3

 8 April 1988

..Subject;   FA CUP SEMI FINAL BETWEEN NOTTINGHAM FOREST AND LIVERPOOL


         /vas arrested in the Lancashire County Police area for      an offence
 of threatening behaviour, s4 Public Order Act 1986. He gave         the name. |
                               and was charged and bailed under      that name.
 On his appearance before Blackburn Magistrates Court he gave        his correct
 details.

 There are no current exclusion orders in operation for Liverpool fans.

 Information has been received that during the game between Liverpool and
 Manchester United at Anfield on Monday 4 April this year, a quantity of
 'death stars' made up of Stanley knife blades and bound together with in­
 sulating tape were found on the Kop after a disturbance between home sup­
 porters and United supporters who had managed to get tickets for the Kop.

 There is also information that the teams of pickpockets who travel to big
 games that Merseyside clubs play in, will be in attendance and an album
 of photographs will be available in the Police Room.

 Although a large amount of the Liverpool supporters will be travelling
 in special trains and coaches, a number will be travelling in mini buses/
 vans (last year fans came in an articulated van from Merseyside) and it
 is anticipated as on previous occasions, these will be carrying alcohol.
 It is well known to visiting fans at Hillsborough for big games that they
 will not be allowed into local pubs so therefore they stock up from super­
 markets and consume it whilst travelling to the game.

 FURTHER INFORMATION

 For those officers who were not present at the briefing for the Sheffield
 Wednesday v Nottingham Forest game at Hillsborough on Saturday 5 March
 this year, on Saturday 17 October 1987, Sheffield Wednesday visited Nottingham
 to play Forest and there were scenes of violent disorder in the Nottingham
 City Centre when both sets of supporters clashed. There were 40 arrests,
 of these 31 were Sheffield Wednesday fans. On completion of the enquiries
 into the matter, 13 Wednesday fans^were charged with offences of disorder.
 These are:

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13

One of those arrested during the fracas in Nottingham was _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_______ he was not charged but intelligence reports suggest he was in
      4

      8 April 1988

"••■"■"■Sfsbject:   T A CnF TTEMl FINAL BETWEEN NOTTINGHAM FOREST AND LIVERPOOL


      the background encouraging the rest forward. _______ |is a known member
      of our own hooligan element, known as the OCS (Owls Crime Squad). This
      squad have been very quiet of late but up to as many as 30 members of the
      OCS have been observed by our observation team led by Detective Sergeant
      551 Wilson, in attendance prior to home games in the City Centre b u t with
      the exception of the so called leader,                 a n d ___ _ _ _ _ _ very
      few have attended the home games.

     A further member of the OCS.,                                       |has just
     been made the subject of an exclusion order.

     With the Nottingham fans arriving at the City end it could well be that '
     the Wednesday fans who took a beating at Nottingham may well seek their
     revenge. I have therefore retained for display our home match intelligence
     board which shows photographs of those charged at Nottingham, together
     with those said to be the leaders of the OCS.

     Also displayed for those who have not worked at Hillsborough recently are
     photographs of the knives which when fitted together lock like fountain
     pens and the 'death stars' which were recently stolen in the Chesterfield
     area, together with photographs of weapons recovered in London by the
     Metropolitan Police whilst searching fans entering two of their First Division
     grounds.

     Three spotters from the Nottinghamshire Constabulary, Police Sergeant Adrian
     Brazener, Police Constable Dave Walker and Police Constable John Smith,
     will be working with our team of spotters to identify the trouble makers.
     There are no spotters attending from Merseyside.

     There is no intelligence at this stage to suggest that there are any forged
     tickets in circulation.

     Information has been received that Doncaster based Liverpool fans have
     joined the Nottingham Forest Supporters Club in order to obtain tickets
     for the game and to be amongst Forest fans on the Kop. I have contacted
     the Secretarys Office at the Forest ground and any such applications for
     tickets will be rejected.

     With your approval I intend to display all      the photographs and items men­
     tioned above for the briefing prior to the      game.

     Court dates for prisoners arrested at the game have been obtained from
     Chief Inspector Vernon and are as follows:

     Nottingham Forest fans - Tuesday 19 April 1988, Thursday 21 April 1988,
     Wednesday 4 May 1988 and Thursday 5 May 1988.

     Liverpool fans - Wednesday 27 April 1988, Thursday 28 April 1988, Wednesday
     11 May 1988 and Thursday 12 May 1988.

     It is requested that 10 prisoners be bailed to each date at 10.00 a.m.
     as required.
0

8 April 1988

Subject:   FA CUP SEMI FINAL BETWEEN NOTTINGHAM FOREST AND LIVERPOOL

If needed further court dates can be obtained from Detective Sergeant 952
Charlesworth at Hammerton Road Police Station.

Should any further information be obtained it will be made available for
the briefing at the ground.




Detective Sergeant 952
                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                           REF:
        FROM:            Superintendent Murray             £>
                                                                           STA TIO N /D E PT.:   FI
        TO:
                        Chief Superintendent ftole          ■m/3,                                14   Hay   198S
                                                                           DATE:


                    SUBJECT:                FA CUP SEMI FINAL - 9 April 1986


                 I refer to the enclosed correspondence regarding the above event. I have
                 liaised with the officers concerned with the preparation, control and
                 supervision of the above event and we have noted locally the lessons that
                 were learned and the improvements that can be made for any similar future
                 event. Generally I was well satisfied with the event and I will confine this
                 report to matters which effect the Force Operations Room and Road Traffic
                 Department.

                 COMMUNICATIONS

                On the day more use than normal was made of the radio link between ground
                .control at Hillsborough and the Operations roccn in attempting to contact
                those units equipped with both ground control and UHF radio. This was
                entirely due to difficulties in personal radio transmissions which were
                effected for most of the event by breakthrough from local radio. The
                Superintendent (Communications) is aware of this and an immediate survey
                of the equipment was made after the event, but the fault could not be traced.

                TRAFFIC FLOW AND CONTROL

                Transmissions in relation to problems with traffic, from mobile units and
                the spotter plane were being received at Operations room and were not
                monitored at ground control. It seems sensible to me that for future *semis *
                all matters relating to the control and movement of traffic should be
                supervised by Operations room, with the exception of the local arrangements
                made immediately outside the ground when the final whistle is blown.

                FOOTBALL TRAFFIC SIGNS

                Purpose made signs have been requested in the past, but for financial
                reasons have not been approved. Such signs are extremely beneficial and
                it is pleasing to note that Superintendent Brougham is looking into this
                aspect.

                SEARCHING OF COACHES FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE ETC.

                The effect of alcohol on football supporters is well known and I would not
                wish to see any relaxation of enforcement of the laws relating to the carriage
                of alcohol on coaches etc. It is appreciated that this can cause some traffic
                congestion, but surveys are being carried out on the major roads approaching
                the city to ■establish where this can be carried out to cause minimum
                inconvenience to traffic flows.

                CLOSE CIRCUIT TV LINK WITH WADSLEY BRIDGE STATION

                A TV monitor was sited in the control roan giving pictures from Wadsley Bridge
                Railway Station. This monitor took up valuable room in the control area and
                was of little use and I would not wish such a system to be implemented in the
                future.




GEN/2
                S u p e r in t e n d nnt-   >
                                                          REF*
:F*ROM:   Police Sergeant 1392 HOYLAND
                                                         STATION/DEPT: Operations Roo-n
 TO:      Chief Superintendent HEROLD                    DATE:    nth April 1988

            SUBJECT:   Items for de-briefing re F.A. Semi-final 9th April 1988

            On Saturday 9th April I was duty sergeant in the Operations
            Room and I would like to submit my observations concerning
            the football match.

            1. Operational Orders

               Traffic      - no problems with this order other than the
               fact that no call signs had been allocated to the three
               public order patrols at Woodall Services, Ml. It was not
               until they came on the air that we knew who was on this
               detail. It was necessary to then create a duty rota on the
               computer and allocate callsigns (X 1 0 1 ,X 1 0 2 ,X 1 0 3 ). It would
               have been much better if this had been catered for in the
               order.

               'F' Division - no problems, other than the fact that Operations
               Room did not receive a copy of the order. One was obviously
               copied from another held at headquarters.

               ’D' Division - this order catered very well with 'D' Division
               involvement, the precise details of primary and secondary
               routes being useful. One problem encountered was that the
               traffic signals on the Ml exit slip roads at Catcliffe
               were not turned off; officers were working traffic against
               the lights. This matter was subsequently resolved but should
               be catered for in any similar operation.
                                                                                        r
               Dog Section - Operations Room did not receive a copy of any
               order or duties in relation to duties at the match. It was
               a fairly lengthy task creating a duty rota on the computer
               for all the dog handlers involved and in future advance
               duties for such operations should be supplied in advance.

           2. Use of spotter plane

              As you know we did have problems initially with air to
              ground communications, but once these problems had been
              resolved the assistance cf the spotter plane became
              invaluable. Prior to the match, Operations Room were given
              good accounts of traffic flow into Hillsborough and traffic
              hold ups were reported. It was then possible to give
              instructions to officers on point duty,via other match
              controls, to ease the hold ups.

              Ironically, there was a two mile tailback reported on the
              A616 at Oughtibridge - traffic building up through Warncliffe
              Side to Deepcar. The hold up was on Low R o a d ,Oughtibridge
              where public order patrols manned by the Underwater Search
              Unit were stopping and searching vehicles travelling into
              city.
                         -2-

   After the match, the spotter plane was of great assistance
   in identifying why traffic could not leave the area of the
   ground.

   One major problem highlighted, and rectified by the air
   observer, was that officers on point duty were working
   against each other. One would have released traffic whilst
   the next officer in line would be stopping it. It was then
   possible to synchronise their instructions to traffic to
   keep the traffic flowing. One point that should be made to
   beat officers on traffic points is that after the match they
   should give priority to football traffic leaving Sheffield,
   giving long runs through junctions. This was not the case
   on Saturday and I had to make repeated requests,via Match
   controls, for this to be done.

3. Radio Procedure and Transmissions

   Unfortunately there was some confusion regarding which Force
   Radio Channel was being used for the match. As far as Operations
   Room was concerned, Force Channel 1 was reserved for all
   mobiles engaged on the football duty. 'D' and 'F' Division
   were expecting channel 2. This matter was rectified and channel
   one was used.

   Channel 1 monitored all motorway patrols and any vehicle with
   specific duties in relation to the match. A total of 87 mobiles
   were working on this channel and obviously at this level
   transmission time is at a premium. P.C.     |was the controller
   in Operations Room and I choose this point to state what an
   excellent job he did.

   As always some officers were suffering from 'verbal diarrohea'
   making life very difficult for the radio operator. Officers
   persisted in telling Operations Room every time they saw a
   coach or took up escort of it. In my view this type of
   transmission is unnecessary as it is virtually impossible for
   this type of information to be recorded and retransmitted
   when coming in thick and fast. The only transmission of this
   type required is where we--have a coach containing unruly
   supporters, etc. or where"specific instructions or enquiries
   are given. Perhaps this point should be made at future briefings
   and included in orers.

4. Press Officer

  I am aware that Superintendent Pratt had been detailed to
  deal with the media concerning the match, and we had speech
  with Mr. Pratt thoughout the day, but it would have been
  useful if there had been a press officer on duty at Headquarters
  throughout the day to take care of all the press calls.

  The Operations Room Inspector and Sergeant act as press
  officers out of hours and like any other Saturday numerous
  press calls were being received. Some were in relation to the
  match, others were routine press calls about incidents that
  had occurred Friday night - Saturday morning.
                    -3-



A press officer on duty at headquarters would have allowed
both the .Sergeant and Inspector to give total supervision
to "*t&e"Tanning of the Operations Room and football detail
instead of having to keep breaking off to answer press
enquiries.

Generally, the operation went well and was certainly an
improvement on last year's operation. This report is
respectfully submitted for your information.




Police Sergeant
Operations Room
11th April 1988
             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



                  FILE R E F E R E N C E                     MINUTE SHEET NO   ^


                 SUBJECT


      c l                           U   w   i X

                                                        f
                                                        OV^            ^


                 -J^Ls             ^<ZJVJUL^A,    ^4^        (Sa a A       ^

                                                            c0l ^-A_*
                  iL

                                                  P

 SO U TH YORKS. POLICE

      'Q —i ~s   /■£ -— (- ' ' f

       \ y        ;v rB

 ^                     / / / C .// -
CHIEF S’j P E R l M E V t l N f
OPER A TIO N S !s TRAFFIC




       GEN/I
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



        FILE REFERENCE_____ .
                            ____________________ MINUTE SHEET NO 2


        SUBJECT    F.A. SEMI-FINAL      -   11.4.88

                               -   2-

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

The report at 1A is passed for your information only. It makes a few valid
points about the policing of this year's semi-final which need to be borne in
mind for future events.

There is one aspect that Sergeant Hoyland spoke to me about which he has not
included in his comments and that was his request to the SYMAS Control Room at
Rotherham to be more selective in passing 999 Ambulance calls to us during the
Saturday afternoon. Our impression on the day was that they had reduced the
number of calls passed in contravention of their normal policy and we felt that
was very beneficial. In fact, we now know - following our meeting earlier this
week - that in fact it just happened that 999 calls were very low that day and
they passed them all. As you know that request of ours was one of their gripes
at our recent meeting. However, by next year our revised joint policies will
obviate that area of difficulty.

I have a few comments of my own concerning the policing that day as follows

You will appreciate this was my first semi 'outside the ground',with the
responsibility for Operations L Traffic. By and large it was okay, but I think
the management of traffic flow can be improved. Many of the officers deputed to
traffic points in both 'D' and 'F' Divisions really had little idea of what they
were expected to do. Many appeared never to have worked traffic before and
their signals were sloppy and gave a poor impression. Many I spoke to had no
idea of the overall traffic strategy and had been deputed to a particular
traffic point both before and after the match with no understanding of how their
actions might influence the overall situation. I consider that one way to
improve that might be for Divisions ^o perhaps be a little more selective in who
they choose to depute to key traffic points, and once those persons have been
nominated, then I feel that for the purposes of the operation they should come
under the aegis of Traffic and all attend a pre-match briefing by ourselves so
that all know just-what is what. I would envisage the use of maps and aerial
photographs and videos to illustrate the overall picture. That would leave
Divisional Commanders and Sector Commanders outside the ground to deal with the
crowd control, public order, liquor, etc., etc., with the control of traffic
under a single co-ordinated command.

Staying with traffic, you will be aware that at one stage we had a tail back of
some 2J miles from Tinsley to Catcliffe on the Ml. Had we not adopted a one-off
course of action to resolve that, many Notts fans would-have missed the start of
the match. We would need to cater for such a contingency next year.




                                                            continued




GEN/1
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



                         FILE REFERENCE_____ .
                                             __________^__________ MINUTE SHEET NO       3


                         SUBJECT______F.A. SEMI-FINAL   -   11.4.88



                 The match 'signing' on the motorway was pathetic, as was the route signing for
                 both sets of fans. We need to consider the acquisition of LARGE CLEAR and
                 easily portable signs as a matter of urgency. We were trying to encourage
                 Northbound match traffic to use only the nearside lane of the Ml North after
                 Catcliffe and the only signs we had were 18" square propped up at intervals on
                 the hard shoulder where no one could see them. We should consider flexible
                 signs that we could attach 'gantry style' to the overhead bridge at the A57
                 junction North (and also bridges on the motorway for Southbound spectators which
ycc*4.           give clear instructions to visiting fans and which they cannot fail to see).
                 Subject to your agreement, I will arrange for Superintendent Brougham to
                 research that area and report relative to cost etc. I do not envisage any great
                 sum being involved.

                 The spotter plane was - as always - a real asset, but although we thought we had
                 it right this time and the communications worked at rehearsal, they failed us on
                 the day. We will try again on Spring Bank Holiday when Middlesborough come to
                 Oakwell versus Barnsley.

                 If you agree in principle with these very general comments, I would intend to
                 circulate these papers to the Divisional Commanders concerned for their
                 information and future discussion.




                  /
               . Chief Superintendent
                 (Operations & Traffic)
                THQ/RH/SJR     26.4.88


                               1        Q f c . .'




± (21                                                                                        '




           SOUTH YORKS. POLICF



                2 8 APR 1988
                                                                        ■>-7,    W   •
         CHI EF S U PER I N T t H p g v f
                          & TRAFFIC A '
           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



              FILE REFERENCE                                MINUTE SHEET NO          4^

              SUBJECT                              Is^/TL
                                    r-

                                                              •»   <



                                                                                          £<ry
                          >Zt                  ^




                                                                       \J   hrtf   I/Co




r       - 5 y Ay 1988
                                         /7
CHIEF SOPER 1NTE,JXNT
    T     DIVISIC?'                      --- 15




                                    • (



                                V U f




                                        tv W




    GEN/i
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



  FILE R E F E R E N C E                              MINUTE SHEET NO   5


  SUBJECT              F A CUP SEMI FINAL - 11.4.88


                                  -   8   -




Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) HQ

Sir,

In respect of your memorandum concerning the above subject, I forward
herewith a report by Superintendent Murray and endorse the comments
made therein.

M y only additional conment concerns traffic, and I would agree with
the ccmments made by Superintendent Anderson that in future at such
events, i.e. semi finals, there may well be merit in traffic being
dealt with separately from the policing of the football match. I
would not be adverse to this suggestion and feel that it would be
beneficial to all concerned. However, I would not wish to see similar
action at normal football matches and feel that our existing
arrangements are completely adequate.

I submit this report for your information please.




Chief Superintendent
'F' Division
16.5.88
        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



          FILE REFERENCE                                  MINUTE SHEET NO   6

         SUBJECT                F A CUP SBU FINAL - 11.4.88


                                          -9-

         Chief Superintendent, 'D' Division

          e ccmments of F' Division are appended hereto for forwarding
         o the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations). However, they are
        now forwarded for your conments before that action is taken.




/

        <-niei superintendent
        'F1 Division
        16.5.88




GEN/I
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
  /
                                                            REF:                   Fl/SRS/MJ
        FROM:   Inspector Sewell
                                                            STA TiO N /D E P T.:   Hammerton Road
        TO;     The Chief Superintendent - 'F' Division
                                                            DATE:                  9 August 1988

                   SUBJECT:   EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                               GROUND



                   On Tuesday 9 August 1988, a meeting was held at Hammerton
                   Road Police Station to re-establish further liaison with the
                   Fire and Ambulance Service in the event of a major disaster
                   occurring a t .the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.

                   The meeting was chaired by Superintendent Murray and attended
                   by Superintendent Marshall, Chief Inspector Beal and Inspector
                   Sewell, Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer Hopkins and Assistant
                   Chief Ambulance Officer (Operations) Jones, South Yorkshire
                   Ambulance Service and Assistant Divisional Officer Rowlands
                   of the South Yorkshire Fire Service

                   A senior ambulance officer already attends all home matches
                   at the Sheffield Wednesday Ground and is allocated a compli­
                   mentary ticket for the South Stand.   He is in direct radio
                   contact with ambulance control and in the event of a major
                   disaster at the ground, he would be the first line contact
                   with ambulance control.   Contingency plans are already in hand
                   for the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service to rendezvous with
                   their vehicles at Herries Road bus garage and the senior
                   ambulance officer already at the Wednesday Ground would control
                   the ambulance vehicles in and out of the Wednesday Ground.

                   Arrangements have been made for the senior ambulance officer
                   who attends the Wednesday Ground to meet the 1F l 1 Liaison
                   Inspector outside the players' entrance at 2.15 pm, before
                   each home match to re-establish contact and also contact will
                   be maintained with Mr Lock, the security officer at the
                   Wednesday Ground.  In the event of an evening kick off,
                   further arrangements wij.1 be made to establish contact time
                   with the ambulance service.

                   In the event of a major disaster occurring, the senior
                   ambulance officer at the ground would, where possible, make
                   his way to the gymnasium to direct his operations.

                   It was considered that this ambulance officer would be better
                   based in the North Stand so he could get to the gymnasium
                   without problems.  However, the senior ambulance officer who
                   attends is off duty and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                   only wish to allocate the complimentary tickets to the ambulance
                   service for use in the South Stand, so that the club physio,
                   Alan Smith, can signal straight away to the ambulance officer
                   if an ambulance is required for a Wednesday player.




GEN/2
    (2)




    Following discussions with the Fire Service Officer it was agreed
    that the fire service would attend by the quickest possible
    routes direct to the immediate scene of any fire and as such
    no rendezvous points or pre-arranged routes could be determined.

    The main points raised, in relation to the fire service, were
    that it was imperative that the Police Control give the exact
    location of any fire or incident and as much detail as possible
    given.  No senior fire officer is on duty at the match.

    To assist the fire and   ambulance services in any major disaster,
    two Police Tango units   will be specifically detailed to assist,
    one with the ambulance   service and the other with the fire service.
    The exact details will   be written into the serial order for the
    mobile unit concerned.




    Inspector




/           <      . .r   cvAUA
<Vk       vwfcW                                       ^         .   .   I




    Di


                                                 /I
                                                                            □
                                                           __
SERIAL   Reserves - Mobile (Call sign -
         TANGO 2)

         Phases 1 & 3 - Before and After
         Match.

         Patrol in a personnel carrier
         on the away frcm city side of
         the ground, giving particular
         attention to public houses on
         Penistone Road North where away
         supporters vehicles may have to
         pass. If directed escort away
         supporters to and frcm the coach
         park or railway station.

         Phase 2 - During Match

         During the game the serial will
         remain on patrol around the ground
         to ensure security of parked
         vehicles etc.



         Meal details at Briefing.

         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

         In the event of such a situation arising
         (indicated at Appendix 'Al' in the serial
         Order), this serial will go imnediately to
         Herries Road Bus Garage. This would be a
         rendezvous point for Ambulance vehicles.
         This serial would then give assistance to
         Ambulance personnel in the movement of their
         vehicles in liaison with Police Control and the
         Senior Ambulance Officer present.
SERIAL   Reserves - Mobile (Call Sign -
         TANGO 1)

         Phases 1 & 3 - Before and After
         Match.

         Patrol in a personnel carrier on
         the city side of the ground, giving
         particular attention to public
         houses in the vicinity of the Owlerton
         Stadium car park, where home support­
         ers gather on the forecourts (these
         contain some of the known hooligan
         element). If directed escort away
         supporters to and from the coach
         park or railway station. Follow
         supporters towards the city centre
         after the game to prevent damage
         en route.

         Phase   2 - During Match

         During the game the serial will
         take up a position in the area
         between the South Stand and Spion
         Kop. They will remain at this
         location for use as a reserve for
         deployment by the Ground Corrmander.




         Meal details at Briefing.
         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

         In the event of such a situation arising,
         (indicated at Appendix 'Al1 in the serial
         Order), this serial will return to the ground
         (if not already there) to give any assistance
         to the Fire Brigade they may require in
         relation to the movement of fire service
         vehicles.
                                                                                                  if iV-/

  ■/                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            REF:                      Fl/SRS/MJ
        FROM:   Inspector Sewell
                                                            ST A T IO N /D E P T .:   Hammerton Road
        TO:     The Chief Superintendent - 'F' Division
                                                            DATE:                     9 August 1988

                  SUBJECT:   EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                              GROUND



                   On Tuesday 9 August 1988, a meeting was held at Hammerton
                   Road Police Station to re-establish further liaison with the
                   Fire and Ambulance Service in the event of a major disaster
                   occurring a t ,the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.

                  The meeting was chaired by Superintendent Murray and attended
                  by Superintendent Marshall, Chief Inspector Beal and Inspector
                  Sewell, Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer Hopkins and Assistant
                  Chief Ambulance Officer (Operations) Jones, South Yorkshire
                  Ambulance Service and Assistant Divisional Officer Rowlands
                  of the South Yorkshire Fire Service

                  A senior ambulance officer already attends all home matches
                  at the Sheffield Wednesday Ground and is allocated a compli­
                  mentary ticket for the South Stand.  He is in direct radio
                  contact with ambulance control and in the event of a major
                  disaster at the ground, he would be the first line contact
                  with ambulance control.  Contingency plans are already in hand
                  for the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service to rendezvous with
                  their vehicles at Herries Road bus garage and the senior
                  ambulance officer alreac^at the Wednesday Ground would control
                  the ambulance vehicles in and out of the Wednesday Ground.

                  Arrangements have been made for the senior ambulance officer
                  who attends the Wednesday Ground to meet the 'FI' Liaison
                  Inspector outside the players' entrance at 2.15 pm, before
                  each home match to re-establish contact and also contact will
                  be maintained with Mr Lock, the security officer at the
                  Wednesday Ground.  In the event of an evening kick off,
                  further arrangements will be made to establish contact time
                  with the ambulance service.

                  In the event of a major disaster occurring, the senior
                  ambulance officer at the ground would, where possible, make
                  his way to the gymnasium to direct his operations.

                  It was considered that this ambulance officer would be better
                  based in the North Stand so he could get to the gymnasium
                  without problems.  However, the senior ambulance officer who
                  attends is off duty and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                  only wish to allocate the complimentary tickets to the ambulance
                  service for use in the South Stand, so that the club physio,
                  Alan Smith, can signal straight away to the ambulance officer
                  if an ambulance is required for a Wednesday player.




GEN/2
  (2)




     »
  Following discussions with the Fire Service Officer it was agreed
  that the fire service would attend by the quickest possible
  routes direct to the immediate scene of any fire and as such
  no rendezvous points or pre-arranged routes could be determined.

  The main points raised, in relation to the fire service, were
  that it was imperative that the Police Control give the exact
  location of any fire or incident and as much detail as possible
  given.  No senior fire officer is on duty at the match.

 To assist the fire and     ambulance services in any major disaster,
 two Police Tango units     will be specifically detailed to assist,
 one with the ambulance     service and the other with the fire service.
 The exact details will     be written into the serial order for the
 mobile unit concerned.




 Inspector



e v u |




 R *      W   u   -   W A         M                W       W                  ^

                                                       m,
                                                        ,,!-■ mi
                            ,            p a l

                                                  11 AUG ^ 8
  A
                                             CH»£- SC ?P S ^]^
                                         r        rr' n*visiof»*>\
                                                               «C>J
                                                                      . ii
                                                                    a *4' ‘

                  C
                  t^ \      f i
SERIAL   Reserves - Mobile (Call sign -
         TANGO 2)

         Phases 1 & 3 - Before and After
         Match.

         Patrol in a personnel carrier
         on the away frcm city side of
         the ground, giving particular
         attention to public houses on
         Penistone Road North where away
         supporters vehicles may have to
         pass. If directed escort away
         supporters to and frcm the coach
         park or railway station.

         Phase 2 - During Match

         During the game the serial will
         remain on patrol around the ground
         to ensure security of parked
         vehicles etc.



         Meal details at Briefing.

         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

         In the event of such a situation arising
         (indicated at Appendix 'Al' in the serial
         Order), this serial will go inmediately to
         Herries Road Bus Garage. This would be a
         rendezvous point for Ambulance vehicles.
         This serial would then give assistance to
         Ambulance personnel in the movement of their
         vehicles in liaison with Police Control and the
         Senior Ambulance Officer present.
SERIAL   Reserves - Mobile (Call Sign -
         TANGO 1)

         Phases 1 & 3 - Before and After
         Match.

         Patrol in a personnel carrier on
         the city side of the ground, giving
         particular attention to public
         houses in the vicinity of the Owlerton
         Stadium car park, where heme support­
         ers gather on the forecourts (these
         contain some of the known hooligan
         element). If directed escort away
         supporters to and from the coach
         park or railway station. Follow
         supporters towards the city centre
         after the game to prevent damage
         en route.

         Phase   2 - During Match

         During the game the serial will
         take up a position in the area
         between the South Stand and Spion
         Kop. They will remain at this
         location for use as a reserve for
         deployment by the Ground Commander.




         Meal details at Briefing.
         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

         In the event of such a situation arising,
         (indicated at Appendix 'Al' in the serial
         Order), this serial will return to the ground
         (if not already there) to give any assistance
         to the Fire Brigade they rray require in
         relation to the movement of fire service
         vehicles.
                                                                                                                                                      4?
                                                                                                                                                                                  \
                                                                                                                          FENCE AND GATE
                                                                                                                          UNOER STAIRS
                                                                                                  EXISTING
                                                                                   /        i     REFRESHMENTS & BAR                                                       TOILETS .
                                                                                  /N E W
                                                                                 'LADIES
                                                                                                                                                                 TOUTS PARTITIONED OFF
                                                                                   NEW GENTS
                                                                                   TOILET


                                                                                                    V IS IT IN G SEATED                                        HOME SEATED
                                                                                                     SUPPORTER’S .                                              SUPPORTERS .



                                                                                                                                      NEUTRAL AREA
                                                                                                                                            OR
                                                                                VISITING SUPPORTER’S                                  VISITING SUPPORTER’S                               HOME SUPPORTERS
                                                                                TERRACE .                                             TERRACE                                             TERRACE .
                                                                                                                                               NEW SECONDARY
                                                                                                                                               RADIAL FENCE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                  E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC                                                                       DRAWN                       SCALE

                  C o n s u ltin g Engineers                                               POSSIBLE MODIFICATION TO ENTRANCE ROUTES AT                                                                 CHECKED                N.T.S.
                  St. A n d r e w s House
                                                                                           LEPPINGS LANE END.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I6705 2 J
                  2 3 K in g fie ld Road                                                                                                                                                               APPROVED                 D R A W IN G   No.
                  S h e f f i e l d S11 9 A S   t * i. (0 7 4 2 ) 5 8 3 8 7 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                       DATE       APRIL 85             /       .
C .tts . L td .
        South Yorkshire County Council
        Chief Executive & County Clerk:                          Department of Administration
        J. C. Harris, M.A., LLB.(Cantab)                         County Hall
                                                                 Barnsley
                                                                 South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                 (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                 Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

        Our Ref: DV/AA/583/5         Your Ref:    OPS/JB         Date:   12 April 1985


        This matter is being dealt with by       D. Vaughan      Ext,




 Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

Confirming the *phone conversation between our respective
officers yesterday, a further meeting of the Officer
Working Party (Sheffield District) will be held at 10 am
on Thursday, 18th April, 1985, at the Police Sports and
Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield.

The purpose of the meeting is to consider the letter
dated 9th April and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners
relating to the Club's proposal to construct two new banks
of turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in
order to achieve segregation of visiting supporters at the
Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Stadium (copy of the
letter and plan forwarded under separate cover).

No doubt you will arrange to be represented at both
Headquarters and Divisional levels, as usual.

                                             Yours faithfully,




                                             Chief Executive.




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield.
S3 8LY
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                 Note of a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
                 District) held at the Police Sports & Social Club, Niagara
                               Sheffield, on 18th April 1985


PRESENT:                 ](City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           C.   Calvert   (South Yorkshire Police)
                          (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           G.   Stanley (South Yorkshire Police)
           T.   Stewart   (South Yorkshire Police)
           G.   Sykes     (South Yorkshire Police)
           D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
                          (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)


1.    Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 9th April
and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to the proposals of
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks of
turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the
Hillsborough Stadium.

2.    Consideration of Proposals

The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club. At one
time, both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances
at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of use by
home supporters as well.

The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
Police representatives, subject to:-

(a)   additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
      and the wall of the inner access road;

(b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral area or
      visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new
      central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
      pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit entry
      to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
      secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
      on the plan to be abandoned);

(c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters
      terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
      running from back to front with two gates (the existing radial
      fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
      home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

(d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit gates
      installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
      area

                                            1.
The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the pronosals,
subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects,
and the Building Authority similarly saw no objection, subject to
submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

3.   Action

IT WAS AGREED

(a) That              should investigate as a matter of urgency the means
of escape aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the
outcome.

(b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
County Fire Service, the outline proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastwood
& Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the submission of the
necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act and Building Regulations.
        South Yorkshire County Council
        Chief Executive b County Clerk:                              Department of Administration
        J, C. Harris, M.A., LL.B.(Cantab)                            County Hall
                                                                     Barnsley
                                                                     South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                     Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                     (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 8 6 1 4 1
                                                                     Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

        Our Ref: D V / A A / 5 8 3 / 5   Your Ref:     W E /JF       Date: 2 Mav   1 98 5


        This matter is being dealt with by            D.   Vaughan   Ext. No. 42




Dear Sirs,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1985
Sheffield Wednesday Football ClubPLC

In reply to your letter dated 9th April, whilst a meeting of the
Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) was held on 18th April
to consider the proposals which you outlined, the County Fire
Service requested additional time to consider the means of escape
aspects.

I am now able to say that, subject to the incorporation of the
following points and to the submission of detailed plans and
calculations under both the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and
Building Regulations, the proposals outlined are regarded as
generally acceptable

(a)   additional gates being provided between the turnstile
       numbered 16 and the wall of the inner access road;

(b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral
       area or visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in
      half by a new central radial fence running from the tunnel
       entrance to the pitchside security fence with gates erected
       so as to permit entry to be diverted to either half as
       appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial fence
      adjacent to the existing, fence indicated on the plan to be
       abandoned);

(c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters'
      terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial
       fence running from back to front with two gates (the existing
      radial fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral
      area and home supporters — to have a second gate installed):



                                                     /Contd . . .


Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
St. Andrews House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield.
Sll 9AS
the existing pitch p e r :   have additional exi
gates installed - o n e      area and one in the
home supporters area;

certain gates to have t:     hs (in metres) indi
on the attached plan ar.      fully supervised.



                             :ith fully,




                             lecutive.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (3 -A
                                                                                                      2-10




                                                                                                      rc ? tE i U GAIE
                                                                                                      ' M Q STAIRS
                                                                                    EXISrWB
                                                                HeN     I           «SHMEHTSS8AH.                                                                     GENTS
                                                                                                                                                                      rOfLEFS.


                                                              «EW GEMS’         |                                                                   is l e t s   P is rm o N E D of ;
                                                              TOILET.           1


                                                                                    VISITING SEATED
                                                                                     SUPPORTER'S                                                HOME SEATED
                                                                                                                                                 SUPPORTER'S



                                                                                                                  neutral area
                                                          VISITING SUPPORTER'S                                          OR
                                                          TERRACE                                                 VISITING SUPPORTER'S
                                                                                                                  TERRACE                                                               nUME SUPPORTER'S
                                                                                                                                                                                         TERRACE.
                                                                                                                           NEW SEuKOARY             !
                                                                                                                           HAfllAL FENCE.           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -----------------------
                  EASTWOOD                   & PARTNERS
                  C o n s u ltin g    Engineers
                                                                   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALl rT iiff                             pi      r   '
                  St. A n d r e w s    House
                                                                                                                                                                                                          draw n                    J.C.                 SCALE
                  2 3 K in g f ie l d _R o a d
                  S h e ffie ld     S11 9 A S                      S        i        w                    ro                                        ir                                                    C HE C KE D                             HIS.
C .a s . L : a.                                                                                                                                                                                          approved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1    D R A W IN G   N o

                                                                                                                                                                                                         DATE                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ■IPMl 35   1   6705/ 2 .
E A S T W O O D & P AR T N E R S                                                                                      St. Andrews House
               (Consulting     Engineers)                                                                             23 Kingfield Road
Directors:                                                                                                            Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood               F.Eng., B.Eng. P h.D . D.Eng.                                                               Tel.: (0742) 583871
                          C.Eng., F.I.C.E. P.P.I.Struct E„
                          F .I.M a c h i. F J L S., M .C oruE .
                                                                                                                      Telex:       547266
A. A. Wood                B.Eng., Ph.D „ C.Eng. F.I.C.E.
                                                                                                                                        and at:
                          F.l.Struct.E„ M.I.W.E.S.. M.Cons.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood         B.Sc., C-Eng. M .I.C .E. M.I.Stroct.E.                                                         36 H ig h H o lb o rn
G. Spir                   C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                                  London WC1V 6AA
Associates:                                                                                                              Tel.: (01) 242 7438
                                                                                                    0      2
C. S. Greaves             B.Enf., C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.EE.
J . A. Strange            C.Enf., M.I.Stnict.E.                                                                  WE/KWP/SEB/6705
S. Preston                B.Enf., C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Stnict.E.                             Your R ef:
R. Tandy                  C.Enf., FJ.Struct.E.
                                                                        •        <• K!     U ltiN lV             I;
G. M . Seaman             B.Sc., C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Stnict.E.
                                                                      I - !=!»'; V.   •'   1,- ; ini<,ir;li ?r
J . M . Wood              B.Sc., C.Enf., M.I.C.E., M.I.Scruct.E.

C onsultant:                                                                20 JUt vf'oS
A. G. Burdett             G.M., B.Sc.(Enf.), C.Ene.,
                          F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.                    v m n        VMA.       g^N^/y



South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                  25 July 1985
Department of Administration
County Hall,
Barnsley
S. Yorks


For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                              Segregation of Visiting Spectators at
                                                         Leppings Lane End

               Further to our preliminary submission in April 1985, we
enclose six copies of the drawings as follows:-
               6705/ 1        Existing Layout of Leppings Lane Entrance
                     6        Details of the New Central Fence on West Terrace
                     8A       Modifications to Entrance Routes & Revised
                              Layout of Facilities.
                     9a       Proposed New Ladies Toilets Under West Stand
                    10A       Details of New & Refurbished Toilets at
                             Leppings Lane End.
                    11A      Details of New Refreshment Facilities Under
                             Elevated North West Terrace.
                    12       Details of New Handrail at Leppings Lane
                             Entrance and Barrier on West Stand.
                    13       Details of New Safety Barrier East Side of
                             North Stand.
                    14a      New Brickwork Wall - Leppings Lane End

                              An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




    6705/15   Repairs to Crowd Control Barriers -
              Spion Kop.
         16   Plan on Spion Kop - Barrier Numbering
         17   Details of New Radial Fence on West Terrace
         18   Details of New Fences on Access Level of
              West Stand.
         19   Location Plan for Crowd Security Fence,
              West Stand.




                                Yours sincerely,
                                             _______ L
                                                                                                                                                             •THE OWL SHOP.




                                                                                                                                       U D IE S TOILETS.




                                                 EXISTING    REFRESHMENTS AND 8A R .
                                                                                                           GENES   TOILETS.   EXISTING SUBSTATION.




                                                                                           WEST   STAND.


E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                                                                             SCALE
                                                                           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB P.L.C.                                        DRAWN
C o n s u ltin g Engineers
S t. A n d r e w s House                                                                                                                                   CHECKED
                                                                                                                                                                                     1:250
2 3 K in g fie id Rocd                                                     EXISTING LAYOUT OF LEPPINGS LANE ENTRANCE.
S h e f f i e l d S11 9 AS   T » l. (0 7 4 2 ) 5 8 3 8 7 1
                                                                                                                                                           APPROVED                 DR A W IN G No.

                                                                                                                                                           DATE           2 7 -85
                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                    6705/1
         Notes.
 t r . : K e . I o « = ^ ]e - a J d           b e u s l            c a    ^ e s        e=>^w ee>J           -Y o tz U s V .W s .
—       ~TCg > i y . <=-ekKE^*<jll.^ Exo^k'/e^'Je. C ^S"Y Iwl s J e E -V                                            CHA,iJ»JeL
 ~ - ^ U O              S T fk tA - p x a ^ p s .           fo E C . tZ e -i^ £ » E .            .
?.      : ^ b .V o «= ^ T |*e       a j- id      E t-o s t                                             \~J <t- \2> A.VJ-C* z d V
                                                                                                                                                          HEW W A LL m PARAPET
     7 ; .A S S O Q A ]& D                A C C .E .S £ » * z :t& S »             AoJ D           N K E .< ^ H ^ J \ S ) A S .                            TO M A It n IX 1 S T 1 N & A
J n t m        l b      v JeW        * Y o b » J ^ i\je .       fc>\-«a<=j£           ty   fc » 6 , »wi      k e V is £ .d
 ~ " L       o c ^ i o J             R E -O S E             - T f e t \ . W « a t Z \ £ . A & x a s /e .     J*A.\w ) v J ^ A L .                                                                  SHEETED FENCE, ACCESS
         ^ tz .e ^ .iJ c u e jA .e .v jT             ^>J&           \_«tsY«*oY t>& p^>V& o f -                     m e   W                       DRG 6 7 0 5 /1 2 .                                &ATE TO BE MAINTAINED.
         ■ p J i C S j - l & T 'W   E=i.cac.V(l ~TS=»                        A 25 .
                                                                                                                                                         \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M       SUPPORTERS
M *.     O ENNusLvbm -&r<\ S ^ v-l c , ToBL*-lsT\\.t S=L«o<=-W. ,^ E N K o N /e
         D B W u a V iS U E D M ^Y cS Z V ^ V *y-=» ~TTp Wv^.Vl'E G 0 0 D
         2 S a«_ *;zf= .A e^£ _ “ P= »           L eV eV                     A a j A . c E W -] -       E »C Y c^K ke.K l                                             > %           DEMOLISHED .

 -
         A /^ C ^ £ ^ C « iV N V - v J E A S a u C
    (fcow-w-) e»*J E*i£T\\vjC. H ^ k S Z O c c a C Z E .
                                                                        2 S / * * * ) , b O .S E            C -o t ilZ & S .
                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                           ^    \.          ^       T U R N S T IL E S .K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >        '
E=>. t Z e V o c k ^ t A . V J O « Z E - Z ^ S E . p t v - i d E . f c r f £ \v s lE .E .> - l                                                                                                                                  ^J^A C E                I
         “[ o t Z i J s i l l i e s ,   o*^YE.PZ. p e U c -E .. ^ vae.^ Y p e U c -E .
         W r fw       pA.A>s^s~=A * c o a [ e d js s E A f.lc t= > s»ye.tJL S H & E "]i*u c .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      n z to o a fre d o o ftz ..
                 d E E ^ 5 ^Se<£fio»J C 0 V 0 0 R . K c - f '£ » E & 2> "pa & & - 1 + -8 .0 0
                                                                                                                                                   EXISTING M .H .                            HEW CHARCOH SAFET1CURB.                                       RE-USE EXISX1H&
     T0   fe e . p V ^ s 'Y i& o V . c o ^ T J e o « » J e=»=>~fH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GATE. ~
C=». pta=»v/\cse. t-lc w o ^ i x e o v J               eTY'     tZ -fc                                    e p E tJ                                                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                            NEW TURNSTILE BLOCK
        < u -c ^ iJ w le \.          c ,^ \_ V y          ^ c ^ ^ o E - v jif -Y«=> ctE.Voc-cCYE.c3                      c^ a    ^e .                                                       TO MATCH EXISTING                                           LINE OF RELOCATED
         C ^ w 4 w i.t« £ Y T 0            E ’f ' S l ’ U C , M A v J W <aVe. .                                                                                                                                                                         FENCE.* ~ ~ 7                 THE OWL SHOP.
7-       SZ’E V .o e ^ e . A U D              S2LE. - 0>e=E_ p tw lc E /e u /^ p E                              fta£Y/sJe-E-*4
        “Y c 2 > K .v a -s r7 ,\.fe s e > /‘i a >U d ~Yh e o v J ^ & W o p                                                                                                                                                                              OME NEW PANEL
         O vJ e .      v-1e .W        P > ^ vJ   e   \.    o f=      p E .v 4 c .E -           \<=^   T 2 .E ^ O \e E .O .                                                                                                                              REQUIRED

                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^PERSONNEL ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                                                    /                       /        nnno
                                                                                                                                                                      SEE DR& 6705/1^


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REFURBISHED LADIES TOILETS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SEE 0R& 6 7 0 5 / 9 . f l


                                                                                           U                         U                                                          a                                   £r                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _ __ * fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *i                j

                                                                  EX1STINS        REFRESHMENTS AMD BAR
                                                                                                                                                                       T L REFURBISHED
                                                                                                                                                                             7         '. 1                     1
                                                                                                                                             U D IE S                  3                  *                                     REFURBISHEO         n   EXISTING SUBSTATION
                                                                                                                                                                       =1       ,_ PEHTS TOILETS , -                            CENTS TOILETS       □
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                                                   /
                                                                                                                                  SEE DR& 6 7 0 5 ! \ m                     SEE OR & 6 7 0 5 /1 0 »                                                                                            NEW REFRESHMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UNDER ELEVATED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NORTH WEST TERRACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEE DR6 6 7 0 5 / 1 1 .

                                                                                                                     W EST STAND.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SCALE
       ’E A S T W O O D & P A R T N E R S                                                             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC                                                                                                                                        DRAWN        /./>7.Lo/s*=r)

       C o n s u l t i n g Engineers
                                                                                                      MODIFICATIONS TO ENTRANCE ROUTES AND REVISED                                                                                                                                 CHECKED    m/ji.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1:250
       S t. A n d r e w s House
       2 3 K in g fie fd Road                                                                         LAYOUT OF FACILITIES AT LEPPINGS LANE END                                                                                                                                    APPROVED                                            o.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D R A W IN G No.
       S h e f f i e l d S11 9 A S                t * i. (0 7 4 2 ) s s 3 « 7 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6705/8       Pi
EASTW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                      St. Andrews House
              (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                      23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                          Sheffield S11 9AS
D lnctors:
W. Eastwood               F.Eng., B.Eng_ Ph.O_ 0-Er>g,
                                                                                                                          Tel.: (0742) 583871
                          C .E ng, F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.StrucfcE,                                                              Telex:       547266
                          F.LM«ch.E-, F.G .S , M.Cons.E,

A. A. Wood                B.Eng., P h.D . C .Eng. F.I.C.E,                                                                                  tn d i t :
                          F.I.StnicLE.. M .I.W .E.S, M.Cons.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood e sc.. C.Eng.. MJ.C.E.. M .I.Slruct.E.                                                           /         36 H ig h H o ib o rn

G. Spir           C-Eng.. M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                  ''           J             London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                              '        * -,/                 Tel.: (01) 242 7438
Associates:
C. S. Greaves             B.Enf., C.Enf., MJ.C.E., MJ.Struct.E,
                                                                                             Our Ref:                    WE/KH/6705
J . A. Strange            C.Enf., M.Utniet.E.
S. Preston                B.Enf., C Jnf.. M.LC.E.. MJ.Struct.E.                              Your R e f :                DV/AA/
R. Tandy                  G£nf., F.1-Struct.E.

G, M . Seaman             B .S e .,   C-Enf., M . I .C .E ,   M .l ^ t r u c t .E .

J . M . Wood              B ^ e ..    C Jnf.,   M J .C .E ., M X S c r u c t.E .


Consultant:                                                                                                                   /e ^
A. G. Burdett             GJ1.. B.Sc.(Enf ), C.Enf,,
                          FJ.C.E.. FJ.Struct.E.




The Chief Executive,                                                                                                      1 August 1985
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorks.
S70 2 T N .




For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                         Safety of Sportsground Act,                                   1975
                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
               Thank you very much for your letter of 30 July giving the
outcome of the Working Party meeting on 2 9 July.                                                                        We note
the general comment that the calculations have to be approved
by the Building Surveyors Department.                                                     We believe that all the
calculations which are likely to be required have been sent for
checking and comment.
               With regard to your detailed observations our response
is as follows
(a)            We are not sure of the location on the West terrace of
the proposed extra security gate.                                                     There is already a gate in
the 2m wide gap formed by the new radial fence for use by the
police.           This same gate will still be available for the spectators
in emergency as there are gates into the 2m gap from the terrace
which will be under the control of the police.                                                                         This point may
perhaps be clarified during the Working Party's visit on 7 August.

(b)            The foundations "for this fence are in fact already aligned in
                                      An Unlimited Company, Registered in England — No. 1833144
                                                                            SHEET 2 •
m

    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




     the way you suggest.

      (c) and    (d)
                We are a little surprised by the suggestion that a
     single block thickness is not sufficient for the cubicle
     walls.      The inside of a toilet cubicle is not a very
     vulnerable area and the walls are braced by the door frame.
     Studding is not at all suitable in terms of strength or
     durability, and would probably invite vandalism.

      (e)     The refreshment     area is under the most westerly
     staircase up to the north west corner terrace.         There will
     be an opportunity to inspect on 7 August.

      (f)     The      handrail is to be at a height of 1250mm   (4'1")
     above the horizontal step, measured at the face of the vertical
     step.

      (g)     The      stepping of the face of the wall is achieved    by 45°
     chamfers which will not form good footholds.

     (h)      Mr.           ~| says that the club will certainly not
     object to the provision of another gate at this point, and
     the precise location can be discussed on 7 August.

     (i)      As with point      (a), we are not sure what is intended,
     and the matter can be discussed on 7 August.

     (j)      Your comment     regarding stewarding will no doubt,     be
     taken care of by Mr.


              It will be much easier for your Working Party to
     appreciate what is intended when they see the works under
     construction.        There will also be an opportunity to see
     the metal decking of the South stand.


                                     Yours sincerely,




     c .c .   Mr.
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

       Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on
                             7th August, 1985

 PRESENT: Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

           Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
           P. Hough (Deputy Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

          __________ (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
          C. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
          _________ (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
          B. Mole (South Yorkshire Police)
                     (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
          D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
                        (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

 1.   Purpose of Meeting.

The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "summer" inspection of the
Stadium with particular reference to the Leppings Lane end improvements and
the metal sheeting of the upper seated area of the South Stand.

2 .___ Ground Inspection.

A.    Leppings Lane End

The progress of the works to segregate visiting supporters behind and on the
West Terrace and Stand were inspected with particular reference to the
points raised at the Officer Working Party's meeting held on 29th July,
(forwarded to Messrs. Eastwood and Partners by the Chief Executive's letter
of 30th July) and Messrs. Eastwood & Partners reply of 1st August.

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners had confirmed that all the calculations which
were likely to be required had now been sent to the Building Authority for
checking and comment.

On the inspection, the Building Authority pointed out what they considered
to be the poor standard of workmanship in the construction of the new
dividing wall which was being built behind the Stand. The position of the
Police Personnel access gate and the stepping of the face of the wall by
45 chamfers so as not to form footholds were acceptable.

The foundations of the new handrail by Turnstile 23 had actually been
aligned so as to maintain the exit width between the outer (river) wall
and the Turnstile (unlike the indication on the plan submitted).

As regards the single block thickness of the internal walls of the cubicles
in the new male and female toilet facilities at the rear of the stand,
Messrs. Eastwood and Partners considered that the inside of a toilet cubicle
was not a very vulnerable area, and pointed out that the walls were braced
by both the outer walls and the door frames. The Building Authority noted
the assurances given by Dr. Eastwood, but expressed concern that the
dividing walls in the new toilet facilities evidently did not have any
foundations, apparently having been built straight onto the existing
concrete slabs. It was noted that there were some 9 inch thick brick walls
in the Male Toilets, it being considered that any hooliganism or vandalism
would be more likely to occur there than in the Female Toilets.

The Club pointed out that thenew toilet facilities would not be completely
finished by the first match of the season (on 17th August) but that
temporary facilities would be available and that no building material would
be left on site.

The position of the new refreshment area under the most westerly staircase
up to the North-West corner terrace was noted. This again had been built
straight onto the existing concrete slabs.

On the Terrace itself, it was noted that there was an existing gate in the
new 2 m. wide gap formed by the new radial fence for use by the Police.
This gate would still be available for the use of spectators in an
emergency as the gates at the top of the Terrace under the control of the
Police would enable spectators to be directed down the 2 m. wide gap.
However, it was agreed that steps or a longer gate would be required. It
was also agreed that a new gate would be required from the new South
Central Terrace Pen.

As regards the upper seated stand area, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners had
sent by letter dated 2nd August plans of the new fences and barriers in
both the Stand and at the Access level.

IT WAS AGREED

(a)   that the condition of the internal walls in the new male and female
toilet facilities at the rear of the Stand should be monitored;

(b)   that the existing gate in the pitch perimeter fence should either be
extended or have steps to provide easier access from the new 2 m. wide gap
formed by the new radial fence;

(c)   that a new gate in the pitch perimeter fence should be provided from
the new South Central Terrace Pen;

(d)   that the advertising hoardings at the front of the upper seated stand
area should be securely fixed to the concrete wall;

(e)   that the spalling of the concrete of the wall at the front of the
upper seated stand area should receive attention as a matter of maintenance;

(f)   that the corrosion of the steel columns at the rear of the Stand
should receive attention on a maintenance basis.

B.    South Stand

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners reported that the condition of the upper
concrete outer portion of the exterior wall of the Stand had been
investigated and was considered to be satisfactory.

It was noted that the metal sheeting of the wooden upper portion of the
Stand had been largely completed, and the spraying of the non-slip
surface was to cannence very shortly (and certainly be completed by the
start of the season).
IT WAS AGREED that the metal sheeting of the wooden upper portion of the
Stand should largely overcome the flammability problems inherent in such
timber structures, and the Club stated that they would ensure that the
wooden intermediate steps were securely replaced upon completion of the
laying of the metal sheeting.

C.    Spion Kop

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners recalled that outline details of the Club's
proposal to cover the Spion Kop had been sent for the information of the
Officer Working Party by letter dated 22nd July. As part of that scheme,
the bridge portion of the Kop would be removed. Its present condition
remained acceptable with continuing maintenance.

In yifiw of experiences last season, the Club were requested to provide an
additional gate in the pitch perimeter fence in the front corner nearest
to the South Stand to overcome the lateral crushing hazard which could
occur when large crowds were present.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would provide a new gate in the pitch perimeter
fence in the front corner nearest to the South Stand with a stepped
arrangement to assist access and egress.

D.    North Stand

The temporary storage facilities created by the erection of a timber wall
(i-n front of the Ladies' Changing Facilities in the Sports Hall) were
inspected.

IT WAS AGREED that so long as light combustibles (such as paint) were not
stored in this area, its use continued to be acceptable on a temporary
basis.

      Closed Circuit Television Facilities

The advantages for general crowd control and security (both in and outside
the Stadium) which would be given by the recently installed Closed Circuit
Television System were explained to the Officer Working Party.

IT WAS AGREED:-

(a)   that a 2| kg. CO2 Fire Extinguisher should be installed in both the
Police Control Box and'the Disc Jockey Box;

(b)   that loose external wires on the outside of the Boxes should be made
secure.
c
                                                                     OPS TW3/SM
                                                                                   OPERATICilS
CH SUPT MGLc.     DIVISION                                                         IS November 1935


                sosga   197?. - siiErrie l d W e d n e s d a y   football   club




Pls..se ■'ind st*:ached for your information copy of minutes dated
13 "ovenfc        5 in re::pect of a meeting held at Niagara Sports
Ground.




Chief Superintendent
Operations L Traffic Division


Enc




                             Jlryj
                                                      /?• c                     rJj^Zx. _
        U^»    Yue^~
                       SAFETY OF 5?<5RTS' GROUNDS 'AC'T,~1975
Note of a Meeting of the Officer.^Working Tarty (Sheffield District), held at
the Police Sports and Social Club, Niaga;rrt Sheffield, on 13th November, 1985


PRESENT:                  (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              C. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
              R. Greenwood (South Yorkshire Police)
                          (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)     SGv TH YGRi o . PCL!
              I           (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council;
                         (South Yorkshire Police)                 j
              D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)      j      ^q
                           1(South Yorkshire County Fire Service);
                                                                                      • /' V
                                                                     CHIEF SL FE                XT
1.    Purpose of Meeting                                             Or     i iQfCS     I HA;

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the response to be given to the
proposals outlined in the letter dated 25th October, 1985 and plans received
from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to facilities for the disabled, an
increased capacity for the Spion Kop .and consequent additional exit routes.
Outline details of the roof to be erected over the Spion Kop had also been
provided.                               \ ,     ,     ^7
2.    Disabled Facilities                                         IjdK & su)
The Officer Working Party expressed reservations on both of the suggestions
proposed by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners for the disabled. If the disabled
continued to be accommodated in front of the North Stand, they would still
be in the "firing line" of mis-aimed shots and any clear sheeting over the
top of the area they occupied could constitute an unacceptable hazard to
persons who might vacate the North Stand in an emergency situation by
climbing over the front wall of the stand onto the pitch perimeter. It was
accepted that the means of escape did not provide for this to be done, but
it had to be recognised that in practice this was a real possibility. The
structural strengfhof such a structure would also be something of a problem.
The other suggestion of accommodating the disabled in front of the perimeter
fence along the front of the Spion Kop (nearest to the North Stand) was also
unacceptable for the reasons stated by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners.

The suggestion of the Police representatives was that the front area of the
lower Spion Kop (nearest to the North Stand) should have the terracing levelled
to provide, say, a two-tier level landing on which to accommodate the disabled,
with a substantial fence at the rear. The existing pitch perimeter fence in
front of this area could be removed, and the disabled would continue to gain
access from the ramp between the Spion Kop and the North Stand as at present.
This would also enable free access by the disabled to the proposed disabled
toilets under the rebuilt terracing of the Spion Kop.

The current legislation relating to the disabled was also discussed.

 IT WAS AGREED that the proposals for the disabled, as now
•outlined by the Police representatives, should be supported and
  transmitted to MessrsEastwood & Partners as the views of
 the Officer Working Party, subject to there being no obstruction of exit
 routes and flows.

3.    Enlarged Spion Kop

The Fire Service and the Building Authority agreed that calculations showed
that the enlarged Spion Kop would provide for an increase of some 5,000
spectators on the present capacity of 16,850, and that the number of exit
widths required to achieve evacuation was 46. The proposals to increase the
tunnel exit on the north side of the Kop to 8 clear units and to provide a
complete new six unit staircase on the south side were regarded as acceptable.
As when the original calculations had been made, the units of exit width
included the emergency gates in the pitch perimeter fence, but it was cons­
idered that landings in front of these gates should be constructed (as has
been done at Bramall Lane).

IT WAS AGREED that, subject to the following points, the proposals from the
enlarged Spion Kop submitted by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners were generally
acceptable:-

      (a)   adequate headroom being provided between the new roof and the
            upper rear and the new south side exit routes:
      (b)   to barriers being provided adjacent to the refurbished gents'
            toilets and the new ladies' toilets in the new six unit staircase
            on the south side;
     (c)    to landings being constructed in front of the existing emergency
            gates in the pitch perimeter fence;
     (d)    to confirmation of the number of new turnstiles to be provided on
            the south side and on the Penistone Road side;
     (e)     until acceptable alternatives are available, the new exit gates to
            be fitted with a turn-bar arrangement under the control of
            stewards.

4 .Roofing of Spion Kop
_




Whilst itwas accepted that only an outline of the roofing proposals hadbeen
supplied to date, the Building Authority pointed out that the plans showed
that the gables were not lined.

IT WAS AGREED that this should be pointed out to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
as well as the fact that should any of the proposed works on enlarging or
roofing the Spion Kop take place other than in the close season, it will be
a requirement that the areas concerned will have to be secured to prevent
unauthorised access.

5 .___ Crowd Flow at the Leppings   Lane End of the Stadium

The Police reported on the continuing problems caused by the merging of
spectators from all parts of the Stadium at the Leppings Lane end.

It was difficult to see how this could be overcome, as the physical restraints
to achieve this could conceivably be more of a danger than allowing the present
position to continue.

6 .___ Duties of Stewards Booklet

IT WAS AGREED that the draft of a Booklet prepared by the South Yorkshire Police
outlining the duties of safety stewards was acceptable and should be distributed
to designated grounds for the information and guidance of stewards employed at
such grounds. Factors peculiar to particular grounds could, of course, be
added if considered appropriate.

7 .___ Spot Checks at Designated Grounds

The Fire Service reported on the success of the recent spot check carried out
at the Oakwe 11 Ground of the Barnsley Foe   conjunction with the
Police and the Building Authority, and re     Divisions of the
Brigade were being asked to carry out sir    s at designated
grounds in their areas.

IT WAS AGREED that such spot checks were     sure that the requi
standards were being maintained by the Cl
                C:i     SUPT MEADOWS    OPS •- TRAFFIC DIVISION                                                OPF.F.ATTC.iS
                C;i supt            f division                                                                    D e c s a b e r 19



                                       SAFETY OF SPORTS CFOUIIES ACT 1?73
                                       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




                P7.ctr.re fir.d attached for your information a copy of                             ?. letts"
                     :‘cv.:r.!:er Ivo; frc-n Eastwood ana Part
                                         x «         C W u U U   u i i u   i »— .»   ^ -J   w »»v                      w


                ('scr.ty C..ur.cil in respect of the; fcrt!:c                                       x   npr*ovcrTiwi'.tii
                r.r Sheffield ’    .'edr.eeday Football Ground.




                Chief Superin12r.dent


                i_r.c




                          n^.____




                           S O U T H YORKS. POLICE




                          OPERATIONS & TR'AFJIC




 SOUTH YORKS. POLICE


         6 DEC 1985

CHIEF S U P E R IN T E N D E N T
OP E R A TIO N S & T R A F F IC
 ♦^ S T W O O D
               ( C o n s u ltin g
                                    & PARTNERS
                                     E n g in e e r s )                       (
                                                                                  ,                              St. Andrews House
                                                                                                                 23 Kingfield Road
 Directors;                                                                   J                                  Sheffield S11 9AS
 W. Eastwood                    F.Eng., B.Eng, Ph D , D.Eng,
                                C.Eng.. F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..
                                F.l.Mach.E„ F.G .S. M.Cons.E.
                                                                          /                                     .Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                                                                                                 Telex:       547266
                                                                                  .   0>:..
 A. A. Wood                    B .E ng, Ph.D.. C .Eng, F.I.C .E,      '
                               F .I.S tructE , M .I.W .E.S, M.Cons.E.
                                                                                      V*-1*                                           and at:
 R. C. A. Eastwood             B.Sc.. C.Eng.. M .I.C .E, M.I.Struct.E.
    Spir                                                                                                fy       /    36 H ig h H o l b o r n
                               C-Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                                      London WC1V 6AA
 Associates:
                                                                                                                      T el.: (01) 242 7436
 C. S. Greaves                 B.Enf ., C.Enf., M.I.C.E, MJ.Struct.E.
 J . A. Strange                C.Enf., M.I.Struct.E,                                           Our Re f :            WE/KH/6648
 S. Preston                    B.Enf.. CEnf ., M.I.CE.. M-I.Stnict-E.
 R. Tandy
                                                                                               Your R e f :          DV/AA/583/5
                               C.Enf., FXStruct.E.
 G. M . Seaman                 B.Sc., C-EnfM.I.C.E., MJ.Stnici.E.
 J . M . W ood                 B.S«„ C.Enf.. MJ.CE., MJJtruct.E.
 Consultant:
 A . G. Burdett                    . B SJ:;(Enf.). C.Enf..
                              F.I.C.E., F.LStruct.E.




 Department of Administration,
 South Yorkshire County Council                                                                                      29 November 1985
 County Hall,                   '
 Barnsley,
 South Yorkshire,
 S70 2TN.


For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                                    Safety of Sports Grounds Act,                                  1975
                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
          Thank you for your letter of 14 November setting                                                           out the
comments of the officer working party orj the proposals for the
new roof over the Kop.                                    Our response is as follows


1•      Disabled Facilities
          First it should be emphasised that the disabled will have
to be accommodated at ground level.                                                      No other arrangement is
possible at reasonable expense.                                                   The choice is between putting
them in front of the North stand or in front of the Kop.
         Considering first the Kop, you will know that the terracing
drops down below the level of the perimeter track.                                                              It would
therefore be necessary to place the disabled slabbing and seating
behind the line of the present perimeter fence.                                                             Each disabled
chair including manoeuvring space and also a runway in front
of the chairs occupies the same space as about 20 standing
spectators.                It would therefore be necessary to sacrifice the

                                    An Unlimited Company, Registered In England - No. 1833144
                                                                     SHEET   2 .


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




 equivalent of about 1000 standing spectator places to accommodate
 50 disabled people and their attendants.      This would be
extremely costly.      The Club has decided to increase the
capacity of the Kop by 5000 people and the additional cost
compared with merely roofing over the present Kop is in
excess of £500,000.      Thus, if 1000 standing places were
sacrificed the cost to the Club would be £100,000 at least.
Ancillary expenses would include moving the boundary fence
and reconstructing it to safety barrier standards plus the
cost of the concrete hardstanding.      We also have to keep in
mind that not only would the spectators be in the firing
line if anywhere near the goal but that in addition the new
Kop roof only extends to the front of the terracing so that
the disabled would be virtually unprotected from rain.
        The alternative proposal of leaving the disabled in front
of the North stand has the advantage that the cantilevered
roof extends some way in front of the seating so that there
is some protection from rain except when the wind is blowing
from the South.        The Club would like to give complete
protection from rain and is prepared to consider the cost of
the glazed roofing which we have suggested as a possible way
of increasing the comfort of the disabled.      The glazing
would of     course be of toughened glass.
        If the working party has strong reservations about the
glazing then obviously it will     not be carried out.     However
I should stress that there is no possibility of the disabled
being placed in front of the Kop because of the exorbitant
cost.      The Club will continue to use the present location and
the only question to be decided is whether it should be under
cover or not.

        I should add that new toilet facilities for the disabled
are an integral part of the scheme for the Kop and will be
conveniently placed under the North      end of the Kop.
                                         SHEET
_

    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




    2•   Enlarged Spion Kop
          (a)   All exit routes will have 2.4m clear head room
          (approximately 8f t . ).


          (b)   We will need to discuss the proposed barrier
         adjacent to the new ladies toilet.      The exit route
         widens out very considerably from 4.1m wide at the
         location where the six unit width has been calculated
         and is approximately 6m wide alongside the toilet block.
         We therefore believe that there is no bottleneck effect
         and that a barrier might merely provide an unseen
         obstruction which could create difficulty.     We will
         forward a larger scale drawing of the area so that
         our comments can be considered in more detail.


         (c)    We will of course provide the landings in front
         of the existing emergency gates in the pitch perimeter
         fence but you will know that there have been changes of
         view on this particular matter in the past and we would
         not wish the Club to be put to the expense of taking
         them out again when members of the present officer working
         party are replaced with the passage of time.


         (d)    Therewill be four new turnstiles on Penistone
         Road and six new turnstiles at the South end of the Kop.


         (e)    Gates with a turn—bar arrangement will be provided
         at the exits and the Club will of course provide stewards
         to control them.


    3.   Roofing of Spion Kop
         The gables will be sheeted on the outside face only and
wi H      n°t be lined.    This is normal in Kop buildings and we
think it extremely unlikely that there will be any difficulty
with hooligans climbing.         The horizontal rails are at such
wide spacings that it would be difficult for even the most
agile to climb up.
                                                                      SHEET   4   .


EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




         We are very mindful of the need to complete the areas
 open to spectators before the start of the new season.          It
 is conceivable that the contractors will have difficulty
 in completing the new terrace steps at the rear of the Kop
 before the first game.     In that event secure fencing will
 have to be provided as a temporary me a s u r e . However we
 are reasonably confident that the whole of the terrace
 area of the Kop will be complete by the due date.          We
 also intend to have all the new exit arrangements completed
        it is possible that work will still be going on in toilet
 areas, particularly the new toilet for the disabled.


 4*     Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium
        The Club is aware of the difficulties which the Police
 have to contend with at the Leppings Lane end and has of
 course been very pleased to help the problem by the major
 works which were undertaken during the last close season.
 We find it very difficulty to envisage anything more which
 could be done at reasonable expense.


 5*      Fire Brigate Access to the Front of all   Stands
        As part of the works on the Kop, we are    completely
 remodelling the area around the existing tunnel.        The
 head    room is being increased to 2.4m and the   width of the
 tunnel is being increased also.     A considerable amount of
 earth shifting will have to take place and this
 presents an opportunity to widen the gangway so as to
 enable say a fire engine to pass between the North stand
 and the retaining wall of the Kop.      If the Fire Service
 think this is of value, I should be pleased to know the
 width they would like so that we can see whether it can
 be provided at reasonable cost and without sacrificing too
 many standing spaces.

                            Yours   sincerely,
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

        Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield
                         on 22nd January, 1986

PRESENT: Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

          Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
                  (Groundsman)

          Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                        South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                        (Sheffield City Council - Building Surveyors' Division)
                              (Sheffield City Council - Legal & Admin. Dept)
                        (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                         (Sheffield City Council - Legal & Admin Dept.)
          R.   Greenwood (South Yorkshire Police)
          D.   Rosevere (South Yorkshire Police)
          T.   Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
                     (Sheffield City Council - Building Surveyors' Division)
          G.   Sykes (South Yorkshire Police)
          D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)      ,
                         (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)*

1.    Welcome and Introduction

Mr. Vaughan pointed out that the Local Government Act, 1985, would abolish
the South Yorkshire County Council (and the other Metropolitan County Councils)
on 31st March, 1986. From 1st April, 1986, the Certificating Authority under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, would be the appropriate District
Council. In the case of the Hillsborough Stadium this would naturally be
the Sheffield City Council. For this reason, it had been suggested to the
City Council that appropriate representatives in addition to the Building
Surveyors' Division might find it useful to be present at the meeting, and
Mrs.              and Mr.              were welcomed and introduced to the
remainder of the representatives present.

Mr. Vaughan took the opportunity of expressing appreciation and thanks to
the representatives for the help and assistance which they had given to him
in his role as Co-ordinator of the Officer Working Parties since 1978. There
had obviously been occasions when differences of opinion and interpretation
had occurred but, in .the main, these had been resolved both amicably and
constructively.

For the Club, Dr. Eastwood thanked Mr. Vaughan for his services and wished
him well for the future. Other representatives endorsed Dr. Eastwood's
remarks.

2.    Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was two-fold; firstly to discuss the further
details of development proposals at the stadium forwarded with the letter
dated 23rd December, 1985, from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners and, secondly,
to carry out the "winter" inspection of the Stadium.

A.    Development Proposals for the Spion Kop

The further details were in addition to the comments set out in the letter
dated 29th November, 1985, on the observations made following the Officer
Working Party meeting held on 13th November.
        (i)    Sheeting of Outer Face

        Dr. Eastwood reported that the sheeting of the enlarged Spion Kop at
        the rear and sides would result in the structure being virtually
        sealed. In reply to queries from the County Fire Service, he confirmed
        that no storage would be allowed under the structure and that checks
        for any accumulations of rubbish would be undertaken on a regular basis.

        (ii)   Climbing of the-Inner Steel Frame

       As regards the possiblity of unruly spectators climbing the inner steel
       frame of the new. structure, Dr. Eastwood reported that the bottom boom
       member was now to be omitted. The resultant height of over.10 feet
       would make it very difficult for spectators to climb the structure.

        (iii) New Step and Barrier Layout

       Drawing No. 6648/56 was circulated and considered. This related to the
       new step and barrier layout on the Spion Kop, and Dr. Eastwood reported
       in particular on the discussions which he' had had with the Planning
       Authority as to the height of an intermediate or a low second rail to
       the barriers where the drop.to the gangway below could be over one metre
       in places. He sought the Officer Working Party's viewsN and the merits
       of the options were considered.

       IT WAS AGREED that, in the view of the Officer Working Party, the best
       option for a second rail in the areas described was a low toe rail at
       a height of some 200 mm.

 B - . -Facilities for the Disabled

 To illustrate that the figures originally quoted to provide facilities for the
  isabled at the foot of the Spion Kop (nearest to the North Stand) were not
 unrealistic, Dr. Eastwood reported on the breakdown of the tender figures
 (opened on Monday) for the enlarged, roofed Spion Kop. He still considered
 that any such proposals would involve the loss of up to 1,000 of the extra
 5,000 spectator places which would be provided by the enlarged Spion Kop.
Other areas of the Stadium had also been considered and investigated, but
none could provide as large a flat, easily accessible area as that in front of
 the North Stand, which had been successfully used for so long without any major
problems. Up to 80 disabled persons, plus attendants, used the area. The only
major drawback he saw was that when there was a strong southerly wind, rain
could be blown onto the disabled, despite the cantilever roof of the North
Stand extending virtually to the pitch. For this reason, the Club were willing
to roof an area from approximately the letter "0" cn the results board to the
end.of the Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop) with a substantial roof, including
armoured glass .where there might be a visibility problem, provided that this
was supported by the Officer Working Party.

•Whilst accepting jnuch of what Dr. Eastwood said, the Officer Working Party
 (and the Police representatives in particular) still expressed some concern as
to whether making semi-permanent facilities for the disabled in front of the
North Stand was the appropriate and correct thing to do.

The Building Authority confirmed that, after further investigations, it was
considered that the disabled facilities requirements of the Building
Regulations 1985 did not appear to strictly apply to the roofing of the
enlarged Spion Kop.
IT WAS AGREED that, in the first instance, Dr. Eastwood would prepare sketch
plans of the suggested roofed disabled facilities in front of the North Stand
for consideration by the Officer Working Party.

C.    Ground Inspection
      (i)   West Terrace and Stand

The Police representatives confirmed that the revised segregation arrangements
to the rear of the Stand worked well on by far the majority of occasions.

Dr. Eastwood pointed out that the segregation rail in the upper seatedarea '
of the stand could be moved within certain limits if the Police considered
that this would achieve a useful purpose.

IT WAS AGREED:-

(a)   that the additional advertisement hoardings at the front of the upper
seated stand area (nearest to the North-West Terrace) should also be securely
fixed to concrete wall;

(b)   that further areas of spalled concrete at the front of the upper         ,
seated stand area should received attention as matters of maintenance.
                                                              *

      (ii)   North-West Terrace

IT WAS AGREED that the advertisement hoardings erected on the upper North-
West Terrace should be securely fixed.

      (iii) North Stand

The area for the suggested covered disabled facilities was inspected.

As previously mentioned by Dr. Eastwood, the possibility of providing an
increased width access to the pitch area (between the North Stand and the
Spion Kop) for possible use by emergency vehicles, as well as for maintenance
by the Club was discussed. The facility could be incorporated into the
enlarged Spion Kop proposals relatively easily.

It WAS AGREED that, whilst the County Fire Service felt that such a facility
was not essential for their purposes, it could be useful for use by emergency
vehicles in certain situations and generally should be supported.

      (iv)   Spion Kop

Dr. Eastwood indicated the extent of the work to construct the enlarged,
roofed, Spion Kop, and confirmed that steps would be taken to prevent
unauthorised access to areas where work might be in progress during the
course of the season.                                           .    _

It was noted that the additional gate in the pitch perimeter fence in the
front corner nearest to the South Stand, with a stepped arrangement Lo
assist access and egress, had been provided.

      (v)    South Stand

It was noted that the metal sheeting of the wooden floor of the upper
portion of the Stand (with sprayed non-slip surface) had proved to be of an
acceptable appearance in use, and generally appeared to provide a compromise
solution to the flammability problems inherent in such wooden structures.

IT WAS AGREED that its condition would continue to be monitored.
