                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE



                                                                                REF:                     MS/PJLM/JW
FROM:   Chief Inspector, Management Services
                                                                                STATION/DEPT:            HQ Man Services
TO:     * See Distribution List
                                                                                DATE:                    9 March 1989




        SUBJECT:        STATUTORY INSTRUMENT 1807/1988 - SPORTS GROUNDS AND
                        SPORTING EVENTS (THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT
                        REGULATIONS 1988)

                        STATUTORY INSTRUMENT 75(C3)/1989 - FIRE PRECAUTIONS
                        (THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
                        (COMMENCEMENT NO. 5) ORDER 1989)


        Copies of the above correspondence are attached hereto for the information of:-

        Senior Command Morning Basket
        Central Registry

        The original correspondence has been forwarded with Central Registry File
        Reference P.22/02/12 to Chief Superintendent. Operations and Traffic for any
        necessary action, and return in due course via the Assistant       r -nnot''lhift "”i
        Operations.                                           [  SOUTH VORKsTPOLlCE_J


                                              3 -"—
                                               S U tf d d , ft/             feC*?** ‘
                                                    -----------------   a   T T tT        C ^ I E F   SypRiNTENpfcN'
        Chief Inspector

                                     UritJk                                           ‘-UN*   l\rULur    e jlL     M jJ jL&v
                                                  C gryun^              ~un%jtT               <rr\s ± GfAJL ±^8*).




        * Distribution List

        Senior Command Morning Basket
        Central Registry
        Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic / J

                                                                            ? H IEF   SUPEF^TENDENT
             G v ffy ib t& J       A-4    ~
             (A1                                                               *£>            -A


             0
                          1 4 M.-tnrmrW
 t




            STATUTORY                 INSTRUMENTS



                           1988                                     No. 1807

     SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

      The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988

                           ISBN 0 11 087807 8
                                                                        -      r



                                                           Ty g p ^
                            CORRECTIONS^
             Page 5, Schedule, Part I, paragraph 8(a), l i n e J ^ j c
                 delete “stands”                 1         ' 9 n r’
                 substitute “stand”,              .                 ___ _
             page 6, Schedule, Part II, h e a d in g !^ .—T Z f f v r '   ■ ' iJ
                 delete “SPECIAL SAFETY C ^ T in C A T l^ ” f^AtvON
                 substitute “SPECIAL SAFET


November 1988
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
                 STATUTORY                INSTRUMENTS



                              1989 No. 75 (C.3)

                         FIRE PRECAUTIONS

  The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
           (Commencement No. 5) Order 1989

                 Made                              20th January 1989


In exercise of the powers conferred on me by section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), I hereby make the following Order:

  1. This Order may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
(Commencement No. 5) Order 1989.

  2. The provisions of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified
in the Schedule to this Order shall come into force on 1st April 1989.



Home Office                                                             Douglas Hurd
20th January 1989                   One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




(a) 1987 c.27.
                                             SCHEDULE                                           Article 2
                                                                                                            '   •
PROVISIONS OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT
        ACT 1987 COMING INTO FORCE ON 1ST APRIL 1989

Provisions o f the Act                                Subject matter o f provisions

Section 1                                             Power to exempt from requirement to have fire
                                                        certificate
Section 2                                             Exemption from requirement to have fire
                                                        certificate: supplementary
Section 5                                             General duty as to means of escape and for
                                                        fighting fire
Section 6                                             Codes of practice
Section 7                                             Improvement notices
Section 16, so far as not already in force            Special provision for certain premises
Section 18, so far as not already in force            Application to Crown etc.
In section 49, subsection (1) to the extent           Repeals and transitional and saving provisions
  necessary to give effect to the repeal in
  Schedule 4 specified in this Schedule, and
  subsection (2) so far as not already in force
Schedule 1, so far as not already in force            Fire precautions: special provision for certain
                                                        premises
In Schedule 4, the entry specified in the             Repeals
  Appendix to this Schedule
Schedule 5, so far as not already in force            Transitional and saving provisions




                          APPENDIX TO THE SCHEDULE
                    REPEAL TAKING EFFECT ON 1ST APRIL 1989

Chapter                        Short title                                     Extent o f repeal

1974 c.37.                     Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974.        Section 78(4).




                                                  2
•   -
                                              EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                        (This note is not part o f the Order)

          This Order brings into force on 1st April 1989 the provisions of the Fire Safety and
        Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified in the Schedule to the Order.




                         NOTE AS TO EARLIER COMMENCEMENT ORDERS
                                         (This note is not part o f the Order)

          The following provisions of the Act have been brought into force by commencement
        orders made before the date of this Order:

        Provision                                Date o f commencement    S. I. No.

        Sections 3, 4, 8, 9, 11 to 14,             1.1.1988               1987/1762
        16 (partially), 17, 18
        (partially), 19 to 25, 46,
        49 (partially), 50 (partially), Schedule 1
        (partially), Schedule 2,
        Schedule 4 (partially)
        and Schedule 5 (partially)
        Sections 42, 43, 45, 49                    1.6.1988                1988/485
        (partially), Schedule 3,
        Schedule 4 (partially)
        and Schedule 5 (partially)
        Sections 44 and 48.                        1.6.1988                1988/626
        Sections 26 to 41 and 50                   1.1.1989                1988/1806
        (partially)




                                                              3
              STATUTORY                      INSTRUMENTS



                           1989 No. 75 (C.3)

                     FIRE PRECAUTIONS

The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
         (Commencement No. 5) Order 1989




                                          85p net
                                ISBN 0 11 096075 0

              Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office


        790   WOOl 14     C25      1/89    452/3     4235     PS 8901375     883912M
  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



     F IL E REFERENCE                                           MINUTE SHEET NO    I-


     SUBJECT                 S I . V S l5 |^ .



           o t   ^

                     r^ n or«W               *\jUa* VA^^^yvow    o^>   S«j^v   .   ^ \c w « .



                                                 SOUTH YORKS. POLICE "1


                                                     13DFr »

                                              CHIEF SUrtRINTENDENT
                                       - £
                                 • f




                                              OPERATIONS & TRAFFIC




     Z -




    /Cw                                 *




G EN/1
                                                                                                 i c c j^ y        ito b J v W

                                                                                                                                   \(v
                     S T A T U T O R Y                  I N S T R U M E N T S                                SOUTH YORKS, POLICE



                                           1988 No. 1975                                                            12 DEC 1988
                                                                                                                  HEADQUARTERS
    SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVEN IS                                                                           ADMINISTRATION         J


 The Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Order 1988

                      Made -           -      -     -             11th November 1988
                      Laid before Parliament                      23rd November 1988
                      Coming into force                                 1st January 1989


In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by sections 1(1) and 18(2) of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in section
18(4) of that Act, I hereby make the following Order:

  1. This Order may be cited as the Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Order
1988 and shall come into force on 1st January 1989.

  2. The sports grounds a t -
     (a) Glanford Park, Doncaster Road, Scunthorpe; and
     (b) Moss Rose Ground, London Road, Macclesfield,
(being sports grounds each of which in the opinion of the Secretary of State has
accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators) are hereby designated as sports
grounds requiring safety certificates under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

  3. In the Schedule to the Safety of Sports Grounds (Association Football Grounds)
(Designation) Order 1985(b), the entry in respect of the Old Show Ground, Scunthorpe
shall be omitted.

                                                                                                  Douglas Hurd
Home Office
11th November 1988                            One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




(a) 1975 c.52; section 1(1) was amended by Schedule 2 to the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (c.27).
(b) S.1.1985/1063.
                                  EXPLANATORY NOTE
                             (This note is not part o f the Order)

  Article 2 of this Order designates the sports grounds specified therein as sports
grounds requiring safety certificates under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. That
Act was amended by Schedule 2 to the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 (which was brought into force on 1st January 1988 by S.I. 1987/1762) so that
references to sports grounds were substituted for the references to sports stadia.

  Article 3 varies the Order referred to therein by omitting an entry in respect of a
place that is no longer a sports ground.




                                                45pnet
                                      ISBN 0 11 087975 9

                      Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                     790/    W01846        C9     11/88     452     7102     PS8901369
;
        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



               FILE REFERENCE                       P '2. 2 -0 2 . 1Z.                                MINUTE SHEET NO                    r


^       ^ SS Vi tbkiJc                                                              ^ p p * lsd --\o<v-S^


         \             d3>fcto^t/C \ '


             ^A o /k .< _       G -{ /( < ^                  C      o U                 (V »

             V \ t 7 (w-e_      Q ^ j\}                      d x r c -j U /             (V      o                l?$ £

             ■S L L a fc * jt« c ^        ( v*-j     u                   (N^-o       \8ot^C .                 W *

         ^ fc o fc tjU > rc -j        { v M ^ w u i ii r              fV o           \ S 'C f) J



              j L *> c *                                           *-*><^r^-e-o {           ^o/r                         /L « C e £ S e < ^

              ^cito/v                 ^                                 t-ka^           .                         C jsffj           *j       ^ sx c l

             /_Oo            fcu2Aj^               /^-oaulxp*v •                       (                            N /p - f             S

             <Cr>                         ^                  b u           O L ^ f                  6 ^ U    U           or         /Ho fA .u.'
              Q^soloUr                    Oj-dL                    u<Jw U                   W                                 V_|             <9 <J

               C o uloJv             Co       m   lJLu               (luaA'            also.                ~77c         relt^aJr (luo^if^




              CXu4           ^ U ^ v^ B jvX              u   I”
                fV\cxMX_gt. iwoAr                 £ s& vkGis

                 )(o     IN/ou^luj                   l<?S&

                                     V)


    \ GEN/I
                                                                             L & , ✓
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



          FILE REFERENCE                                            MINUTE SHEET NO -2


          SUBJECT
                                             *5 -




                                qORKSHlRg

                                    NOV 1988

                                m m m



                                        Ur
S \c ~ c ( > ) .


        Q a irt-uJIeuU                                      ^      ^            ^

  w                /        W                           w              ^


       ^ T \           /i       .                           v'   t / s o   ^    - a 2 /i> |-? s-

                                                                       M wM J




      GEN/I                         ■   **          *
                                                                                              a >

                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                               REF:    OPS TWS/SM
        FROM:   CH SUPT OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                               ST ATION/DEPT .
                                                                             :   OPERATIONS
        TO:     ACC (OPERATIONS)    MR W W JACKSON
                                                               DATE:             21 November 1988

                SUBJECT:     HOME OFFICE CIRCULARS NOS 96/88 AND 97/88




                 Home Office Circular 96/88

                 This deals with Part 3 of the - Sports Grounds - Certification of
                 Stands and the Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988 (in force
                 with effect from 1 January 1989).

                 Annex 'A1

                 Provides system of safety certification for stands determined by the
                 Local Authority as able to hold 500 or more spectators under cover.
                 Certification is of course a matter for the Local Authority who
                 normally seek advice from the Police, Fire Service, building
                 authorities etc.

                 Annex 'B1

                 This prescribes the form and procedures for application for safety
                 certificates under Part III.

                 Annex 'C1

                 Deals with the issue and content of safety certificates.

                 Annex 'D'

                 This is the form of notice in respect of a 'regulated stand1 and this
                 is served by the Local Authority.

                 Home Office Circular 97/88

                 This deals with statutory guidance to Local Authorities in discharging
                 their function in connection with this legislation. Frequency and
                 scope of inspection of sports grounds containing regulated stands is
                 also covered.

                 The Safety of Sports Grounds Act Officer Working Party in South
                 Yorkshire liaises closely with the respective Local Authorities, Fire
                 Service, building authorities etc, regarding these matters.

                 I suggest therefore that copies should be forwarded to Chief
                 Superintendents A, B, C, D, E, F, Licensing Department and the
                 Superintendent, Operations. I do not see a need for the 'morning
                 basket' but suggest that you perhaps mention this briefly at a morning
                 meeting.




                 Chief Superintendent
3EN/2            Operations and Traffic
                                                 H O M E OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-273
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:    FEP/88 6/233/8               15 November 1988
Your reference:


                                                     SOUTH YORKS. POLICE

       The Chief Executive
       County Councils                                    1 6 NOV 1988
       Metropolitan District Councils
                                                                BARTERS
       London Borough Councils
                                                        ADMI.Mi.ST RATION
       Common Council of the City of London



       Dear Sir
       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 96/1988
       FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT : PART III - SPORTS
       GROUNDS - CERTIFICATION OF STANDS AND THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF
       SPORT REGULATIONS 1988
        Introduction
       1.   This circular, together with annexes A - D, introduces the
       provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
       Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) and the Safety of Places of Sport
       Regulations 1988, which come into force on 1 January 1989. A
       copy of the Commencement No 4 Order, under which Part III comes
       into force, is enclosed.
        Implementation
        2.   Part III is the final phase of implementation of those parts
        of the 1987 Act dealing with spectator safety at places of sport
        in line with the Government's proposals contained in the
        Consultative Document published in 1986. It brings into effect a
        system of safety certification and subsequent inspection of
        stands able to accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators
        ("regulated stands") at sports grounds not designated as
        requiring a safety certificate under section 1 of the Safety of
        Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Detailed advice on Part III,
        section by section, is contained in Annex A. A suggested format
        for a notice of determination that a stand is a regulated stand
        is at Annex D.
        3.   Action taken by local authorities in response to HOC 5/1986
        to identify stands able to accommodate at least 500 spectators
        should mean that most, if not all, such stands have already been
identified. However, in determining regulated stand status under
Part III of the 1987 Act local authorities are required to act in
accordance with guidance issued by the Secretary of State under
section 26(8). This guidance is being issued, together with      i
guidance on inspections under section 34 of the 1987 Act, under
separate cover.
Regulations

4.   A copy of the 1988 regulations is enclosed with this
circular. The regulations lay down the procedure for
applications for safety certificates, their issue, transfer,
amendment, replacement and cancellation. The regulations further
authorise local authorities to determine charges in respect of
applications for the issue etc of safety certificates. Time
limits for all appeals to the courts are also prescribed. More
detailed guidance to the regulations is contained in Annex B.
Safety Certification

5.   Supplementary advice on the application of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) and on the certification
of stands is offered in Annex C.

Resource and Manpower Implications

6.   The potential variation in regulated stands is such that an
accurate estimate of the average number of man-days for
certification is not possible, but reasonable costs can be
recovered by authorised charges (see paragraph 4 above and Annex
B). The resource implications of inspections under Statutory
Guidance given under section 34 of the 1987 Act will be dealt
with separately, as necessary, in the covering circular.
Supplementary

7.   Guidance on the effects of Part III of the 1987 Act intended
for ground management has also been produced. Copies of the
guidance, which local authorities may wish to make available to
local sports ground management, are enclosed. Additional copies
can be obtained from the Home Office if required.

8.   The information and advice given in this circular and
Annexes are given in good faith but it should be understood that
ultimately only the courts can rule authoritatively on points of
law.

9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to Miss D Russell 01-273 3406.

                                             Yours faithfully


                                                R R G WATTS
                                            Fire and Emergency
                                            Planning Department
Enclosures:
Enclosures:   Commencement No 4 Order
              The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988
              Guidance for Ground Management on the Operation
               of Part III
              Application Forms for a safety certificate




Copies for information to:-
     Association of County Councils
     Association of Metropolitan Authorities
     London Boroughs Association
     Association of District Councils
     Association of Chief Police Officers
     Clerks to Police Authorities
     Clerks to Fire & Civil Defence Authorities
     Chief Officers of Police
     Magistrates Association
     Justices Clerks Society
     Sports Council
HOC 96/1988    ANNEX A

PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
SAFETY CERTIFICATION FOR REGULATED STANDS AT SPORTS GROUNDS
Introduction

1.   The provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety & Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) supplement the provisions
of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (SSGA) with the aim of
improving the safety of spectators in stands at sports grounds
which are not designated as requiring a safety certificate under
the SSGA. They follow closely the Government's proposals
contained in the Consultative Document published by the Home
Office/Scottish Office in June 1986 in response to the Final
Report of the Popplewell Inquiry. Part III is brought into force
from 1 January 1989. It is the final stage of implementation of
the 1987 Act's provisions on spectator safety at sports grounds
and provides for a system of safety certification for stands
determined by the local authority as able to hold 500 or more
spectators under cover ("regulated stands").

2.   Part III provides a regime of safety certification similar
to that under the SSGA but applies only to covered stands which,
in general, were seen by the Popplewell Inquiry as most likely to
pose risks from fire or structural deficiency (or both). The
provisions of Part III apply to all types of sports ground as
defined in section 41 of the 1987 Act and section 17 of the SSGA.
General approach

3.   The safety certificate forms the main instrument of control
under Part III of the 1987 Act. There are two sorts of safety
certificate, general and special. The general certificate is the
main mechanism and is to be issued for an indefinite period for
specified activities taking place at the sports ground. A
special safety certificate may be issued for a specified event or
events not covered by the general certificate. A safety
certificate is required for each regulated stand that is to be
used by spectators for viewing activities at the sports ground.
It is the local authority who determine, subject to a right of
appeal to the courts, whether a stand is a regulated stand and
issue a safety certificate. The stand in question remains a
regulated stand unless the local authority subsequently determine
otherwise. Supplementary advice on safety certification is
contained in Annex C.

4.   In determining whether a stand is a regulated stand (ie able
to accommodate 500 or more spectators under cover) local
authorities are required to act in accordance with any guidance
issued by the Secretary of State under section 26(8). Such
guidance has been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/
1988. Local authorities are also required, under section 34, to
arrange for the periodic inspections of sports grounds which
contain regulated stands in accordance with guidance from the
Secretary of State. Such guidance has also been issued under
cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.
SUBSTANCE OF PART III OF THE 1987 ACT
Section 26 : Safety   certificates for stands at sports grounds
5.   Section 26 provides for the new system of safety
certificates for stands at sports grounds. Under subsection (l)
Part III is applied to all sports grounds which

     a.    provide covered accommodation in stands for spectators,
     and

     b.    are not designated under section 1 of the SSGA.
Under subsection (2) a safety certificate is required in respect
of the use of each stand which provides covered accommodation for
500 or more spectators to view activities at the around (known as
a "regulated stand" under subsection (5)). Where more than one
regulated stand exists at a sports ground the local authority may
issue one certificate to cover all such stands. The figure of
500 can be varied by the Secretary of State by Order subject to
negative resolution procedure of Parliament (subsections (3) and
(4)). There are no plans at the present time to obtain such an
Order.

6.   Local authorities may care to note that it is only when a
stand is used for the purpose of viewing activities at the ground
that a safety certificate is required. The use of a stand for
some other purpose, such as an internal activity (eg an
exhibition) would not require a safety certificate under Part
III.

7.   Subsection (6) places the function of determining whether a
stand is a regulated stand and the issue of a safety certificate
on the local authority who, under subsection (7), may apply any
appropriate criteria but who, under subsection (8), must act in
accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of State. This
guidance has been issued under the      coverof Home Office Circular
97/1988. Under subsection    (9) the    finaldetermination of the
local authority, subject only to an appeal to the courts (see
paragraphs 19-20 below) concludes the question of whether a stand
is a regulated stand. This mechanism, together with service of
notice of the determination under section 28(2) on the
"responsible person" (see paragraphs 11-14 below) ensures that a
safety certificate must be applied for if the stand is to be used
by spectators for viewing activities at the ground.

8.   Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (10) describe
respectively "general" and "special" safety certificates as
defined in subsection (11). Here again local authorities may
wish to note that a safety certificate for a stand relates to the
use of the stand for viewing an activity or activities.
Subsection (11) provides self-explanatory definitions. "Stand"
includes the uncovered portion of the structure for certification
purposes. It will be noted that by use of the phrase "(not
merely temporary)" the definition of "stand" excludes from
certification temporary stands.
Section 27 : Contents of safety certificates for stands

9.   Subsection (1) requires a safety certificate to contain such
terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
expedient to secure reasonable safety in the stand and which may
involve alterations or additions to it or any installations in or
serving it (for example cables, ducts, plant equipment). There
are no obligatory terms and conditions. However, under
subsection (2) safety certificates must include terms and
conditions required by an Order made under section 39 which
enables the Secretary of State to make an Order modifying the
provisions of Part III as they apply to.any particular class of
stand. No Order has been made under this section and there are
no current plans to do so. (see paragraph 33 below)
10. Subsection (3) precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for determination by the chief officer of police.
Subsection (4) provides that a certificate may include a
condition on the keeping of records relating to attendance (in
practice this would apply only where access to the stand is
controlled, see Annex C) and the maintenance of safety in the
stand. Subsection (5) requires a general safety certificate to
include a plan of the stand or stands to which it applies and the
area in the immediate vicinity of it/them. Terms and conditions
in any safety certificate should be framed where appropriate by
reference to that plan. Subsection (6) allows for different
terms and conditions to be included in the safety certificate for
different activities taking place at the ground. Subsection (7)
ensures that safety certificates do not derogate from any
requirements imposed by any regulations made under section 6(2)
of the SSGA. No regulations have been made under that section
and there are no current plans to do so.

Section 28 : Issue of certificates
11. This section identifies to whom safety certificates should
be issued, lays down procedures for determining whether a stand
is a regulated stand, and for the issue of certificates.
Subsection (1) sets out who qualifies for a safety certificate.
In the case of a general safety certificate this is the ground
management; for a special safety certificate it is the person
organising the activity at the ground in question. In many
cases, of course, the holder of the general safety certificate
will also qualify to hold the special safety certificate.

12. Under subsection (2), where it appears to the local
authority that a stand at a sports ground in their area is a
regulated stand, they have to make a preliminary determination on
whether or not the stand is a regulated stand. If the local
authority determine that it is, they must then issue a notice of
determination and the effect of it on the person who appears to
qualify for the general safety certificate (ie the person who
appears to qualify under subsection (1)(a)). A suggested draft
notice of determination is attached at Appendix D.
13. Subsection (3) provides that the preliminary determination
becomes a final determination after two months. Subsection (4)
allows for revocation of that determination at any time before it
becomes final or on consideration of an application for a safety
certificate. These two subsections allow ground management an
opportunity to discuss and review with the local authority any
information or proposals which might cause the local authority to
revise their determination and save recourse to the appeal
procedure. Subsection (5) allows the local authority to withdraw
(rather than revoke) the notice of determination before it
becomes final and serve it on a different person - for example
where information has come to light meantime indicating that
there has been a change in the management of the ground. When a
fresh notice is served the two month period under subsection (2)
begins again.

14. Subsection (6) lays a duty on the local authority to make
certain determinations on applications for general safety
certificates.   (Subsection (10) (see below) imposes certain
procedural requirements on the local authority on receipt of such
an application.) Subsection (6)(a) provides for applications for
general safety certificates which are made otherwise than in
response to a notice served by the local authority under
subsection (2); such applications would be made where the
applicant is of the opinion that the stand in question is a
regulated stand. Under subsection (6)(a) the local authority
must determine whether the stand in question is a regulated stand
and, if it is, whether the applicant qualifies for the general
safety certificate. A determination under (6)(a) that a stand is
a regulated stand is immediately a final determination.
Subsection (6)(b) concerns an application for a general safety
certificate in response to a notice served by the local authority
under subsection (2). Provided that the local authority do not
then decide to revoke their preliminary determination that the
stand is a regulated stand (in the light of further information)
they must determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a
general safety certificate. Once these issues have been resolved
a general safety certificate must, under subsection (7), be
issued to a qualified applicant unless such a certificate is
already in operation in which case an application should be made
under section 29(5) for the transfer of the certificate.

15. Subsection (8) concerns the issue of a special safety
certificate. Such a certificate is only issued if there is
already a general safety certificate in operation. The local
authority have a discretion as to whether or not to issue a
special safety certificate.

16. In all cases where a local authority determine that an
applicant for a safety certificate does not qualify for one they
must serve on him notice under subsection (9) stating their
determination.

17. Subsection (10) requires the local authority to send a copy
of an application for a safety certificate to the chief officer
of police and, where the local authority is in Greater London or
a metropolitan county, to the fire authority; elsewhere, a copy
must be sent to the building authority. The local authority must
also consult these authorities about the terms and conditions to
be included in the certificate.
18. Subsection (11) enables the local authority to serve a
notice on an applicant requiring such information or plans etc as
they consider necessary to issue a safety certificate. The plan
could be for an area larger than the stands. Subsection (12)
provides that if an applicant fails to comply with the
requirement for information or plans within any time specified in
the notice or as extended by the local authority his application
will be deemed to have been withdrawn. Thereafter, if a fresh
application is not made and spectators are admitted to a
regulated stand an offence will be committed under section 36.


Section 29:   Amendment, cancellation etc of certificates
19. Subsection (l)(a) provides for the cancellation of a safety
certificate where it appears to the local authority who have
issued it that the stand in question is not or has ceased to be a
regulated stand - for example if the original determination was
mistaken or if the covered accommodation is reduced to below 500.
In these circumstances subsection (1)(a) requires the local
authority to revoke the determination and, by notice to the
holder, cancel the safety certificate. Subsection (1)(b) enables
the local authority to amend the terms and conditions of the
safety certificate by notice to the holder, and subsection (1)(c)
enables them to replace the safety certificate. Subsection (2)
enables the powers under subsection (1)(a) - (c) to be exercised
without an application from the holder (see also paragraph 21
below). Subsection (3) applies the provisions of section 27 to
an amended or replacement safety certificate. When the local
authority amend a certificate under subsection (1)(b), the notice
must, under subsection (4), specify the operative date of the
amendment which can be later than the date of the notice. This
enables the local authority to anticipate completion of any
remedial work or delay operation of a condition to allow for
changes to be made.

20. Subsection (5) concerns the transfer of safety certificates.
It places a duty on the local authority to determine whether a
person is qualified to have a safety certificate issued to him on
transfer from the holder (see paragraph 11 above) and notify him
of the determination. If the person is qualified the safety
certificate may be transferred to him. Application for transfer
may be made by the holder or by the person to whom transfer is
proposed (subsection (6)).
21. Copies of the application must be sent by the local
authority to the chief officer of police and, where the local
authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, to the
fire authority, and elsewhere to the building authority
(subsection 7). These authorities must also be consulted on any
proposal to amend, replace or transfer the safety certificate
(subsection (8)).

22. Subsection (9) provides for the surrender of a safety
certificate whereupon it ceases to have effect. Subsection (10)
gives a local authority discretion to cancel a safety certificate
if the holder dies or, if a body corporate, is dissolved.


Section 30 :   Appeals
23. All appeals under Part III are to the courts. Subsection
(1) gives a right of appeal against a final determination that a
stand is a regulated stand. Subsection (2) provides a right of
appeal against a determination that an applicant is not qualified
(or would not qualify in the case of transfer) for the issue of a
safety certificate. Subsection (3) confers a right of appeal
against a refusal by the local authority to issue a special
safety certificate (other than on grounds of qualification).
Subsection (4) gives "interested parties", who are defined in
subsection (8), the right of appeal against
     a.   inclusion of anything in or omission of anything from a
     safety certificate;
     b.   refusal to amend or replace a safety certificate.
All appeals have to be brought within the period prescribed by
Regulations made under section 31, in England and Wales by way of
complaint for an order to a Magistrates Court (subsections (5)
and (6)).
24. Under subsection (9) where a local authority have served
notice on an applicant of their determination that he does not
qualify for the issue of a safety certificate he is, unless he
appeals, deemed to have withdrawn his application once the appeal
period has expired (see also paragraph 26 below on offences under
section 36). Subsection (10) identifies the deemed date of
withdrawal of an application in the case of an appeal which is
not upheld by the court or is withdrawn by the applicant.
Subsection (11) suspends the operation of any term or condition
in a safety certificate pending an appeal, and subsection (12)
prescribes who, in addition to the local authority, may appeal to
the Crown Court against an Order by the Magistrates Court.


Section 31:    Regulations
25. Under this section the Secretary of State is empowered to
make regulations prescribing the procedures and application
particulars for the issue etc of safety certificates, authorising
local authorities to. determine fees in connection with such
applications and prescribing the time limits for appeals. The
regulations may also contain such incidental and supplementary
provisions as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.
Regulations under section 31 have been made and come into effect
from 1 January 1989 (see Annex B for further details).
Section 32:    Alterations and Extensions
26. Subsection (1) requires the holder of a general safety
certificate to notify the local authority of any proposed
alteration or extension to a regulated stand or its installations
which is likely to affect the safety of people in the stand
before he begins to carry out the proposals. Subsection (2)
emphasises the need for such a notice in relation to entrances
and exits and means of access and escape. The purpose of this
section is to guard against any alterations being made without
the local authority's knowledge and which might affect the safety
of spectators. Failure to give notice is made an offence by
section 36(7)(b).

Section 33:   Exclusion of other statutory requirements
27. Subsection (1) harmonizes Part III with other legislation by
disapplying provisions of several Acts whilst a general safety
certificate for a regulated stand is in force. Subsection (2)
suspends the operation of any term or condition in a licence
relating to a matter which is also covered by the safety
certificate for as long as the certificate is in operation.
Subsection (3) ensures that a person failing to meet a
requirement of a local Act will not commit an offence under that
Act if meeting the requirement would involve a contravention of
the terms or conditions of a safety certificate.

Section 34:   Enforcement
28. Subsection (1) provides for local authorities to enforce the
provisions of Part III and to arrange for periodical inspections
of sports grounds at which there are regulated stands. Such
inspections shall (by virtue of subsection (2)) be in accordance
with any guidance by the Secretary of State. This guidance has
been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.

Section 35:   Powers of entry and inspection
29. This section confers for the purposes of Part III a right of
entry to a sports ground at any reasonable time on persons
authorised by the local authority, chief officer of police, in
London or a metropolitan county the fire authority, elsewhere the
building authority, to inspect the stands and make any necessary
enquiries. Authorised persons may be required to produce their
authority and may examine and copy records relating to regulated
stands. The powers under this section apply to all sports
grounds and are in addition to powers under section 11 of the
SSGA.


Section 36:   Offences

30. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) create an offence
if spectators are admitted to a regulated stand on an occasion
when no safety certificate covering their use of the stand is in
operation (see paragraphs 5, 6, and 8 above); or if any term or
condition in a safety certificate is contravened. The offence is
committed by the "responsible person" as defined in subsection
(3) and, if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder of
it. No offence is committed if the local authority have not made
a final determination or if application for a safety certificate
has been made and it has not been withdrawn or deemed to have
been withdrawn (subsection (2)). Subsection (4) provides for
penalties on conviction and subsection (5) provides a defence on
the grounds of proof that spectators were admitted or the
contravention took place without the defendants consent and that
he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all "due
diligence" to avoid commission of the offence by himself or any
person under his control. Subsection (6) provides a defence for
a responsible person on the grounds of proof that he did not know
the stand was a regulated stand (for example if notice had not
been served on the right person). Subsection (7) creates
offences in connection with the provision of information under
sections 28(11) and 32(1) or obstruction under section 35.
Subsections (8) and (9) apply the offence provisions to a body
corporate its officers and members.

Section 37:   Civil and other liability
31. This section limits the effects of the provisions of Part
III in civil proceedings, and on requirements in public, local or
private Acts or in rights of action to those provided expressly
in Part III.

Section 38:   Service of documents

32. This section makes provisions for the service of notices or
other documents required or authorised under Part III.
Subsection (1) makes general provision for such service,
subsection (2) deals with service on corporations or partnerships
and subsection (3) identifies the address to which notices or
documents are to be sent.

Section 39:   Power to modify Part for classes of stand

33. Subsection (1) enables the Secretary of State to modify the
provisions of Part III in the way they should be applied to any
specified class of stand. The power is exercised by Order
subject to negative resolution (subsection (3)) and after
consultation (subsection (4)). Under subsection (2) different
modifications can be made for different activities at a sports
ground and may include such supplementary or transitional
provision as considered expedient. Section 39, together with
section 27(2), would enable the Secretary of State to stipulate
that terms and conditions of a safety certificate should take
account of different ways in which stands are used by spectators
(see paragraph 9 above). It is an important reserve power which
is unlikely to be necessary provided terms and conditions of
safety certificates are framed to take account of the differences
experienced and observed within the stands at different sorts of
sports grounds (see also Annex C).
Section 40:   Application to Crown
34. Subsection (1) applies sections 26 to 29 to premises
occupied by the Crown but substituting for the reference to a
local authority a reference to the Secretary of State who will
therefore be responsible for the certification of such premises.
Subsection (2) provides that nothing within Part III authorises
entry of premises occupied by the Crown.


Section 41:   Interpretation
35. This section provides self-explanatory definitions of words
used in Part III.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988 ANNEX B



PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT REGULATIONS 1988

General
1.   The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988 (1988
Regulations) under section 31(1) and (2) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (1987 Act) have been made and
come into force on 1 January 1989. The 1988 Regulations are
similar to, but distinct from, the Safety of Sports Grounds
Regulations 1987 (S.I.1987/1941). Terms and expressions used in
the 1988 Regulations, eg safety certificate, therefore have the
same meaning as under section 41 of the 1987 Act and refer to
Part III of that Act, not the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
They prescribe the form and procedures for applications for
safety certificates under Part III, provide for the issue of
notices of certain decisions and authorise local authorities to
charge fees for work done by them or on their behalf in
connection with applications for issue etc of safety
certificates. The Regulations also prescribe the time limits for
appeals against local authority decisions taken under Part III.

Substance of Regulations

2.   Regulations 1 and 2 concern citation and interpretation.
Regulation 3 deals with applications. Paragraph ( 1 ) of
Regulation 3 and the Schedule to the Regulations prescribe the
form in which applications for the issue of a safety certificate,
either a general or special certificate, are to be made. For a
general safety certificate the application form envisages that it
will be accompanied by details of the stand including the plans
where available. For a special safety certificate details of the
stand will already be known from the general safety certificate
application but additional information about the activities and
any changes proposed as a result of those activities may be
required by the local authority. Applications for both general
and special safety certificates are directed at providing
information about the stand when it is used by spectators for
viewing activities at the ground (not when it is used for some
other purpose such as an exhibition or conference for which a
safety certificate is not needed). Applications should also
provide details of the status of the applicant to enable the
local authority to determine whether he qualifies to hold a
certificate. Paragraph ( 2 ) lays down that applications for
cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety
certificate have to be made in writing and, except for
cancellation, details must be given by the applicant of anyone
who is believed to be concerned with ensuring compliance with
terms and conditions of the safety certificate.
3.   Regulation 4 deals with notices of decisions taken by the
local authority. Notices issued under Regulation 4 are in
addition to those issued under the 1987 Act itself by the local
authority. Under paragraph (11 of Regulation 4 the decisions
described in (a) - (c) must be notified by notice in writing to
the interested parties (as set out in paragraph (8)). The notice
must also include details of when and where a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of the relevant application may be
inspected (paragraph (6)). In the case of a refusal decision
under (c) the reasons for the refusal should be included in the
notice.

4.   Paragraph (2 ) requires the local authority to issue notice
on an applicant who has been refused a special safety certificate
other than on the grounds that he is not a qualified person. The
notice should include reasons for the decision.

5.   Paragraph ( 3 ) is concerned with the transfer of certificates
and requires the local authority to serve on the holder of a
safety certificate a copy of any notice issued under section
29(5) of the 1987 Act.    (This ensures that both the holder and
the would-be holder of the safety certificate are aware of the
adverse decision.) Similarly, where it is decided that the
applicant is qualified to hold a certificate but it is decided
not to transfer it, that decision must be notified to both the
applicant and the holder giving reasons for the decision.
6.   Paragraph ( 4 ) requires the local authority to serve notice
on an applicant of any decision to refuse an application for the
cancellation of a safety certificate under section 29(1)(a) of
the 1987 Act and giving reasons for the decision; and paragraph
(5) requires the local authority to serve a copy of the notice of
the decision on the other interested parties as soon as
practicable thereafter. Paragraph (6\ provides that the notice
should include the information of when and where a copy pf the
safety certificate and any application may be inspected.
7.   Paragraph ( 7 ) requires local authorities to publish a notice
in a local newspaper setting out the decision taken under
paragraph 1 above. The publication should include the
information of when and where a copy of the safety certificate
and any relevant application may be inspected (as in
paragraph (6)). Paragraph ( 8 ) defines "interested parties".

8.   Regulation 5 lays down the time limits for appeals under
section 30 of the 1987 Act. Paragraph (11 lays down the time
limit of 28 days in the case of an appeal against a determination
that a stand is a regulated stand. This period is calculated
from the date when any preliminary determination becomes a final
determination under section 28(3) of the Act (paragraph (l)(a))
or in the case of a final determination under section 28(6) the
date of the receipt of the notice of that determination
(paragraph (1)(b)).
9.   Other appeals under the 1987 Act must under paragraph ( 2 ) of
Regulation 5 be brought within 28 days in the case of a general
safety certificate and 7 days in the case of a special safety
certificate from the "relevant date". Paragraph ( 3 ) of
Regulation 5 sets down what is meant by the "relevant date".

10. Regulation 6 deals with fees. Paragraph fll of Regulation 6
enables local authorities to determine the fee to be charged in
respect of an application (whether or not successful) for the
issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate
or in respect of an application for the cancellation of such a
certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
Paragraph (2) provides that any fee must not exceed an amount
commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done by or on
behalf of the local authority.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96 /1988 ANNEX C


PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT
1987 : ISSUE AND CONTENT OF SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Introduction
1.   This Annex provides some additional advice on the issue and
content of safety certificates which local authorities may care
to take into consideration when drawing up safety certificates
for regulated stands under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act (the 1987 Act). Although directed at
certification under Part III, the underlying principles of the
advice in this Annex may also assist local authorities when
reviewing terms and conditions to be contained in safety
certificates for sports grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Local authorities may find it
useful to cross-reference this Annex with Annex A to Home Office
Circular 71/1987 and Annexes C and D to Home Office Circular No
7/1986 - some of the advice of which is reproduced below.
2.   The following advice is given in good faith but it should be
remembered that only the courts can interpret on points of law.

Reasonable Safety
3.   Part III of the 1987 Act, like the SSGA, provides that terms
and conditions within safety certificates should be such as are
considered necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety.
It would probably be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
to seek the absolute safety of everyone occupying a stand at a
sports ground. The courts might also be sympathetic to an appeal
against a term or condition which entailed expenditure on
measures to combat a risk which was seen to be remote or did not
arise at all at the particular ground or stand. Local
authorities should therefore consider operating on the principle
that the addition to safety which any particular measure will
produce needs to be balanced against its cost. In some cases
certain measures may have to be taken whatever the cost,
irrespective of the size or profitability of the undertaking.
But where the difficulty and cost of the remedy are high, and
careful assessment shows the risk is not significant, it may not
be necessary to insist on action; if the risk is significant it
may be possible to opt for a solution which will reduce it to an
acceptable level at modest cost.


General

4.   An application for a general safety certificate under Part
III should normally be accompanied by information about the
stand, a proper plan of the stand and its installations. In
practice, not all the information necessary to draw up a safety
certificate will always be provided at the time of the initial
application. However, local authorities are able to require, by
notice, under section 28(11) further details to enable them to
consider the application. For an application for a special
safety certificate under Part III much information would already
be available from the general safety certificate application;
but additional information may be required if, for example, the
activities which are to take place at the sports ground for which
a special safety certificate is needed are such that the
spectator accommodation in the stand is altered or affected.
5.   A special safety certificate under Part III is issued at the
discretion of the local authority (subject to a right of appeal).
There is no time limit in which a safety certificate, whether
general or special, has to be issued. However, a special safety
certificate will need to be issued before the event, allowing
time for any appeal. Local authorities may therefore wish to
give ground management advice on the likely time scale which will
be needed and to remind them that a last minute application might
constitute sufficient grounds for refusal. In general an
application lodged 3 months before an event should give
sufficient time for the procedures (including an appeal) to be
carried out. Local authorities may nonetheless feel able to
agree to a shorter period where they are satisfied that the
application can be finalised within the lesser period of time
given.

Consultation
6.   It is envisaged that consultation between the local
authority and ground management will take place in drawing up the
terms and conditions to be contained within any safety
certificate issued under Part III. In this way much valuable
information can be obtained in order to apply the principles of
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) so as to
meet the safety needs of the particular stand(s) at the ground in
question (see also paras 9-15 below). Local authorities will be
aware of the statutory requirement to consult the police and, in
London and metropolitan counties, the fire authority, elsewhere,
the building authority, and are reminded of the potential
advantages of a safety team approach as a way of ensuring that
the professional knowledge and skills of the various disciplines
can be brought to bear on drawing up a safety certificate.

Scope and content of safety certificates
7.   Provision is made in section 27(6) for different terms and
conditions to be included in a general safety certificate for a
stand for different activities at the ground. Where a ground is
used for several activities local authorities may therefore wish
to include, as far as possible, all the activities within the
general safety certificate, reserving the need to issue a special
safety certificate for a "one off" event when the viewing
arrangements are likely to be affected in such a way as to
require additional considerations and safeguards which cannot be
included in the general safety certificate. Section 27 does not
have to vary to meet different needs, but as a general rule local
authorities may wish to consider inclusion of terms and
conditions which address
     a.   structural stability where elements of the stand are
     judged, from preliminary inspections, as likely to be
     inadequate for their intended function.
     b.   the maximum number of spectators who should be admitted
     to the stand(s) and different parts of it (them) bearing in
     mind the considerations set out in paragraphs 10 - 13 below;
     c.   the number, size and situation of entrances to and
     exits from the stand(s) or any part of it (them) including
     means of escape in case of fire or other emergency; and the
     means of access to any such entrances and exits;

     d.   requirements for entrances and exits and means of
     access to be properly maintained and kept free of
     obstruction;
     e.   other fire precaution measures;

     f.   the provision for crush barriers, if any, their number,
     strength and location;

     g.   provision for stewards, steward training, fire drill
     procedures, first aid.

     h.   need for records of maintenance, inspections and/or
     tests and training.
8.   If it is evident that a stand is rarely filled to capacity
the local authority may consider it proper to base the safety
requirements on the actual levels of attendance. In such
circumstances the terms and conditions of the general safety
certificate may not be sufficient for a particularly attractive
event or fixture when a larger than normal crowd can be expected
to attend. As some such fixtures could arise at relatively short
notice, local authorities may wish to work out in advance, the
modifications and/or additional controls to the normal terms and
conditions of the general safety certificate which would enable
an increase in the number of spectators to be accommodated; for
example, an increase in the limit might be conditional upon the
employment of additional stewardsf or more sophisticated fire
fighting equipment with trained stewards to operate it.
9.   When drawing up terms and conditions in any safety
certificate local authorities will doubtless keep in mind the
advice of the Green Guide (see paragraphs 10 and 11 below) and
the "reasonableness" of the requirements (see paragraph 3 above).
The quality or standard of measures should be stated so that the
holder knows what is required under what conditions, and does not
have to rely on carrying out work "to the satisfaction of" or "as
may be required by" the authority. Terms and conditions
specifying work needed should include details of the increase in
the permitted spectator limit or, if there is no increase, the
restrictions on the capacity or operation if the work is not
done. The following are two examples of the sort of detail that
might, with adaptation to suit individual circumstances, be
included in a term or condition.

Example A.  (Where it is a condition that attendance records are
kept to a standard required by the authority).
"[Except as mentioned below] the holder shall keep a record [in
the form contained in Appendix   of this certificate] for [each]
[the] regulated stand to which this certificate applies of the
number of spectators admitted on each occasion when the stand[s]
is [are] used for the purpose of viewing the [specified]
activities at the ground [specified below] ...".
If a record is not required for low attendances an additional
clause might be added:-
"The number of spectators admitted on any occasion need not be
entered in the record described in paragraph   above where on any
occasion the total admission to the ground is certified by the
holder [in the record] as not having exceeded "x" by entering the
words [quote] which should be signed and dated by [the holder]."

Example B (where emergency lighting is the requirement)

"Emergency lighting for use in the event of failure of the
general lighting shall be provided on [exit] route(s) marked [
] on plan [   ] and shall include illuminated exit signs at exits
marked [   ] on plan [   ].
Emergency lighting provided under paragraph    above shall be
installed in accordance with paragraphs 166 to 169 of the Guide
to Safety at Sports Ground [except that .... ].
On completion of the installation a certificate of completion [in
the form specified in Appendix [ ] of this certificate] shall be
obtained from a [specify] and that certificate shall [be retained
by the holder] [sent within [x days] to the authority].
Until installation as required in paragraph    above is carried
out and a certificate obtained as in paragraph    above [exit
route/s marked [   ] on plan [   ] is/are not to be used by
spectators] [the number of spectators who are to be admitted to
the stand is restricted to [   ]] [and areas marked [    ] on plan
[   ] are not to be occupied].
On completion of installation and on obtaining a certificate of
satisfaction required in paragraphs [   ] above exit routes
marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used and the number of
spectators who may be admitted to the stand is increased to [   ]
[and the area(s) marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used by
spectators.]"
Application of the Green Guide
10.   The Guide is not a statutory code providing a set of rigid
requirements to be applied in all cases irrespective of the
individual circumstances. The diversity of regulated stands is
likely to be considerable, varying from basic, covered terracing
at, say, non-league football or rugby grounds to large, complex
buildings offering a variety of facilities to many thousands of
spectators. The advice in the Guide has therefore to be applied
to the situation that is seen to exist at a particular ground
having taken account of such factors as location, size,
construction, condition, together with the activities undertaken
at the ground, the numbers and density of spectators who occupy
the stand or stands and their movement patterns. The following
examples may help to illustrate how the Guide might be
interpreted without jeopardising reasonable safety.
     i.   Where it is known that the safe limit of the stand will
     not be exceeded (eg because total attendances are within
     that limit) there may be no necessity to regulate the
     admission or, in the case of standing accommodation, to
     require internal division in order to control the dispersal
     of spectators. In such circumstances, the number, strength
     and layout of barriers (if any) for standing areas need only
     reflect the number and density of the spectators to be
     accommodated.
     ii. A partly roofed, open sided, terrace allowing quick
     movement away from the covered area may not need fire-
     warning/detection systems.
     iii. The strength requirements for protective guard-rails on
     stairs, gangways or exit routes and balustrading in front of
     a row of seats may well vary. The last of these is not, for
     example, usually subjected to high pressures. Similarly,
     side or end rails to seating rows will need to be designed
     to accommodate the forces to which they may be subjected.
     These may also vary and account should be taken of
     individual circumstances.
     iv. Where it is known that spectators vacate an area of a
     stand more quickly than envisaged by using the Guide1s
     (notional) calculations, that knowledge may be taken into
     account when assessing requirements for safe egress from a
     stand.

Horseracing/greyhound racing

11.   Unlike crowds at some other sports where spectators are
essentially static for the duration of the event, there is a
common requirement for greyhound and horseracing spectators to be
mobile, with free movement to various internal parts of the stand
or racecourse to which they are admitted. Local authorities may
find that this mobility requirement regulates the density at
which the spectators congregate on terraced areas to below the
maximum of 54 persons per 10 square metres (paragraph 222 of the
Guide) for "static spectator sports". Even at well attended
meetings, where crowd densities are liable to be high (perhaps
approaching the maximum of 54 per 10 square metres) "surging" is
not generally experienced. Spectators will probably be static
for only a few minutes before moving off to other parts of the
stand or ground. This aspect of spectator behaviour should be
taken into account when considering the safety requirements of
the stand. For example, where barriers are judged to be
necessary at all, their function is most likely to be to channel
or direct safely the movement of spectators on the terrace, and
to mitigate against any "waterfall" effect of someone stumbling
at a critical moment, whilst simultaneously allowing the free
movement desired by spectators in between races. In such
circumstances, continuous barriers (see paragraph 113 of the
Guide) will probably not be the most suitable arrangement, and a
series of staggered short lengths may be appropriate; the
horizontal spacing between barriers should be commensurate with
the forces likely to be generated on the terraced areas.

12. In the case of horseracing, access and egress can often be
gained to and from a stand from the front where it discharges on
to an open "enclosure" area. Except for those parts of the stand
to which entry is gained by additional payment, eg reserved
seating or boxes spectator movement within this enclosure area
(including the stand) is not controlled. As a general rule
therefore it will not be appropriate, or possible, to include
terms and conditions in a safety certificate specifying the
maximum total number of spectators to be admitted to the stand or
requiring records of the total number of spectators so admitted.
This ought not to create undue difficulty especially when the
crowd density on standing areas of the stand is low and such
areas are occupied for relatively short periods of time. It
follows however that in setting terms and conditions geared to
the normal use of the stand the local authority will have to take
account of the possibility that everyone admitted to the
enclosure area may use the stand, - although at any given time
only a proportion of spectators will do so and even then will be
dispersed within it. These considerations may also apply to some
stands at greyhound racing courses.
13. Discussions with local management together with observation
and information about the numbers admitted to the particular
racecourse enclosure or stand at a greyhound racing stadium
should help to form a considered view on the level of use and
dispersal of spectators on which to base the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate. Where a racecourse or greyhound
stadium is occasionally used for a particularly attractive event
the local authority may wish to build into the safety certificate
additional terms and conditions to deal with that occasion as in
paragraph 8 above provided that they are satisfied that such
measures are sufficient to effect reasonable safety for the
number of spectators who are expected to attend.




Home Office
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988   ANNEX D


FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

NOTICE OF A PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION UNDER SECTION 28(2) THAT A
STAND IS A REGULATED STAND


To




Name (if any) and address of sports ground




Notice is hereby given to                       (who appears to
the                       Council to be the person responsible
for the management of the above-mentioned sports-ground and who
is therefore qualified under section 28(1) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) to hold a
general safety certificate for the regulated stand[s]* at that
sports ground) that the council have made a preliminary
determination under section 28(2) of the 1987 Act that the
stand[s] detailed in the schedule to this notice [is]* [are]*
[a]* regulated stand[s]* under section 26(5) of the Act. A
regulated stand under section 26(5) is a stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view
activities at the sports ground.

The prel itninarv determination of the council will become a final
determination two months from the date of this notice. If you
consider that [the stand]* [any of the stands]* detailed in the
schedule to this notice [is]* [are]* not [a]* regulated
stand[s]*, or if you consider you are not qualified to hold a
general safety certificate you should contact the
Council at
without delay with your reasons.
You will have a right under section 30(1) of the 1987 Act to
appeal to a magistrates court against the final determination
within 28 days from the date it becomes final. Subject to the
exercise of any appeal, on expiry of that 28 day appeal period a
general safety certificate will be required in respect of the use
of the regulated stand[s]* by spectators for viewing activities
at the sports ground.

It is an offence under section 36(1) of the 1987 Act (punishable
on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding the statutory
maximum (currently £2,000) or on indictment to a fine or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years (or both)) if
spectators are admitted to a regulated stand when no safety
certificate is in operation unless application for a general
safety certificate has been made.

Any application for a general safety certificate should be made
to the ................ Council at the address given below on
the enclosed form[s]*.   Further copies of the form can be
supplied on request.




Signed
Name in capitals
Position held in local authority
Name/Address of local authority
Date
SCHEDULE TO NOTICE



1.   Number of stands to which the notice applies:




2.   Name (if any) of each stand:




3.   Location of each stand:




4.   Any other identifiable feature of each stand:
                                                                                                                        w
       It will contain terms and conditions which              As with any enterprise or undertaking,           ggk
the local authority, after they have consulted the        responsibility for the safety o f spectators rests witHlpr
police and either the fire authority or building          the m anagement and organisers who have to
authority, consider necessary or expedient to             meet the cost o f any safety measures.
secure reasonable safety for the num ber o f
spectators to be accom m odated in the whole stand
(including any parts which are not under cover)
when it is in use for viewing such activity or
activities at the ground as are specified in the                 Local authorities are authorised by
certificate. Terms and conditions are likely to deal      regulations to charge fees for work reasonably
with such things as exits, exit routes, stairways,        done by them, or on their behalf, as a result o f an
gangways, barrier protection, fire precautions,           application for the issue, amendment,
stewarding etc.                                           replacement, transfer or cancellation o f a safety
                                                          certificate.




       This will depend on the individual
circumstances. In general the local authority will
balance the am ount o f additional safety produced              The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
by a particular measure against its cost and the          (ISBN 0-11-340840-4) published on behalf o f the
extent o f the risk. If the holder o f a safety           H om e Office and Scottish Office by HMSO price
certificate thinks the requirements are                   £2.50 contains guidance on safety requirements at
unreasonable he has a right to appeal to a                sports grounds. But do take care not to waste
magistrates court (in Scotland, a Sheriff Court)          resources on measures which do not satisfy the
within 28 days o f receipt o f the general safety         local authority. Seek professional or skilled advice,
certificate (7 days in the case o f a special safety      or ask the local authority, if you are in doubt
certificate).                                             about what is required.




      There is provision u n d e r Part III o f the Act
for a local authority to amend, transfer, replace or
cancel a safety certificate — either on application
in writing, or without application if the local
authority consider it right to do so.
                                                          * “ Local authority” m eans for the purpose o f the 1987 Act:-
                                                          in London, the L ondon borough council or C om m on Council
                                                          of the City of London; in m etropolitan counties, the
                                                          m etropolitan district council; elsewhere in England and Wales,
                                                          the county council; in Scotland, the regional or islands council.
                                                          w
       Part III o f the 1987 Act does not apply to               There are two sorts o f safety certificate: a
sports ground which is designated under the               “ general” safety certificate and a “special” safety            This depends on the viewing accommodation
Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 as requiring a         certificate.                                              under cover for spectators. In m ost cases it
safety certificate for the whole ground. It applies             The general safety certificate is for the use o f   should be clear whether or not a stand can
to all other outdoor sports grounds, whatever             the stand for those activities at the sports ground       accom m odate under cover at least 500 spectators.
their use, where there are covered stands for             specified in the certificate for an indefinite period.    There is statutory guidance for local authorities
spectators.                                                                                                         issued under section 28(8) o f the 1987 Act. In
                                                                 The special safety certificate is for an event,
                                                                                                                    general the capacity is calculated for the purpose
                                                          or series o f events, specified in that certificate and
                                                                                                                    o f determining whether a stand is a regulated
                                                          not specified in the general safety certificate. A
                                                                                                                    stand by adding the num ber o f any fixed seats
                                                          special safety certificate is issued only if a general
                                                                                                                    (and/or marked bench places) and any standing
      Basically, it stipulates that a stand at a sports   safety certificate is in force.
                                                                                                                    accom m odation calculated at 27 persons per 10
ground which is not a designated ground (see 1            Note: Although there is no statutory time limit in        square metres.
above) and which can accommodate at least 500             which to apply for a special safety certificate, the
spectators under cover to view the activities at the      local authority will need time to consider any
ground must have a safety certificate if it is to be      application. Application should therefore be
used for that purpose. Such a stand is called a           made as early as possible, preferably at least 3
“ regulated stand” .                                      months before the event.
                                                                                                                           If you disagree with the preliminary
                                                                                                                    determination contact the local authority straight
      Broadly speaking, the local authority                                                                         away saying why you disagree. You should also
responsible for the issue of a safety certificate                                                                   tell the local authority if you think som eone else
                                                                A general safety certificate is issued to the
determine if a stand is a regulated stand. They                                                                     qualifies to hold the safety certificate. The local
                                                          person responsible for the m anagement o f the
will then notify the person who appears to them                                                                     authority can then try to resolve any differences
                                                          sports ground.
to be responsible for the management o f the                                                                        with you before the preliminary determination
                                                                A special safety certificate is issued to the       becom es final. If you then still disagree about
sports ground. This is known as a preliminary
                                                          person organising the particular event at the             whether the stand can accom m odate at least 500
determination which becomes a final determination
                                                          sports ground (who may also be the holder o f the         spectators under cover you can appeal to a
after two months. An application for a general
                                                          general safety certificate).                              magistrates court (in Scotland, a Sheriff Court)
safety certificate then has to be made if the stand
is to be used by spectators to view activities at the                                                               within 28 days o f the date o f the final
ground.                                                                                                             determination.
      Alternatively, if the person responsible for              This is defined in section 26(11) o f the 1987
managing the sports ground is aware that one or           Act. Temporary stands are excluded. Otherwise
m ore o f the stands would be a regulated stand he        any artificial structure providing covered
can obtain the forms from the local authority and         accom m odation for spectators is regarded as a
                                                                                                                          Application forms are obtainable from the
apply for a general safety certificate without waiting    stand for the purposes o f Part III o f the 1987 Act.
                                                                                                                    local authority (who may well issue them with
for the preliminary determination. The local              The accom m odation may be seated or standing
                                                                                                                    their preliminary determination). A separate
authority will then make a final determination and        accom m odation or both. (Covered terracing
                                                                                                                    application form should be completed for each
deal with the application.                                would, for example, be a stand under Part III of
                                                                                                                    regulated stand.
                                                          the Act.)
••
     W hlFt                                            H O M E OFFICE
                                                Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                       Direct line: 01-273
                                                      Switchboard: 01-273 3000


 Our reference:    FEP/87 6/233/19/21                15 November 1988
 Your reference:


         The Chief Executives
         County Councils
         Metropolitan District Councils                  SOUTH YORKS. POLICE
         London Borough Councils
         Common Council of the City of London                 16 NOV [988

                                                            HEADQUARTERS
         Dear Sir
                                                            ADMINISTRATION


         HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 97/1988
         FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
         PART III - SAFETY OF STANDS AT SPORTS GROUNDS

                   a.   STATUTORY GUIDANCE BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                        UNDER SECTION 26(8)
                   b.   STATUTORY GUIDANCE BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                        UNDER SECTION 34(2)

         Introduction
         1.   This circular introduces (a) Statutory Guidance under
         section 26(8) of the 1987 Act to local authorities in discharging
         their function of determining whether a stand at a sports ground
         is a "regulated" stand; and (b) Statutory Guidance under Section
         34(2) on inspections of sports grounds containing regulated
         stands.
         2.   Local authorities may find it useful to cross reference this
         circular with Home Office Circular No 96/1988 giving general
         guidance on the operation of Part III of the 1987 Act and also
         with Home Office Circular 72/1987 which covers Statutory Guidance
         under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 on inspections of
         designated sports grounds.


         General
         3.        Both sets of Statutory Guidance are accompanied by
E .R .
         explanatory notes and commentaries. Local authorities are
         reminded that whereas these supplementary commentaries are not
         binding the Statutory Guidance under sections 26(8) and 34(2) is
         mandatory.

         Resource implications

         4.   No resource implications result directly from the Statutory
         Guidance under section 26(8) which provides no more than a basis
         for determining whether, in borderline cases, a stand is a
         regulated stand.

         5.   Inspections of sports grounds containing regulated stands
         under the Statutory Guidance made under Section 34(2) are not
         expected to give rise to significant resource implications.
         These inspections are not intended to be as detailed or the same
         as those carried out by the local authority when drawing up, or
         amending, a safety certificate; nor is it intended that they
         should duplicate those required to be carried out by or on behalf
         of the holder under the terms and conditions of the safety
         certificate. Subject to the size, condition of a particular
         sports ground and the stand or stands to be inspected, it is not
         expected that inspections should take more than 2 man days per
         ground on average and in some cases it may be less.

         Supplementary

         6.   Any enquiries about this circular or the Statutory Guidance
         should be directed to

                                                    Yours faithfully




                                                  Fire and Emergency
                                                  Planning Department

         Enclosures:     Statutory Guidance under section 26(8)
                         Statutory Guidance under section 34(2)

         Copies for information to:-

              Association of County Councils
              Association of Metropolitan Authorities
              London Boroughs Association
              Association of District Councils
              Sports Council
              Magistrates Association
              Justices Clerks Society
              Association of Chief Police Officers
              Clerks to Fire & Civil Defence Authorities
              Chief Officers of Police
    #   ' .




              FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987




                    STATUTORY GUIDANCE UNDER SECTION 26(8)


                    STATUTORY GUIDANCE UNDER SECTION 34(2)




                                                         SOUTH YORKS. POLICE
f

                                                                 16 NOV 1988

                                                              H E A Q Q -m r i'is ■
                                                             AD M ii i.'o i ■ i. "ilTtCDM




                               H O M E OFFICE
                        Queen Anne’s Gate London SW11I 9AT
HOC 97/1988


STATUTORY GUIDANCE UNDER SECTION 26(8) TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES FOR
THE DISCHARGE OF THEIR FUNCTION UNDER SECTION 26(6) OF THE FIRE
SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 26(8) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987.


Purpose and Scope

1.   Local authorities are required by section 26(6) of the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) to
determine whether any and, if so, which of the sports grounds in
their areas provide covered accommodation in a stand for 500 or
more spectators to view activities at the ground. A certificate
under Part III of the 1987 Act is required for such a stand
(which expression is defined by section 26(11) of that Act).
This guidance provides criteria for the purpose of calculating
the number of spectators for whom such accommodation is provided.


Calculation of the capacity of the accommodation to view the
activities
2.   Both seated and standing accommodation to view the
activities at the ground should be taken into account and
aggregated as necessary.

3.   Where the accommodation consists of fixed seating for
spectators the capacity of that accommodation should be
determined as follows

     i.    where individual seats are provided, by counting the
     number of seats;

     ii.   where bench seating.is provided and

           a.   it consists of marked places, and

           b.   the result of dividing the length of the bench by
          the number of marked places is that no such place
          exceeds 550mm in length,

     by counting the number of places;11.

     iii. for bench style seating where (ii) above does not
     apply by calculating on the basis that one person occupies
     each 530mm of benching and disregarding any portion of a
     bench of less than 530mm which remains after that
     calculation.

4.   Where the accommodation consists of a terraced or sloped
viewing area for standing spectators the capacity should be
determined by dividing the net standing area of the accommodation
in question excluding any gangways, stairways, landings by the
factor of 2.7 persons to 1 square metre.   (1 person to .37 square
metres)

5.   Where the accommodation (whether at ground level or above)
consists of a flat area without fixed seating, its capacity
should be determined by using the calculation of paragraph 4
above to a depth of up to 2 metres from the front of that part of
the accommodation in question from which the activities at the
ground can be viewed. Any area behind the 2 metres referred to
should be disregarded for the purpose of calculating the number
of spectators.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
•    '




fc       HOC 97/1988


         Supplementary advice and explanatory notes to the Statutory
         Guidance to Local Authorities given by thie Secretary of State
         under section 26(8) of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
         Sport Act 1987


         Introduction
         1.   This advice supplements and comments on the Statutory
         Guidance issued under section 26(8) of the 1987 Act. It does not
         form part of the Statutory Guidance itself. The advice contained
         in the following paragraphs is not binding on local authorities
         and although it is given in good faith it should be remembered
         that only the courts can rule authoritatively on the
         interpretation of points of law.

         Objectives of the Statutory Guidance
         2.   The objective is to achieve a measure of consistency by
         local authorities when they determine under section 26(6) whether
         a stand is a regulated stand if there is doubt, or dispute as to
         the stand capacity. The Statutory Guidance is not intended for
         use for any other purpose. In most cases the capacity of the
         accommodation will be manifestly above or below the 500 level.

         Calculation
         3.   The figures used in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Statutory
         Guidance are notional. They are solely for the purpose mentioned
         above and are only in respect of the covered areas of the stand
         (which must be an artificial structure) used by spectators for
         viewing activities at the ground. For bench seating consisting
         of marked places paragraph 4 of the Statutory Guidance allows up
         to the maximum width recommended in the Guide to Safety at Sports
         Grounds (the Green Guide). Otherwise, for example where such
         seating does not have places marked, the notional figure of 530mm
         is used instead. The figure of 2.7 persons per square metre for
         standing spectators is in line with paragraph 222(b) of 'the
         Green Guide1. It not only allows for potentially different crowd
         densities and mobility requirements which, in practice, may apply
         to different sports but also produces an area of similar size to
         that for seated spectators (using the notional "unit width" and
         allowing 610 mm to 760 mm for seat depth).
         4.   Once the local authority have determined that a stand is a
         regulated stand, the actual capacity permitted by any safety
         certificate will where appropriate be determined by the safety
         requirements for the stand. That figure may be less than 500
         unless required remedial work is carried out on the stand.
5.   Local authorities may wish to bear in mind that in
calculating the capacity for standing accommodation the Statutory
Guidance refers to the net area, ie it excludes existing
gangways, landings, etc.
6.   Paragraph 6 of the Statutory Guidance applies to both ground
level and raised areas of a stand such as executive boxes,
balconies, together with bars, restaurants etc which are also
used for viewing. Although more people may be accommodated in
such areas, it is assumed that spectators are unlikely, in
general, to be able to view an event beyond a depth of 2 metres
from the limit of the viewing area. Local authorities will note
the discretion given by use of "up to" so that a lower figure can
be adopted, for example if the sight line is obscured for some
reason. Stands which contain multi facilities are liable to hold
well over 500 spectators so calculations under paragraph 6 of the
Statutory Guidance may not, in practice, prove necessary in such
cases.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
STATUTORY GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON INSPECTIONS TO BE
CARRIED OUT UNDER SECTION 34 OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF
PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 ON SPORTS GROUNDS CONTAINING REGULATED
STANDS

The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 34(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987.



General

1.   For the purpose of this guidance "regulated stand" has the
meaning given by section 26(5) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 and includes any installations in or
serving the stand which are the subject of terms and conditions
in the safety certificate.

2.   Each regulated stand at a sports ground in respect of which
a safety certificate under Part III of the 1987 Act has been
issued is to be inspected in accordance with this guidance.


3.   The local authority should be satisfied that inspections
under this guidance are carried out by a person or persons
qualified for that purpose.

Frequency of Inspections

4.   Where a sports ground has a regulated stand which is the
subject of a safety certificate and which, in the opinion of the
local authority, contains accommodation under cover for over
2,000 spectators to view activities at the ground an inspection
under this guidance of all the regulated stands at that sports
ground should be carried out in the calendar year following the
date of issue of the last safety certificate. Thereafter, an
inspection of the regulated stands under this guidance should be
carried out at least once in every calendar year following the
date of the last inspection.
5.   In any other case of a sports ground containing a regulated
stand or stands which is/are the subject of a safety
certificate(s) at least one inspection under this guidance of the
regulated stands at that sports ground should be carried out
within two years from the date of issue of the last safety
certificate. Thereafter, an inspection should be carried out at
least once in every alternate calendar year following the date of
the last inspection.

Scope of Inspection

Certificates and Records

6.   Inspection should, where possible, include inspection of the
following certificates of testing and records as may be required
under the terms and conditions of the safety certificate to be
kept by the holder and/or submitted to the local authority in
respect of the regulated stands:


     a.   any certificate covering the testing of:-

          i.   strength/loading capacity of guard rails, hand
          rails, balustrading and any crush barriers

          ii.   condition, stability of the stand


          iii. inspections and condition of electrical
          installations.


     b.   any records of the following:-

          i.    spectator attendances where appropriate;

          ii.   accidents involving spectators;


          iii. maintenance and other inspections of components
          and installations together with identified deficiencies
          and recorded remedial measures taken;
          iv. tests and checks on emergency lighting, public
          address system, fire fighting equipment, fire warning
          system (if installed);

          v.   emergency evacuation procedures and any steward
          training sessions.

7.   Inspection under this paragraph relates to the regulated
stands only and should normally include inspection of the
following items:-

     a.   any part of the stand or stands where an accident or
     incident resulting in serious injury to spectators has
     occurred since the last inspection;

      b.   any recorded defect or deficiency which has arisen
     since the last inspection and which, in the opinion of the
     inspecting officer, would be likely to lead to an accident
     which could result in serious injury to spectators;

     c.   major remedial work carried out since the date of the
     last inspection;

     d.   all public stairways for their general condition, slip
     resistance; condition of hand rails for overt signs of
     weakness (aee also (j) below), trip hazards especially at
     the head of stairways, adequacy of lighting and structural
     fire separation;

     e.   all egress routes used by the public, including
     emergency exit routes, for obstructions, operation of exit
     gates and/or doors, adequacy of sign-posting and lighting;


     f.   fire fighting equipment and fire warning system (if
     installed);


     g.   generally for the presence of any accumulation of
     litter;
    h.   any emergency lighting system including any generator
    or batteries;

    i.    any first-aid facilities and equipment;

    j.   10% of any crush barriers and other protective
    barriers on gangways, stairways, exit routes for overt signs
    of weakness which might signal the need for further testing,
    remedial action or (additional) restriction on the number of
    spectators allowed to occupy that part of the stand or
    stands;

    k.   10% of the terraces or viewing slopes for general
    surface condition, evenness and slip resistance;

     1.   anchorage and   fastening of 10% of any fixedseating;

    m.    any provision for disabled people.

Where the inspection of a sample in paragraphs (j), (k) and (1)
reveals matters giving rise to serious concern for the safety of
spectators, all the items in that part of the stand(s) where the
sample indicated that there were deficiencies should be
inspected,



Testing of Equipment


8.   For each of the regulated stands at the sports ground the
following tests should, wherever possible, be carried out to
confirm that the following are in working order:


     a.   lighting, particularly on stairways and exit routes;


    b.    emergency lighting;


     c.   public address system, (including the proper
     functioning of zoning where this facility is part of the
     requirements of the safety certificate);
    d.   fire warning system (if installed);

     e.  10% of any metering system for recording the admission
     of spectators to parts of the stand or stands.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
SUPPLEMENTARY ADVICE AND EXPLANATORY NOTES TO THE STATUTORY
GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES GIVEN BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
UNDER SECTION 34(2) OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF
SPORT ACT 1987

Introduction
1.   The following advice does not form part of the Statutory
Guidance given under section 34 of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act). The following advice is
given in good faith but it should be remembered that only the
courts can rule authoritatively on interpretation of points of
law.
General

2.   The Statutory Guidance follows similar lines to that which
accompanied Home Office Circular 72/1987 in respect of designated
sports grounds except that the Statutory Guidance under section
34(2) is limited to inspections of the regulated stands for which
a safety certificate is likely to have been issued.

3.   As the size, age, condition, type of seating (if any) and
use of the regulated stands, as well as the attitude or ability
of management, can vary considerably, the discretion of local
authorities to carry out more frequent and/or more extensive
inspections than those under the Statutory Guidance is not
restricted. The frequency and extent of the inspections under
the Statutory Guidance have been set at what is seen as a minimum
likely to achieve the objectives described below. It leaves
authorities with discretion to add to the inspections and
increase their frequency according to locally determined needs.
The Statutory Guidance also concentrates on certificated stands -
i.e. those which will be occupied by spectators. However, the
duty of section 34(1) of the Act applies to the whole of a sports
ground which contains a regulated stand irrespective of whether
or not a safety certificate has been issued. It will be for each
local authority to decide, in the light of local knowledge, the
extent of inspection of other parts of a sports ground which
contains a certificated stand, and the inspection requirement for
a sports ground containing an uncertificated stand. Local
authorities may wish to note that some additional flexibility on
inspection frequency is built into the Statutory Guidance by the
use of the term "calendar year" rather than "12 months".
4.   Local authorities are reminded that inspections under
section 34 are in addition to, not a substitute for, those which
may be required to be carried out under the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate by or on behalf of the holder.
Objectives

5.   The object of inspection under the Statutory Guidance is
primarily to monitor the suitability of the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate in the light of any change in
conditions of the regulated stand and to help ensure that the
stand is maintained and occupied in compliance with these terms
and conditions.

6.   Inspections under the Statutory Guidance are not intended to
shift responsibility for safety away from the holder of the
safety certificate or ground occupier; rather they are to help
him succeed in achieving (and maintaining) safety standards
intended to be set by the certificate for the numbers of
spectators who are to be accommodated within the regulated
stands.
Inspection Team

7.   The Statutory Guidance allows the local authority to
determine how best to arrange and effect inspections under
section 34. Local authorities are however reminded of the advice
contained in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the supplementary notes and
guidance accompanying the Statutory Guidance issued with Home
Office Circular 72/1987.
Scope of Inspections
8.   Where a regulated stand or stands is the subject of a safety
certificate all the items listed in paragraphs 6 - 8 of the
Statutory Guidance should wherever possible be inspected and
tested. It is recognised however that there may be occasions
where one or more of these elements cannot, for some reason, be
inspected or tested at the same time. For this reason there is a
degree of discretion within paragraphs 6 - 8 of the Statutory
Guidance. In this way it is hoped to avoid the situation where
the local authority have to pay unnecessary repeated visits to a
ground in order to comply with the Statutory Guidance.
9.   The Statutory Guidance does not require that an inspection
should take place at any particular time so the local authority's
discretion to carry out an inspection whilst the ground is in use
is not restricted. An "in-use" or "during performance"
inspection could therefore constitute part of the inspection
required by section 34 even though it might not be sufficient
(having regard to the requirements of the Statutory Guidance) to
be an inspection itself.
Records

10. Local authorities will doubtless need to keep a record of
all inspections carried out under the Statutory Guidance and may
wish to consider whether a copy of any report/record could be
sent to the holder of the safety certificate.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
#                       STATUTORY                 INSTRUMENTS


                                                                                 I copy
                                 1988 No. 1806 (C.64)

           SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

          The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
                   (Commencement No. 4) Order 1988


                        M ade                               21st October 1988




    In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety
    of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), I hereby make the following Order:

      1. This Order may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (Commencement No. 4) Order 1988.
      2. The provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987,
    together with section 50(4) to (7) of that Act, so far as not already in force, shall come into
    force on 1st January 1989.




    Home Office

                                                                                    Douglas Hurd
    21st October 1988                       One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                                                                SOUTH YORKS. POLICE



                                                                                       1 6 NOV 1988

                                                                                    HEA'V       m S
                                                                                   ADMiri.oillATiON




    (a)    1987 c.27.
                                    EXPLANATORY NOTE                                                        *
                                ( This note is not part o f the Order)

  This Order brings into force on 1st January 1989 the provisions of Part III of the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 and the remainder of section 50(4) to (7) of
that Act.




                 NOTE AS TO EARLIER COMMENCEMENT ORDERS
                                 (This note is not part o f the Order)

  The following provisions of the Act have been brought into force by commencement
orders made before the date of this Order:

Provision                                                               D ate o f               S.I. No.
                                                                        commencement

Sections 3, 4, 8, 9, 11 to 14, 16 (partially), 17, 18                    1.1.1988               1987/1762
(partially), 19 to 25, 46, 49 (partially), 50 (partially),
Schedule 1 (partially), Schedule 2, Schedule 4 (partially)
and Schedule 5 (partially).
Sections 42,43,45, 49 (partially), Schedule 3, Schedule 4                1.6.1988               1988/485
(partially) and Schedule 5 (partially).
Sections 44 and 48                                                       1.6.1988               1988/626




                                                     45p net
                                           ISBN 0 11 087806 X
                           Printed in the United Kingdom by H er M ajesty’s Stationery Office
                                         790/W 01700    C30    10/88   3182083
                      STATUTORY                       INSTRUMEN TS




     SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

         The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988

                     M ade      -                               21st October 1988

                     L a id before Parliam ent                   31st October 1988

                     Com ing into force           -               1st January 1989


In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 31(1) and (2) of the Fire Safety
and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in
section 31(4) of that Act, I hereby make the following Regulations:

Citation, commencement and extent
  1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Safety of Places of Sport Regulations
1988 and shall come into force on 1st January 1989.
  (2) These Regulations do not extend to the Isles of Stilly.

Interpretation
  2. For the purposes of these Regulations “the 1987 Act” means the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.

Applications
  3.—(1) An application for a safety certificate shall be in the form contained in the
Schedule to these Regulations or a form to the like effect and a separate application shall
be made in respect of each regulated stand to which spectators are to be admitted.
  (2)     An application for the cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a
safety certificate shall be made in writing and, except in the case of an application for the
cancellation of a safety certificate, shall set out the names and addresses of any persons
who to the applicant’s knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with
the terms and conditions of a safety certificate as amended, replaced or transferred.

Notices by local authorities
  4.—(1) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided:
     (a) to issue a safety certificate (including an issue by way of replacement of a safety
         certificate); or
     (b) to amend a safety certificate; or
     (c) to refuse to amend or replace a safety certificate,
they shall serve on every interested party notice in writing of their decision setting out
th e in fo rm a tio n refe rre d to in p arag rap h (6 ) b e lo w , together, in the case     e f o s a h - w i t h ..................... ■■■— 5
                                                                                            S & U T H ’ Y O R K S . P O L IC E
th e ir reasons fo r it.



(a) 1987 c.27.                                                                                         16 NOV iv88

                                                                                                   HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                 A D M IN i S T R A T I d W
  (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
determined to refuse that application on grounds other than the one set out in section
28(9) of the 1987 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal, serve on the
applicant notice in writing of their decision, together with their reasons for it.
  (3) Where on an application for the transfer of a safety certificate a local authority:
     (a) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is
         not a qualified person, they shall, in addition to the notice referred to in section
         29(5) of the 1987 Act, serve on the holder of the certificate a copy of that notice;
     (b) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is a
         qualified person but decide not to transfer the certificate, they shall serve on that
         person and the holder of the certificate notice in writing of their decision
         together with their reasons for it.
  (4) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided to refuse an application
for the cancellation of a safety certificate under section 29(1 )(a) of the 1987 Act, they
shall serve on the applicant notice in writing of their decision together with their reasons
for it.
  (5) As soon as practicable after a local authority have issued a notice under section
29(l)(a) of the 1987 Act cancelling a safety certificate, they shall serve a copy of the
notice on the persons referred to in subparagraphs (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph (8) below.
  (6) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of any application in respect of which the local authority’s decision
was taken is available for inspection at a place and at the times specified in the notice.
  (7) As soon as may be after the decision referred to in paragraph (1) above, the local
authority shall cause to be published in a newspaper circulating in the locality of the
regulated stands to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision
and the information referred to in paragraph (6) above.
  (8) In this regulation “ interested party” means:
     (a) the holder of a safety certificate whose application to have it amended or
         replaced has been refused;
     (b) any other person known to the local authority to be or likely to be concerned in
         ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate;
     (c) the chief officer of police; and
     (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
         authority or, in any other case, the building authority.

Appeals under section 30 of the 1987 Act
  5.—(1) An appeal under section 30(1) of the 1987 Act (appeals against determination
that any stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand) shall be brought not later than
twenty-eight days:
     (a) in the case of a preliminary determination, after the date when that
         determination becomes final under section 28(3) of the 1987 Act; or
     (b) in the case of a final determination under section 28(6) of the 1987 Act, after the
         date of the receipt of the notice of that determination.
  (2) An appeal under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of section 30 of the 1987 Act (other
appeals) shall be brought in the case of an appeal in respect of:
     (a) a general safety certificate, not later than twenty-eight days; and
     (b) a special safety certificate, not later than seven days,
after the relevant date.
  (3) In paragraph (2) above “relevant date” means:
     (a) in the case of a person to whom a safety certificate is issued, the date of the
         receipt by him of that certificate;
     (b) in the case of a person on whom a notice is served under section 28(9), 29(1 )(b)
         or (5) of the 1987 Act or regulation 4(1), (2) or (3) above, the date of the receipt
         by him of that notice; and

                                              2
       (c)    in the case of any other person, the date of the publication of the notice required
             by regulation 4(7) above.

Fees
  6.—(1) Subject to paragraph (2) below, a local authority may determine the fee to be
charged in respect of an application for the issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of
a safety certificate or in respect of an application for the cancellation of a safety
certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
  (2) A fee under paragraph (1) above shall not exceed an amount commensurate with
the work actually and reasonably done by or on behalf of the local authority in respect of
the application.



                                                                                        Douglas H urd
Home Office                                One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State
21st October 1988




                                           SCHEDULE                                     Regulation 3(1)

PART III O F FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY O F PLACES O F SPORT ACT 1987
APPLICATION FO R A SAFETY CERTIFICATE FOR A REGULATED STAND

When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive of:
       (a) the county council where the sports ground is situated in a non-metropolitan county in
           England or Wales; or
       (b) the borough council where the sports ground is situated in Greater London; or
       (c) the district council where the sports ground is situated in a metropolitan county in
           England; or
       (d) the regional/islands council where the sports ground is situated in Scotland.

Background notes
   A safety certificate under Part III o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987 (“ the
1987 Act” ) is required in respect o f the use, at a sport ground which is not a designated sports
ground under the Safety o f Sports G rounds Act 1975, o f each stand which provides covered
accom m odation for 500 or more spectators to view activities at the ground. Such a stand is referred
to as a “ regulated stand” .
  A separate application form is required for each regulated stand a t a sports ground (although any
certificate issued may cover all such stands).
  In m ost cases the local authority will have made a prelim inary determ ination that a particular
stand is a “ regulated stand” . They will have served notice o f this determ ination on you under
section 28(2) o f the 1987 Act. T hat determ ination will have become a final determ ination for the
purposes o f that Act a t the end o f the period o f two m onths beginning with the date o f that notice.
You can pursue separately with the local authority the question whether a stand in fact satisfies the
criteria, referred to above, which determines whether a stand is a “ regulated stand” . An “on site”
inspection is likely to be necessary in resolving such a question. Alternatively you may yourself
realise that the stand is a “regulated stand” and may apply for a safety certificate in respect o f it
without a prelim inary determ ination being made by the local authority. Where the application is
for a special safety certificate this question will already have been resolved because a special safety
certificate is issued only if a general safety certificate is in force.
  U nder the provisions o f section 28(7) o f the 1987 Act in the case o f a general safety certificate or
section 28(8) o f the 1987 Act in the case o f a special safety certificate, the local authority receiving
an application for a safety certificate have to determ ine whether the applicant is qualified to hold
the safety certificate. The applicant should therefore provide the inform ation required below to
enable the local authority to deal with the application.
  A scale plan o f the sports ground and o f the relevant stands should, if available, accompany this

                                                    3
application. However, under section 28(11) o f the 1987 Act, the local authority may require you to
provide further inform ation and plans o f the ground.

To be completed in all cases
I hereby apply for a *[general] [special] safety certificate in respect o f the stand described below at

the ........................................... ....... ..................................................................................................................

sports ground to be issued to .......................................................................................................................

I make the application *[on behalf of] [a s ] ................................................................................................

o f f ............................................................................

D a t e ........................................................................      S ig n ed ........................................................................

A d d re ss....................................................................

           ...................................................................... Tel.N o.....................................................................
* Delete as appropriate
f I f applying on behalf o f a sports club, company or some other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).

    1.     (a) N am e and address o f sports ground




         (b)      N am e o f the occupier ...............

                 N am e and address o f the owner



                 Location and nam e (if any) o f the stand for which application is being made ...............


         (c)      Nam es and address o f any persons other than the proposed holder o f the certificate who
                 to his knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with the term s and
                 conditions o f the safety certificate for which this application is being made.




Complete Part I only for an application for a general safety certificate (to cover activities held over an
indefinite period)

Complete Part II only for an application for a special safety certificate (to cover one occasion or a
series o f occasions)




                                                                                     4
                                                                        PA RTI


                                               GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


  2.    List activities for which the stand provides viewing accom m odation and which are to be
covered by the general safety certificate




  3.     Give the approxim ate date o f the construction o f the stands for which application is made
and details o f any subsequent extension, m ajor alteration or re-construction o f it, together with
relevant dates.




  4. Give particulars o f current fire certificates covering any premises on any part o f the sports
ground:
     (a) nam e o f issuing fire authority ........................................................................................ —........
        (b) nam e o f holder o f fire certificate ................................................................................................
        (c) date o f issue o f fire certificate .....................................................................................................
        (d) description o f premises covered by the fire certificate ..........................................................

  5. Give particulars of any current statutory licences granted in respect o f the sports ground or
parts o f it:
      (a) nam e o f licensing authority .........................................................................................................
        (b) nam e o f licensee.............................................................................................................................
        (c) type o f licence (liquor, gaming e tc .) ..........................................................................................
        (d) date o f e x p iry ..................................................................................................................................
        (e) description o f the part or parts o f the sports ground covered by the licen ce...................

   6 .-(a) State m axim um capacity o f the accom m odation in the stand for spectators to view
           activities at the sports ground:
            (i) m axim um no. o f seated spectators .....................................................................................
            (ii) m axim um no. o f standing sp ectato rs..................................................................................
        (b) State any restrictions on that capacity:
             (i) seated sp e c ta to rs.....................................................................................................................
               (ii) standing sp e c ta to rs................................................................................................................

   7.    Is the num ber o f spectators adm itted to the stand controlled on entry to that stand? Yes/No

  8. I f the answer to question 7 is “Yes”, set out below for each of the last three years (that is,
ending on 31st December) and for each o f the activities listed in answer to question 2 above
(setting out the year and activity in question), the following information, nam ely-
      (a) the highest num ber o f spectators adm itted to the stands on any occasion during each of
          the last three years, showing separately the num ber of seated and standing spectators if
          these figures are known; and
      (b) the total num ber o f spectators adm itted during each o f the last three years and the
          num ber o f occasions they were adm itted but excluding-
           (i) any occasion when no charge was made for, or in respect of, admission; and
          (ii) any occasion when the num ber o f spectators adm itted was less than 100.




                                                                               5
Year              Activity             Total                    Number of                Highest
                                       attendance               occasions                attendance

                                                                                         (a) seated
                                                                                         (b) standing


  9.      I f the answer to question 7 is “N o”, set out below for each o f the last three years (that is,
ending on 31st December) and for each o f the activities listed in answer to question 2 above
(setting out the year and the activity in question), the following information, nam ely-
      (a) the highest num ber o f spectators who had access to the stand on any occasion during
           each o f the last three years; and
      (b) the total num ber o f spectators who had access to the stand during each o f the last three
           years and the num ber o f occasions when they had access, but excluding-
             (i) any occasion when no charge was m ade for, or in respect of, admission to the sports
                 ground so as to have access to the stand; and
            (ii) any occasion when the num ber o f spectators so adm itted was less than 100.


Year               Activity             Total                    Number of               Highest
                                        attendance               occasions               attendance




                                                 PART II
                                SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES

 10. N am e activity (or activities) for which the stand provides viewing accom m odation and
which are to be covered by the special safety certificate.




  11. Give date(s) o f occasion(s) when it is proposed that the stand will be used for the activity
(or activities) listed in paragraph 10 above.

  12. Set out below the inform ation required in respect o f each occasion during the last three
years (ending on 31st December) when spectators were adm itted, or had access to, the stand to
view activities which are the same as, or similar to, those listed in answer to question 10 above. The
nam e and date o f the occasions in question should be given together with the total num ber of
spectators who had access to the stand.


 Year                                 Occasion                                  Maximum number of
                                                                                spectators who had
                                                                                access to the stand




   13.    State what changes or adaptations (if any) are proposed to the stand or to arrangements for
 entry and control (if any) of spectators to and from the stand.




                                                     6
                                EXPLANATORY NOTE
                        (This note is not part o f the Regulations)


  These Regulations, which apply throughout Great Britain (except the Isles of Stilly),
concern certificates under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 (by virtue of sections 26(2) and 41 of that Act referred to as “safety certificates” ).
Such a certificate which is issued by a local authority (as defined by section 41) is
required in respect of the use, at a sports ground which is not a designated sports ground
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (c.52), of each stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view activities at the ground. By
virtue of sections 26(5) and 41 of the 1987 Act such a stand is referred to as a “regulated
stand” .
  By virtue of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (Commencement
No. 4) Order 1988 (S.I. 1988/1806), Part III of the 1987 Act comes into force on 1st
January 1989, the same date as the coming into force of these Regulations.
  Regulation 3(1) of, and the Schedule to, these Regulations prescribe the form of
application for a safety certificate and regulation 3(2) makes provision for other
applications in respect of certificates. Regulation 4 requires local authorities to give
notice (including, under regulation 4(7), notice in a local newspaper) of certain of their
decisions in respect of safety certificates. Regulation 5 prescribes the time within which
appeals in respect of a local authority’s decision must be brought. Regulation 6 concerns
the fees a local authority may charge in respect of work done in connection with
applications for the issue etc. of safety certificates.




                                              7
          STATUTORY                      INSTRUMENTS



                            1988 No. 1807

SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

 The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988




                                  £1.60 net
                            ISBN 0 11 087807 8

          Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office


    790   WO 1701     C15     10/88    452/3     4235     PS 8901376      882887D
PART III OF FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987




  Application for a
Safety Certificate for
 a Regulated Stand
When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive of:

                       (a) th e county council w h ere th e sports ground is situated
                           in a non-m etropolitan county in England and W ales; or

                       (b )     th e borough council w h ere th e sports ground is situated
                                in G reater London; or

                       (c) th e district council w h ere th e sports ground is
                                 situated in a m etropolitan county in England; or

                       (d) th e regional/islands council w h ere th e sports ground is
                           situated in Scotland.




BACKGROUND NOTES
         A s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e u n d e r P a rt III o f t h e F ire            r e s o lv in g s u c h a q u e s t i o n . A l t e r n a t i v e l y y o u m a y
S a f e t y a n d S a f e t y o f P la c e s o f S p o r t A c t 1 9 8 7 ( " t h e         y o u r s e l f r e a lis e t h a t t h e s t a n d is a " r e g u l a t e d
1 9 8 7 A c t " ) is r e q u ir e d in r e s p e c t o f t h e u s e , a t a               s t a n d " a n d m a y a p p l y f o r a s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e in
s p o r t s g r o u n d w h i c h is n o t a d e s ig n a t e d s p o r t s                r e s p e c t o f it w i t h o u t a p r e l i m i n a r y d e t e r m i n a t i o n
g ro u n d u n d e r th e S a fe ty o f S p o rts G ro u n d s A c t                       -b e in g m a d e b y t h e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y . W h e r e t h e
1975, o f e a ch s ta n d w h ic h p ro v id e s c o v e re d                              a p p l i c a t i o n is f o r a special safety certificate t h i s
a c c o m m o d a tio n f o r 500 o r m o r e s p e c ta to rs to v ie w                   q u e s t i o n w i l l a lr e a d y h a v e b e e n r e s o lv e d b e c a u s e a
a c t i v it ie s a t t h e g r o u n d . S u c h a s t a n d is r e f e r r e d t o       special s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e is is s u e d o n l y i f a g e n e ra l
as a " r e g u la te d s ta n d " .                                                        s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e is in fo r c e .
         A s e p a r a t e a p p l i c a t i o n f o r m is r e q u ir e d f o r                    U n d e r t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t io n 2 8 (7 ) o f t h e
e a c h r e g u la t e d s t a n d a t a s p o r t s g r o u n d ( a l t h o u g h          1 9 8 7 A c t in t h e c a s e o f a g e n e r a l s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e o r
a n y c e r t if ic a t e is s u e d m a y c o v e r a ll s u c h s t a n d s ) .          s e c t io n 2 8 (8 ) o f t h e 1 9 8 7 A c t in t h e c a s e o f a s p e c ia l
         In m o s t c a s e s t h e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y w i l l h a v e             s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e , t h e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y r e c e iv in g a n
m a d e a p r e lim in a r y d e te r m in a tio n th a t a p a rtic u la r                a p p lic a tio n         fo r    a    s a fe t y    c e r t if ic a t e  have      to
s t a n d is a " r e g u l a t e d s t a n d " . T h e y w i l l h a v e s e r v e d        d e t e r m i n e w h e t h e r t h e a p p l i c a n t is q u a l i f i e d t o
n o t ic e o f t h i s d e t e r m i n a t i o n o n y o u u n d e r s e c t io n           h o ld t h e s a f e t y c e r t if ic a t e . T h e a p p l i c a n t s h o u l d
2 8 (2 ) o f t h e 1 9 8 7 A c t . T h a t d e t e r m i n a t i o n w i l l h a v e       t h e r e f o r e p r o v i d e t h e i n f o r m a t i o n r e q u ir e d b e l o w
b e c o m e a f in a l d e t e r m i n a t i o n f o r t h e p u r p o s e s o f           t o e n a b le t h e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y t o d e a l w i t h t h e
t h a t A c t a t t h e e n d o f t h e p e r io d o f t w o m o n t h s                    a p p lic a t i o n .
b e g i n n i n g w i t h t h e d a t e o f t h a t n o t ic e . Y o u c a n                        A s c a le p la n o f t h e s p o r t s g r o u n d a n d o f t h e
p u r s u e s e p a r a t e ly w i t h t h e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y t h e               r e l e v a n t s t a n d s s h o u ld , if a v a ila b le , a c c o m p a n y
q u e s t i o n w h e t h e r a s t a n d in f a c t s a t is f ie s t h e                  t h i s a p p lic a t i o n . H o w e v e r , u n d e r s e c t io n 2 8 (1 1 ) o f
c r it e r ia ,   re fe rre d       to    a b o v e , w h ic h      d e te r m in e         t h e 1 9 8 7 A c t , t h e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y m a y r e q u ir e y o u t o
w h e t h e r a s t a n d is a " r e g u l a t e d s t a n d " . A n " o n                  p r o v i d e f u r t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n a n d p la n s o f t h e
s i t e " i n s p e c t io n is lik e ly t o b e n e c e s s a r y in                      g ro u n d .




                                                                                       1
To be completed in all cases
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   I hereby apply for a *[general] [special] safety              I make the application *[on behalf of] [as]
   certificate in respect of the stand described below
   at the                                                        _______________________________________________

    ________________________________________________             of+_____________________________________________
   sports ground to be issued to


   ________________________________________________              Address________________________________________




    * Delete as appropriate                                      Signed.
    + If applying on behalf of a sports club, com pany or some
      other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).              Tel. No.



   1   (a) Name and address of sports ground




       (b) Name of the occupier

          Name and address of the owner


          Location and name (if any) of the stand for
          which application is being made



       (c) Names and address of any person other
          than the proposed holder of the certificate
          who to his knowledge will or may be
          concerned in ensuring compliance with the
          terms and conditions of the safety
          certificate for which this application is
          being made.


Complete Part I only for an application for a general safety certificate (to cover activities held
over an indefinite period)
Complete Part II only for an application for a special safety certificate (to cover one occasion
or a series of occasions)

   PART I: GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

   2    List activities for which the stand provides
       viewing accommodation and which are to be
       covered by the general safety certificate.




   3    Give the approximate date of the construction
       of the stands for which application is made
       and details of any subsequent extension,
       major alteration or re-construction of it,
       together with relevant dates.
    4      Give particulars of current fire certificates covering any premises on
          any part of the sports ground:
          (a)    name of issuing fire authority          _______________________

«         (b) name of holder of fire certificate         _______________________

          (c) date of issue of fire certificate          _______________________
          (d) description of premises covered by
              the fire certificate                       _______________________


    5      Give particulars of any current statutory licences granted in respect of
          the sports ground or parts of it:
          (a)    name of licensing a u t h o r i t y _________________________

          (b) name of licensee

          (c) type of licence (liquor, gaming etc.)

          (d) date of expiry
          (e) description of the part or parts of
              the sports ground covered by
              the licence


    6      (a) State maximum capacity of the accommodation in the stand for spectators
               to view activities at the sports ground:
          (i)    maximum no. of seated spectators        __________________________________

          (ii) maximum no. of standing spectators .

          (b)     State any restrictions on that capacity:

          (i) seated spectators

          (ii) standing spectators


    7     Is the number of spectators admitted to the stand controlled on entry to that stand?                Yes/No



     8 If the answer to question 7 is "Yes", set out below for each of the last three years (that
          is, ending on 31st December) and for each of the activities listed in answer to question 2
          above (setting out the year and activity in question), the following information, namely —

    (a)    the highest number of spectators admitted         (b) the total number of spectators admitted during
          to the stand on any occasion during each             each of the last three years and the number
          of the last three years, showing separately          of occasions they were admitted but excluding —
          the number of seated and standing                    (j) any occasion when no charge was made for,
          spectators if these figures are known; and                 or in respect of, admission; and
                                                                (ii) any occasion when the number of spectators
                                                                     admitted was less than 100.

                Year          Activity                        Total                Number of        Highest
                                                              attendance           occasions        attendance
                                                                                                    (a) seated
                                                                                                    (b) standing
                                                                                                    1                u
                                                                                                                     j
  9    If the answer to question 7 is "N o ” , set out below for each of the last three years (that is, ending on   ,1
      31st December) and for each of the activities listed in answer to question 2 above (setting out the year
      and activity in question), the following information, nam ely—                                                 J

      (a) the highest number of spectators who          (b) the total number of spectators who had
          had access to the stand on any occasion          access to the stand during each of the
          during each of the last three years; and         last three years and the number of
                                                            occasions when they had access, but
                                                            excluding —
                                                             (i) any occasion when no charge was made for,
                                                                 or in respect of, admission to the sports
                                                                 ground so as to have access to the stand; and
                                                            (ii) any occasion when the number of spectators
                                                                 so admitted was less than 100.

         Year          Activity                          Total                Number of           Highest
                                                         attendance           occasions           attendance




PART II: SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

 10   Name activity (or activities) for which the
      stand provides viewing accommodation and
      which are to be covered by the special safety
      certificate.


 11   Give date(s) of occasion(s) when it is
      proposed that the stand will be used for the
      activity (or activities) listed in paragraph 10
      above.


 12   Set out below the information required in respect of each occasion during the last three years
      (ending on 31st December) when spectators were admitted, or had access to, the stand to view
      activities which are the same as, or similar to, those listed in answer to question 10 above. The name
      and date of the occasions in question should be given together with the total number of spectators
      who had access to the stand.

         Year           Occasion                                      Maximum number of
                                                                      spectators who had
                                                                      access to the stand




 13    State what changes or adaptations (if any) are proposed to the stand or to arrangements for entry
       and control (if any) of spectators to and from the stand.




                                                            4
                                                                                                      P 2 /Z .-0 2 *-



*                       STATUTORY                 INSTRUMENTS




                                  1988 No. 1806 (C.64)

           SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

          The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
                   (Commencement No. 4) Order 1988


                        Made                                    21st October 1988




    In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety
    of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), I hereby make the following Order:

      1. This Order may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (Commencement No. 4) Order 1988.
      2. The provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987,
    together with section 50(4) to (7) of that Act, so far as not already in force, shall come into
    force on 1st January 1989.




    Home Office

                                                                                    Douglas Hurd
    21st October 1988                       One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                           OO U T H
                                           O'         Y O r,,' 3 .   P O L IC E




                                                  2 2 NOV 1988


                                                ADMlH.Gi^ATSO;!




    (a)    1987 c.27.
                                   EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                ( This note is not part o f the Order)

  This Order brings into force on 1st January 1989 the provisions of Part III of the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 and the remainder of section 50(4) to (7) of
that Act.




                 NOTE AS TO EARLIER COMMENCEMENT ORDERS
                                ( This note is not part o f the Order)

  The following provisions of the Act have been brought into force by commencement
orders made before the date of this Order:

Provision                                                              Date of                S.I. No.
                                                                       commencement

Sections 3, 4, 8, 9, 11 to 14, 16 (partially), 17, 18                  1.1.1988               1987/1762
(partially), 19 to 25, 46, 49 (partially), 50 (partially),
Schedule 1 (partially), Schedule 2, Schedule 4 (partially)
and Schedule 5 (partially).
Sections 42,43,45,49 (partially), Schedule 3, Schedule 4               1.6.1988               1988/485
(partially) and Schedule 5 (partially).
Sections 44 and 48                                                      1.6.1988              1988/626




                                                    45p n et
                                          ISBN 0 11 087806 X
                           Printed in the United Kingdom by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                                        790/W 01700    C30    10/88   3182083
            STATUTORY            INSTRUMENTS



                        1988 No. 1807
   SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
     The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988
                         ISBN 0 11 087807 8


                          CORRECTIONS
             Page 5, Schedule, Part I, paragraph 8(a), line 1:
                 delete “stands”
                 substitute “stand” ,
             page 6, Schedule, Part II, heading:
                 delete “SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES”
                 substitute “ SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE” .



November 1988
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
                  STATUTORY                 INSTRUMENTS



                                    1988 No. 1807
    SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
        The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988
                                                                             SOUTH Y

                 Made      -    -    -                21st October 1988
                 L aid before Parliament              31st October 1988            2 2 NOV BBS

                 Coming into force                     1st January 1989                        RTf-nS
                                                                               ADMiri;
In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 31(1) and (2) of the Fire Safety
and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in
section 31(4) of that Act, I hereby make the following Regulations:

Citation, commencement and extent
  1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Safety of Places of Sport Regulations
1988 and shall come into force on 1st January 1989.
  (2) These Regulations do not extend to the Isles of Stilly.

Interpretation
  2. For the purposes of these Regulations “the 1987 Act” means the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.

Applications
  3 .— (i) An application for a safety certificate shall be in the form contained in the
Schedule to these Regulations or a form to the like effect and a separate application shall
be made in respect of each regulated stand to which spectators are to be admitted.
  (2)     An application for the cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a
safety certificate shall be made in writing and, except in the case of an application for the
cancellation of a safety certificate, shall set out the names and addresses of any persons
who to the applicant’s knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with
the terms and conditions of a safety certificate as amended, replaced or transferred.

Notices by local authorities
  4.—(1) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided:
     (a) to issue a safety certificate (including an issue by way of replacement of a safety
         certificate); or
     (b) to amend a safety certificate; or
     (c) to refuse to amend or replace a safety certificate,
they shall serve on every interested party notice in writing of their decision setting out
the information referred to in paragraph (6) below, together, in the case of a refusal, with
their reasons for it.


(a) 1987 c.27.
  (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
determined to refuse that application on grounds other than the one set out in section
28(9) of the 1987 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal, serve on the
applicant notice in writing of their decision, together with their reasons for it.
  (3) Where on an application for the transfer of a safety certificate a local authority:
     (a) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is
         not a qualified person, they shall, in addition to the notice referred to in section
         29(5) of the 1987 Act, serve on the holder of the certificate a copy of that notice;
     (b) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is a
         qualified person but decide not to transfer the certificate, they shall serve on that
         person and the holder of the certificate notice in writing of their decision
         together with their reasons for it.
  (4) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided to refuse an application
for the cancellation of a safety certificate under section 29(l)(a) of the 1987 Act, they
shall serve on the applicant notice in writing of their decision together with their reasons
for it.
  (5) As soon as practicable after a local authority have issued a notice under section
29(1 )(a) of the 1987 Act cancelling a safety certificate, they shall serve a copy of the
notice on the persons referred to in subparagraphs (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph (8) below.
  (6) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of any application in respect of which the local authority’s decision
was taken is available for inspection at a place and at the times specified in the notice.
  (7) As soon as may be after the decision referred to in paragraph (1) above, the local
authority shall cause to be published in a newspaper circulating in the locality of the
regulated stands to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision
and the information referred to in paragraph (6) above.
  (8) In this regulation “interested party” means:
     (a) the holder of a safety certificate whose application to have it amended or
         replaced has been refused;
     (b) any other person known to the local authority to be or likely to be concerned in
         ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate;
     (c) the chief officer of police; and
     (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
         authority or, in any other case, the building authority.

Appeals under section 30 of the 1987 Act
  5 .— (i) An appeal under section 30(1) of the 1987 Act (appeals against determination
that any stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand) shall be brought not later than
twenty-eight days:
     (a) in the case of a preliminary determination, after the date when that
          determination becomes final under section 28(3) of the 1987 Act; or
      (b) in the case of a final determination under section 28(6) of the 1987 Act, after the
          date of the receipt o f the notice of that determination.
  (2) An appeal under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of section 30 of the 1987 Act (other
appeals) shall be brought in the case of an appeal in respect of:
     (a) a general safety certificate, not later than twenty-eight days; and
     (b) a special safety certificate, not later than seven days,
after the relevant date.
  (3) In paragraph (2) above “relevant date” means:
     (a) in the case of a person to whom a safety certificate is issued, the date of the
         receipt by him of that certificate;
     (b) in the case of a person on whom a notice is served under section 28(9), 29(1 )(b)
         or (5) of the 1987 Act or regulation 4(1), (2) or (3) above, the date of the receipt
         by him of that notice; and

                                              2
     (c) in the case of any other person, the date of the publication of the notice required
         by regulation 4(7) above.

Fees
  6.—(l) Subject to paragraph (2) below, a local authority may determine the fee to be
charged in respect of an application for the issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of
a safety certificate or in respect of an application for the cancellation of a safety
certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
  (2)    A fee under paragraph (1) above shall not exceed an amount commensurate with
the work actually and reasonably done by or on behalf of the local authority in respect of
the application.


                                                                               Douglas Hurd
Home Office                                One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State
21st October 1988




                                           SCHEDULE                                     Regulation 3(1)

PART III OF FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY O F PLACES O F SPORT ACT 1987
APPLICATION FO R A SAFETY CERTIFICATE FOR A REGULATED STAND

When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive o f
     (a) the county council where the sports ground is situated in a non-metropolitan county in
         England or Wales; or
     (b) the borough council where the sports ground is situated in Greater London; or
     (c) the district council where the sports ground is situated in a metropolitan county in
         England; or
     (d) the regional/islands council where the sports ground is situated in Scotland.

Background notes
  A safety certificate under P art 111 o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987 (“ the
1987 Act”) is required in respect o f the use, at a sport ground which is not a designated sports
ground under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975, o f each stand which provides covered
accom m odation for 500 or m ore spectators to view activities at the ground. Such a stand is referred
to as a “ regulated stand” .
  A separate application form is required for each regulated stand at a sports ground (although any
certificate issued m ay cover all such stands).
  In m ost cases the local authority will have m ade a prelim inary determ ination that a particular
stand is a “ regulated stand” . They will have served notice o f this determ ination on you under
section 28(2) o f the 1987 Act. T hat determ ination will have become a final determ ination for the
purposes o f that Act at the end o f the period o f two m onths beginning with the date o f that notice.
You can pursue separately with the local authority the question whether a stand in fact satisfies the
criteria, referred to above, which determines whether a stand is a “ regulated stand” . An “on site”
inspection is likely to be necessary in resolving such a question. Alternatively you may yourself
realise that the stand is a “regulated stand” and may apply for a safety certificate in respect o f it
w ithout a prelim inary determ ination being m ade by the local authority. Where the application is
for a special safety certificate this question will already have been resolved because a special safety
certificate is issued only if a general safety certificate is in force.
  U nder the provisions o f section 28(7) o f the 1987 Act in the case o f a general safety certificate or
section 28(8) o f the 1987 Act in the case o f a special safety certificate, the local authority receiving
an application for a safety certificate have to determ ine whether the applicant is qualified to hold
the safety certificate. The applicant should therefore provide the inform ation required below to
enable the local authority to deal with the application.
  A scale plan o f the sports ground and o f the relevant stands should, if available, accompany this

                                                    3
application. However, under section 28(11) o f the 1987 Act, the local authority may require you to
provide further inform ation and plans o f the ground.

To be completed in all cases
I hereby apply for a *[general] [special] safety certificate in respect of the stand described below at

the .......................................................................................................................................................................

sports ground to be issued to ........................................................................................................................

I make the application “"[on behalf of] [a s ] ................................................................................................

o f t ............................................................................

D a t e ........................................................................      S ig n ed ........................................................................

A d d re ss....................................................................

           ................................................................... Tel. N o.......................................................................
* Delete as appropriate
t I f applying on behalf o f a sports club, company or some other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).

    1.     (a) Name and address o f sports ground




         (b)       Name o f the occupier ...............

                 N am e and address o f the owner



                 Location and name (if any) o f the stand for which application is being m ade ...............


          (c)     Names and address o f any persons other than the proposed holder o f the certificate who
                 to his knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with the terms and
                 conditions o f the safety certificate for which this application is being made.




Complete Part I only for an application for a general safety certificate (to cover activities held over an
indefinite period)

Complete Part II only for an application for a special safety certificate (to cover one occasion or a
series o f occasions)




                                                                                     4
                                                                        PA RTI


                                               GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


  2.    List activities for which the stand provides viewing accom m odation and which are to be
covered by the general safety certificate




  3.     Give the approxim ate date o f the construction o f the stands for which application is m ade
and details o f any subsequent extension, m ajor alteration or re-construction o f it, together with
relevant dates.




  4. Give particulars o f current fire certificates covering any premises on any part o f the sports
ground:
     (a) nam e o f issuing fire authority .....................................................................................................
        (b) nam e o f holder o f fire c e rtific a te................................................................................................
        (c) date o f issue o f fire certificate .....................................................................................................
        (d) description o f premises covered by the fire certificate ..........................................................

  5. Give particulars o f any current statutory licences granted in respect o f the sports ground or
parts o f it:
      (a) name o f licensing authority .........................................................................................................
        (b) name o f licensee..............................................................................................................................
        (c) type o f licence (liquor, gaming e tc .) ...........................................................................................
        (d) date o f e x p iry ..................................................................................................................................
        (e) description o f the part or parts o f the sports ground covered by the licence...................

   6 .-(a) State m axim um capacity o f the accom m odation in the stand for spectators to view
           activities at the sports ground:
            (i) m axim um no. o f seated spectators .....................................................................................
               (ii) m axim um no. o f standing sp ectato rs..................................................................................
        (b)     State any restrictions on that capacity:
                (i) seated sp e c ta to rs......................................................................................................................
               (ii) standing spectators .............................................. ...................................................................

   7.    Is the num ber o f spectators adm itted to the stand controlled on entry to th at stand? Yes/No

  8. I f the answer to question 7 is "Yes”, set out below for each o f the last three years (that is,
ending on 31st December) and for each o f the activities listed in answer to question 2 above
(setting out the year and activity in question), the following inform ation, nam ely-
      (a) the highest num ber o f spectators adm itted to the stands on any occasion during each of
          the last three years, showing separately the num ber o f seated and standing spectators if
          these figures are known; and
      (b) the total num ber o f spectators adm itted during each o f the last three years and the
          num ber o f occasions they were adm itted but excluding-
           (i) any occasion when no charge was m ade for, or in respect of, admission; and
          (ii) any occasion when the num ber o f spectators adm itted was less than 100.




                                                                               5
Year              Activity             Total                    Number of               Highest
                                       attendance               occasions               attendance

                                                                                         (a) seated
                                                                                         (b) standing


  9.      I f the answer to question 7 is "N o”, set out below for each o f the last three years (that is,
ending on 31st December) and for each o f the activities listed in answer to question 2 above
(setting out the year and the activity in question), the following inform ation, nam ely-
      (a) the highest num ber o f spectators who had access to the stand on any occasion during
           each o f the last three years; and
      (b) the total num ber o f spectators who had access to the stand during each o f the last three
           years and the num ber o f occasions when they had access, but excluding-
            (i) any occasion when no charge was m ade for, or in respect of, admission to the sports
                ground so as to have access to the stand; and
           (ii) any occasion when the num ber o f spectators so adm itted was less than 100.


Year              Activity              Total                    Number of               Highest
                                        attendance               occasions               attendance




                                                 PART II
                                SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES

 10.     Nam e activity (or activities) for which the stand provides viewing accommodation and
which are to be covered by the special safety certificate.




  11. Give date(s) o f occasion(s) when it is proposed that the stand will be used for the activity
(or activities) listed in paragraph 10 above.

  12. Set out below the inform ation required in respect o f each occasion during the last three
years (ending on 31st December) when spectators were adm itted, or had access to, the stand to
view activities which are the same as, or sim ilar to, those listed in answer to question 10 above. The
name and date o f the occasions in question should be given together with the total num ber of
spectators who had access to the stand.


 Year                                 Occasion                                 Maximum number of
                                                                               spectators who had
                                                                               access to the stand




   13.    State what changes or adaptations (if any) are proposed to the stand or to arrangements for
 entry and control (if any) o f spectators to and from the stand.




                                                     6
                                EXPLANATORY NOTE
                        (This note is not part o f the Regulations)

  These Regulations, which apply throughout Great Britain (except the Isles of Stilly),
concern certificates under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 (by virtue of sections 26(2) and 41 of that Act referred to as “safety certificates”).
Such a certificate which is issued by a local authority (as defined by section 41) is
required in respect of the use, at a sports ground which is not a designated sports ground
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (c.52), of each stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view activities at the ground. By
virtue of sections 26(5) and 41 of the 1987 Act such a stand is referred to as a “regulated
stand” .
  By virtue of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (Commencement
No. 4) Order 1988 (S.I. 1988/1806), Part III of the 1987 Act comes into force on 1st
January 1989, the same date as the coming into force of these Regulations.
  Regulation 3(1) of, and the Schedule to, these Regulations prescribe the form of
application for a safety certificate and regulation 3(2) makes provision for other
applications in respect of certificates. Regulation 4 requires local authorities to give
notice (including, under regulation 4(7), notice in a local newspaper) of certain of their
decisions in respect of safety certificates. Regulation 5 prescribes the time within which
appeals in respect of a local authority’s decision must be brought. Regulation 6 concerns
the fees a local authority may charge in respect of work done in connection with
applications for the issue etc. of safety certificates.




                                             7
          STATUTORY                      INSTRUMENTS



                            1988 No. 1807

SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
 The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988




                                  £1.60 net
                            ISBN 0 11 087807 8

          Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office


    790   W01701      C15     10/88    452/3     4235     PS 8901376      882887D
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                      MINUTE SHEET



           FILE REFERENCE                                               MINUTE SHEET NO


           SUBJECT

                                                   —    A-




                                             c- c a < ^ ( v \$

                                        - 2-
        ( « * ■/; )




                                            DEC1987


               •   \>Wv*_ W <«,      o ^ m A .    SS   “K s»e-                         635S>

i/'                te 3>> pAdUDJrt^ftV'-                                £c&&* t® TVa. A -           (WfcoW

                                                  •v ^3SftV p—               <^Uo Sc-y to            CH
                             •a^o\ia\9'l.




      IxsQ .       A&-
       J                 .                                       U
                                                                                                        <£^}
                                                                                               \^>>
                    *r                           - *     -                                                     W
                                                                                               lv    «u!?
                                                                                                &*


      GEN/I
                                        ^^IP            p«Ndu-^      fWoe
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



                  F IL E   REFEREN CE                                                          M IN U T E S H E E T           NO    Q ,



                  S U B JE C T           S<J.Cz)fa      C e ^ )tfia x lic > .


                                                            - 5

                   N-eW*

                                               \fi2cp                                   \onv\~ '1)0AXA«SOX




                                                                    Cd —

X-     O i U ^                       ;


       kk     cu-t                                   l-'A    (\     H ]A        j^                      lo a d            i   fti c j
              ibncaiN/ £b ir% JcW                                        4V           k) cNA?.v4vfl^j U/l<7 (in (A/S
                       %     .




     V\u» VVe^ow •
                       3 > \^    ^   c « tv > u U » K * ^    e>£.                ve^w ^sA aV     «s*v       *5 L "|




                                                                                                                                          ai\wW«
                                                                                     V\uis V^«k<Nv
                                                                                                           Ow W*^[> <3c&*> *3
                                                                                                           KQ.. U\ir\eucroJf
 c jjfiiA w ^ r                                                                                            We. uxW <<>0x3 vta|p<mA ^
                                                                                                           \«Su2> e£           V3. V * * y
                 UUsd            0-0 NQvviMi^                                                                         '         %
                                                                                                           (\u<ajk!ir Tfvw» ’^ p & j




            G E N /l
                                                                                                W.R. Bugler, LL.B.,L.M.R.T.P.I.
                                                                                                Solicitor
                                                                                                Director of Legal & Adm inistrative Services

                                                                                                P.O. Box 71, Copley House,
                                                                                                Waterdale, Doncaster,
                                                             m                                  South Yorkshire. DN1 3EQ

                     Metropolitan               Borough          Council                        Telephone (0302)   734636
                                                                                                MDX 12569 - DONCASTER
                     Directorate of Legal and Administrative Services
                                                                                                FAX NUMBER 734665

             MS/JRM/CH               L/DL/JCL                                                                Mr. D. Littlewood
Yo ur Ref.               O ur Ref.                  If tele phoning or calling please ask for




                                                                                                    8th July 1988


                   Dear Sir,

                                            Safety Certificate - Belle Vue, Doncaster

                        Further to your letter of the 13th May 1988 and the subsequent
                   telephone conversation between Chief Inspector Bennett and my Assistant,
                                     I can confirm that the provisions of Section 2(2A) of
                   cne   aaret-y oi Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as inserted by the 1987 Act) will
                   be incorporated in the Safety Certificate for Belle Vue FootballGround.
                   The relevant requirement will now read:-

                         "The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the
                          attendance at every specified activity of an adequate
                          number of Police Officers to secure the orderly and
                          lawful behaviour of the spectators, the number of such
                          Police Officers to be determined by the Chief Constable."

                        Inspector Finch from the Doncaster Divisional Headquarters represents
                   the Police on the Council's Safety Team and I will bring this matter to
                   his attention at the next meeting to be held on the 13th July 1988.

                         I apologise for the delay in confirming the above.


                                                                 Yours faithfully,




                                                          Director^p#*' Legal and
                                                         Administrative Services



                   The Chief Constable,
                   South Yorkshire Police,                                                        SOUTH YORKS, POLICE
                   Police Headquarters,
                   Snig Hill,                                                                     lr£ )W / / 0
                   Sheffield,                                                                             I 3 JUL 1988
                   S3 80Y.
                                                                                                       HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
m
    O THERHAM M ETROPOLITAN BOROUGH CO U NC IL
€ orn Bank,
38 Moorgate Road,
Rotherham S60 2BU                                                  i Iy
                                                                                 Rotherham
Neil H. Morton, F.I.E.H., M.R.S.H., M.lnst.S.W., M.R.I.P.H.H., M jnst. S.H.S.
Director of Environmental Health                                                      For Information
                                                                    ^ Ma y
D EPA R TM EN T OF E N V IR O N M EN T A L                         TH        %
Telephone: Rotherham (0709) 37 3 7 3 1 /9
                                                                                      For Action

W IT H C O M P L I M E N T S
                                                                                      Please Comment
FROM :        ^            .
E X T E N S IO N :
                                                                                      See Comments
                                                                                      Overleaf
 DMD/JD/015                                    43     Mr.

                                                            16th March 1988
 The Chief Constable,
 South Yorkshire Police,
 Snigg Hill,
 Sheffield,
 S3 8LY.




Dear Sir,

EiFe Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987


         r T lth f0r y0Ur lnformatlon a notice of amendment of the Safety
Certificate In respect of the MlUmoor Ground, Rotherham.                *

Yours faithfully,




Assistant Director of Environmental Health
Pollution Control
                                S AFETY CERTIFICATE



                        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

         as amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places Act 1987



Notice is hereby given, in accordance with Regulation 5 of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Regulations 1987,        that the Rotherham Metropolitan Borough
Council at its meeting held on 3rd February 1988, resolved to amend Item 7
in the General Terms         and Conditions        of the Safety      Certificate held        by
Rotherham United Football Club Limited, in respect of the Millmoor Ground,
Rotherham,    as required by Section 21 of the Fire Safety                      and Safety    of
Places of Sport Act 1987.



The amendment entails deleting         from    the said     Item    7 the words        'agreed
between the Chief Constable and the Holder'               and   substituting        the words
'determined by the Chief Constable'.


Item '7, as amended, reads:



      The Holder shall       at his   own expense arrange          for    the   attendance    at

      every Spe ci fi ed A c t iv it y of an adequate    number    of police      officers    to

      secure the orderly and lawful            behaviour of the spectators            and    the

      number of police officers required at each Sp ecified Activity                    shell

      be determined by the Chief Constable at least twenty one days                          (or

      such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
      Specified Activity takes place.


A copy   of   the   Safety    Certificate     is    available   for      inspection   at     the

Department of Environmental Health, Thorn Bank, Moorgate Road, Rotherham,
Monday to Friday between the hours of 10 a.m. and 4 p.m.
                                                                                                                 2. A .

# •

O'Zo'l-   Il>+A44-
          The D i r e c t o r o f     Legal & A d m i n i s t r a t iv e   Your Ref:
          Servi c e s
          PO Box 71                                                        Our Ref:      MS/JRM/CH
          Copley House
          Waterdale                                                        Date:         13 May 1988
          DONCASTER




          Dear S i r

          I r e f e r t o my p rev io u s l e t t e r dated 3 December          1987   (copy a t t a c h e d )   and
          wonder i f you are y e t in a p o s i t i o n t o r e p l y .

          Yours f a i t h f u l l y




          C hief Constable




          The o f f i c e r d e a l i n g with t h i s co rr espondence i s C /I n s p . Bennett     Ext: 3438
          All communications should be addressed to "The C hie f C onstable
    . i '

•      •




            The Chief Executive                                                                Your R e f :
            PO Box 71
            Copley House                                                                       Our Ref:         MS/JDB/JW
            Waterdale
            DONCASTER                                                                          Date:            3 December 1987




            Dear Sir

            RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
            IN RESPECT OF BELLE VIEW FOOTBALL GOUND

            1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
            police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
            issued in respect of Belle View Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
            Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
            implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
            Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

            The terms of this condition, in its reference to the number of police
            officers required to attend at football matches being agreed, are
            incompatible with the provisions of the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
            2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
            officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
            become void.

            I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
            of amendment under Section 4 of the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
            changes. •

            I await hearing from you.

            Yours faithfully




            Chief Constable




            The o f f i c e r d e a l i n g w i t h t h i s c o r r e s p o n d e n c e i s C / I n s p . B e n n e t t   E x t : 3438
            A l l c o m m u n ic a tio n s , s h o u l d be a d d r e s s e d t o "The C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ”
                                  ROTHERHAM METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL

                                  Neil H. Morton, F I.E.H., M.R.S.H., M.lnst. S.W., M .R.I.P.H.H., M.lnst. S.H.S,
X                       WfijA     Director of Environmental Health


                                  Thorn Bank, 38 Moorgate Road,
                                  Rotherham, S60 2BU.

    M y re fe r e n c e :         Y o u r r e fe r e n c e :                     T e le p h o n e :      E x te n s io n :      P le a s e c o n t a c t :
                                                                                 R o th e r h a m
    DMD/JG/                 MS/JDB/JW                                            373731/9                   <43                 Mr.
                                                                                                        3 m
                                                                                                                                       5th January 1988.
    Chief Constable,
    Police Headquarters,
    Snig Hill,
    Sheffield S3 8LY.


    Dear Sir,

    Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sport Act 1987

    Referring to your letter dated 3rd December 1987, a report on the
    amendments arising from the above Act, including the reference in the
    existing Safety Certificate to the determination of police officer
    strength, will be submitted to the next meeting of the Environmental Health
    Committee on 7th January 1988.

    I will contact you again with regard to this matter, after that date.

    Yours faithfully,

                                                                                                                         r




                                                                                                                                       SSOTff' YORKS.-'P^Uo I               eI


    Assistant Director of Environmental Health
    Pollution Control                                                                                                                             --y JA N 1988a


                                                                                                                                                             ;/;.¥U,Qt5lN
                                                                                                                                                                                 'i




                            P le a s e a d d r e s s le t t e r s im p e r s o n a lly t o t h e D ir e c t o r o f E n v ir o n m e n t a l H e a lt h
                                                                                                           1




• •   BARNSLEY
      METROPOLITAN             BOROUGH   COUNCIL




                                                                    DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION
      D.P. CLEPHAN, LL.M.,                                         TOWN HALL,
      DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION                                   BARNSLEY, S70 2TA.
      AND SOLICITOR TO THE COUNCIL                                 Tel:      BARNSLEY (0226) 733232
                                                                    Fax No.:          (0226) 733711




      M YREF            GPK/PM                     ENQUIRIES TO                               Ext.2340


      YOUR REF          MS/JDB/JW                  ADDRESS ALL REPLIES TO THE DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION



           23rd December, 1987.
                                                   SC •                       POLICE I
           The Chief Constable,
           The South Yorkshire Police,
                                                                      ’aL
                                                                            EES
           Police Headquarters,
           Snig Hill,
           Sheffield,                                             9 DEC 1987
           S3 8LY.

                                                                  I ROOM
           Dear Sir,

           Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 -
           Safety Certificate in respect of Oakwell Football Ground

           I refer to your letter of the 3rd December, 1987, which has been
           designated for my attention. I accept what you say in that the
           implementation of the new Act renders clause 7 of the General
           Safety Certificate void, in so far as the Council are no longer
           entitled to have any input into a decision upon the number of p olice
           officers required at each specified activity.

           I would suggest that a new clause 7 should be incorporated to
           read as follows

               "The holder shall at his own expense arrange for the
                attendance at every specified activity of an adequate number4
                of police officers to secure the orderly and lawful
                behaviour of the spectators and the number of police officers
                required at each specified activity is reserved for the
                determination of the Chief Officer of Police at least 21
                days before a specified activity takes place."

           I would suggest that all that is necessary by way of formally
           amending the certificate is to attach this letter thereto and, if
           you are agreeable, I shall also arrange for copies of this letter
           to be circulated to the other statutory bodies holding copies of ,
           the certificate for them to do likewise.
                                                      nj©uTii
           Yours faithfully.
                                                              29DEC1987


               r tr o r tn .
          City of Sheffield              M e tro p o lita n District

          Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor                                                           Administration and Legal Department
          Head of Departm ent
                                                                                                          Tow n Hall
                                                                                                          Sheffield S1 2HH

                               GP/262/DMB                                                                 Telephone            0742-26444
          Our reference
                                                                                                          Facsimile            0742-735003
                                                                                                          Telecom Gold         7 6 :L M X 0 8 6
          Your reference       MS/JDB/JW
                                                          I                                               Telex                54243 SHFLIB G
                                                                                                                     or         265871 MONREF G (quote ref L M X 086)
          Date
                               16th December, 1987


          The Chief Constable,
          South Yorkshire Police,
          Police Headquarters,
          Snig Hill,
          SHEFFIELD.
          S1 80Y
                                                                                                 r*r'“ '
                                                                                         £   A      '                             ■2 D t c I f g y

          Dear Sir,

          Fire Safety and Safety of Place"T5r~Sport Act 1987
          Safety Certification

          I refer to your letter of 3rd December, and feel that I ought to confirm
          that only one Safety Certificate is currently in force in Sheffield, namely
          that relating to Hillsborough.

          As far as I can see the existing Hillsborough Certificate does not contradict
          the amended Section 2 of the Safety of Spor^-StS®ua4s Act 1975. As you are
          aware, the draft revised Certificate coodi^fea^Xllhieh^were circulated to you
          and upon which you commented some tira^ago) take full*ace<s>ant^of that
          amendment of the 1975 Act.                                 •>
          Wi                                                                 b.                                            W
           Yours faithfully,
                                                                                  *&■-




          Head of Department




          JJJ                                                                                      734690 - Mr. Bownes
R7503/1                           For telephone enquiries on this m atter please rin g ................................................... (STD Code 0742)
The Chief Executive                                                                Your Ref
Rotherham Civic Building
Walker Place                                                                       Our Ref: MS/JDB/JW
ROTHERHAM
                                                                                   Date             3 December 1987




Dear Sir

RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
IN RESPECT OF MILMOOR FOOTBALL GOUND

1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
issued in respect of Milmoor Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

The terms of this condition, in its reference to the number of police
officers required to attend at football matches being agreed, are
incompatible with the provisions of the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
become void.

I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
of amendment under Section 4 of the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
changes.

I await hearing from you.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable




The o f f i c e r d e a l i n g w i t h t h i s c o r r e s p o n d e n c e i s C / I n s p . B e n n e t t   E x t : 3438
A l l c o m m u n i c a t io n s s h o u l d be a d d r e s s e d t o "The C h i e f C o n s t a b l e "
The Chief Executive                              Your Ref
Barnsley Town Hall
BARNSLEY                                         Our Ref:   MS/JDB/JW

                                                 Date       3 December 1987




Dear Sir

RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
IN RESPECT OF OAKWELL FOOTBALL GOUND

1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
issued in respect of Oakwell Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

The terms of this condition, in its reference to the number of police
officers required to attend at football matches being agreed, are
incompatible with the provisions of the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
become void.

I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
of amendment under Section 4 of the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
changes

I await hearing from you

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable




The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Insp. Bennett   Ext: 3438
All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable"
**K



••

      The Legal and Admin Department                                                     Your R e f :
      Sheffield Town Hall
      SHEFFIELD                                                                           Our Ref:        MS/JDB/JW
      SI 2HH
                                                                                         Date:             3 December 1987




      Dear Sir

      RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATES
      IN RESPECT OF BRAMALL LANE AND HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUNDS

      Having in mind the implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety
      of Places of Sport Act 1987 on 1 January 1988, I shall be obliged for your
      confirmation that the condition relative to the attendance of police officers
      at football matches in the Safety Certificates issued in respect of Bramall
      Lane and Hillsborough has been amended to comply with the new Sub Section
      (2A) added to Section 2 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

      Yours faithfully .




      Chief Constable




      The o f f i c e r d e a l i n g w i t h t h i s c o r r e s p o n d e n c e i s C / I n s p . B e n n e t t   E x t : 3438
      A l l c o m m u n i c a t i o n s s h o u l d be a d d r e s s e d t o "The C h i e f C o n s t a b l e "
The Chief Executive                                                                 Your Ref
PO Box 71
Copley House                                                                        Our Ref: MS/JDB/JW
Waterdale
DONCASTER                                                                           Date:           3 December 1987




Dear Sir

RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
IN RESPECT OF BELLE VIEW FOOTBALL GOURD

1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
issued in respect of Belle View Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

The terms of this condition, in its reference to the number of police
officers required to attend at football matches being agreed, are
incompatible with the provisions of the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
become void.

I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
of amendment under Section 4 of the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
changes. ■

I await hearing from you.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable




The o f f i c e r d e a l i n g w i t h t h i s c o r r e s p o n d e n c e i s C / I n s p . B e n n e t t   E x t : 3438
A l l c o m m u n i c a t io n s s h o u l d be a d d r e s s e d t o "The C h i e f C o n s t a b l e "
      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



          F IL E REFERENCE                    MINUTE SHEET NO


          SUBJECT




\   c\Su^      £ \r )




                                  £




                                              \


                                              P tiU -




    G E N /I
 \ C***J *€C.                                                                                             IA
                     S T A T U T O R Y              I N S T R U M E N T S


                                                                                          POLICY FILE
                                     1988 No. 485 (C.15)                             RtTuRN**TfO ADMIN D£PT-mQ
         SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

     The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
             (Commencement No. 2) Order 1988

                         Made                                     11th March 1988


In exercise of the powers conferred on me by section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), I hereby make the following Order:

   1. This Order may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
 (Commencement No. 2) Order 1988.

   2. The provisions of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified
 in the Schedule to this Order shall come into force on 1st June 1988.


 Home Office                                                                    Douglas Hurd
 11th March 1988                            One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                            SCHEDULE                                          Article 2

PROVISIONS O F T H E FIR E SAFETY A ND SAFETY O F PLACES O F SPORT
        A C T 1987 COM ING IN TO FO R C E ON 1ST JU N E 1988


Provisions o f the Act                    Subject matter of provisions

Section 42                                Licensing of indoor sports premises in London
Section 43                                Licensing of indoor sports premises outside London (in
                                          England and Wales)
Section 45                                Entertainment licences: removal of exemption
Section 49, to the extent necessary to    Repeals and transitional and saving provisions
     give effect to such of the repeals
     in Schedule 4 and provisions of
     Schedule 5 as are specified in
     this Schedule and the Appendix
     to this Schedule
Schedule 3                                Indoor sports licences: consequential amendments
In Schedule 4, the entry specified in     Repeals
the Appendix to this Schedule
In Schedule 5, paragraphs 8 and 10        Transitional and saving provisions


(a) 1987 c.27.
                                 A PPEN D IX TO T H E SCH ED U LE

                                 REPEA LS TAKING EFFECT ON 1ST JU N E 1 988



Chapter            Short title                                                    Extent o f repeal

1963 c.33          London Government Act 1963                                     In Schedule 12, in paragraph 1(6),
                                                                                       the words “or the Royal
                                                                                       Albert Hall” , paragraph
                                                                                       4(l)(b) and paragraph 20.




                                         EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                  (This note is not part o f the Order)

  This Order brings into force on 1st June 1988 the provisions of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified in the Schedule to the Order.




                  NOTE AS TO EARLIER COMMENCEMENT ORDER
                                  (This note is not part o f the Order)

  The following provisions of the Act have been brought into force by commencement
order made before the date of this O rder-


Provision                                                           Date of Commencement              S. I. No.

Sections 3, 4, 8, 9,11 to 14,16 (partially), 17,18           1.1.1988                                 1987/1762
(partially), 19 to 25,46,49 (partially), 50 (partially), and
Schedule 1 (partially), Schedule 2, Schedule 4
(partially), Schedule 5 (partially).




                                                      45p n e t
                                              ISBN 0 11 086485 9

                           Printed in the U nited Kingdom for H er M ajesty’s Stationery Office


                            79G/WO 0476     C26   3/88   452/1   9385/1492/3190   PS 7944003
         Chief Executives - District Councils in England and Wales
                              Council of the Isles of Scilly

                                 Metropolitan District Councils

                                 London Boroughs
                t
                                 Common Council of the City of London

         Clerks, Fire and Civil Defence Authorities

         Chief Officers of Police



         CORRECTION TO ANNEX TO HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 19/1988
         (FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT: IMPLEMENTATION
         OF PART IV: INDOOR SPORTS LICENCES)


         In line 5 of the first paragraph of the Annex to Home Office
         Circular 19/1988, please change '1 April 1988' to '1 June 1988'.




                                                        C P STEVENS
                                                        15 April 1988




         Copies for information to:

         Chief Fire Officers
         ACC
         AMA
         LBA
         ADC
         ACPO
         Clerks to Police Authorities


                                                                Di5>V*nt> oVed cus

                                                                  r
                                                               SOUfH YORKS, POLICE
                                                                                           m -4 -8 8 .



fcetfe                 CrteyAa         Uao                            I 8 APR 1988
6^- 'i l     HcvC&fl
                                                                           r ’ •   *   '

                    XT            «    4     U Ills-#
#                                                                                                  *

          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



            F IL E   REFERENCE      M6c/       &(<$>         M IN U T E S H E E T NO      2
                                                                                          -



            S U B JE C T         - n u
                                                             ^     4

                                                  cm
    *
                                                       J L

                                                                                   h
                                                       Qa


    3
                                                            - 1?




                                                                           $ jzjJ s 3 1

                C m * ,    ft—    * A      &
                                                                                              is
                     I                   g ) ^7'^                      i




        GEN/I
                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLIC E - MINUTE SHEET



                   F I L E REFERENCE                                                   MINUTE SHEET NO


                   SUBJECT     HOC, IQ |gg-                               *•                  ^
                                                                      \




\h -                           F«*.                               qnnA             O c>«x u   ^du. cmwda*          ruuduAoo^

            9     W        fc*o&r4*A.                             CW V         CcMi^JtoW 4. ©      H o ttw ^ 'S )AflWr-



                             Jr-fr©




                                                                               f



                                                         3-


                                                                      s>C~            /fll.   /d-e^
       / ~7% J     /-//°      Gus&j

                            ^v-
                             ry         — v- bC t^v.
                                                « r v w .C    -*2£.
                       /o ^ /✓ ^        ^             x ^              '*«• ^ c-
                                         ^          ^ •.              - __ ^ y            -sri* C .. A




                           f a t. s )    £^S


            V'-                                                                2 9 MAR 1988              30MARIV88
             GEN / I
                                                                                                  CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT
                                                                                                  n p p n a i l ' ' S ' Tf t AFr i C
Chief Executives - District Councils in England and Wales           \k -
                     Council of the Isles of Scilly
                   Metropolitan District^Cftuncils
                   London Boroughs
                   Common Council of tiyl

Clerks, Fire and Civil Defence Authori

Chief Officers of Police


HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO             19 /19l

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987“

IMPLEMENTATION OF PART IV:    INDOOR SPORTS LICENCES


The Secretary of State has now made a commencement order under
section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act ('the 1987 Act1) bringing into force Part IV and such parts
of Part V and the Schedules to the Act as depend on Part IV, with
effect from 1 June 1988.     This is in accordance with the
provisional timetable for implementation of the Act outlined in
HOC/42/1987.     The Order is the Fire Safety and Safety of Places
of Sport Act 1987 (Commencement No. 2) Order 1988.


2   This circular introduces the provisions of Part IV.       The
Annex puts these changes into context and gives advice on their
operation and intended effects.     Fire Precautions Act 1971
Circular No. 14 and Home Office Circular No 71/1987 give guidance
on the provisions of Parts I and II of the 1987 Act which were
given effect by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 (Commencement No.l) Order 1987 (SI 1987 No 1762).


Implementation


3   Sections 42 and 43 of Part IV of the Act amend Schedule 12 to
the London Government Act 1963 (fthe 1963 Act1) and Schedule 1 to
the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 ('the
1982 Act') respectively.     (Sections 44, also in Part IV, amends
parallel legislation in Scotland but will be the subject of a
separate order, introduced by the Secretary of State for
Scotland, also with the commencement date of 1 June 1988.)
                                                                   <


4   Section 42 inserts three new paragraphs in Schedule 12 to
1963 Act, and section 43 substitutes a new paragraph for
paragraph 2 in Schedule 1 to the 1982 Act, to require the
licensing of premises in which certain indoor sports events are
held.   Hitherto, the only sports subject to licensing under the
1963 and 1982 Acts have been public boxing and wrestling
entertainments in London, and entertainments consisting of or
including indoor boxing, wrestling, judo, karate or any similar
sport in areas of England and Wales outside London.


5   The licensing requirement is, however, limited to indoor
sports entertainments to which the public are invited as
spectators, where, with one exception, the entertainment is the
principal purpose for which the premises are being used at the
time.   The exception is for a sports complex: any such sports
entertainment, even if it is not the principal purpose for which
the complex is being used on that occasion, will require the
premises to be licensed.


6   The provisions in the existing licensing regime, contained in
the 1963 and the 1982 Acts as amended, are broadly preserved by
the 1987 Act.   These provisions include powers for the grant,
renewal, transfer, transmission, variation and cancellation of
licences and for the prescription and enforcement of terms,
conditions and restrictions, subject to which a licence is
issued, and provision for rights of appeal against decisions of
the licensing authority.   It is thought, therefore, that the
coming into force of the 1987 Act will not require a significant
change in the way in which local authorities administer the
licensing regime, though it will undoubtedly increase the volume
of work to be done.


Supplementary


7   The information and advice in this circular and its Annex
explain the effect of the new legislation, but it should be added
that the Secretary of State has no power to determine a question
of law which ultimately is a matter for the courts.




                               -   2 -
8     Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to Philip Stevens on 01-273-3658.


                                                  Yours faithfully



                                                  S S Bampton
                                                  22 March 1988
Copies for information to:

Chief Fire Officers

Sports Council

ACC

AMA

LBA

ADC

CACFOA

ACPO

Clerks to Police Authorities.

St John Ambulance
ANNEX TO HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR            19 /1988

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

Advice note by the Home Office on Part IV of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 ('the 1987 Act').


Introduction


The Popplewell Inquiry set up after the fire tragedy at Valley
Parade, Bradford, recommended that indoor sporting events should
be subject to licensing.   The Government's response was contained
in a consultative document published in June 1986.   Part IV of
the 1987 Act, which comes into force on 1 April 1988, implements
these proposals.


2   Local authorities in England and Wales are already the
licensing authority for public entertainments (including public
dancing or music or public contests or displays of boxing and
wrestling) under powers conferred by the London Government Act
1963 ('the 1963 Act') and the Local Government (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1982 ('the 1982 Act').   The 1987 Act, by amending
Schedule 12 to the 1963 Act and Schedule 1 to the 1982 Act,
requires that premises are not used for sports entertainments
except under and in accordance with the terms of a licence
granted by the Council of a London Borough, the Common Council of
the City of London, the Council of a district outside London or
the Council of the Isles of Scilly ('the authority').


3   Schedule 3 to the 1987 Act amends Section 12 to the 1963 Act
in order to accommodate the new licensing provisions and to limit
the scope of the existing provisions relating to boxing and
wrestling licences.


Substance of the new regime for licensing indoor sports
entertainments


4   With one qualification, the amendments to the 1963 and the
1982 Acts introduced by the 1987 Act require the licensing of
premises for any entertainment which consists of any indoor
sporting event to which the public are invited as spectators.
'Invite* has its ordinary everyday meaning: it implies that the
public are informed (perhaps by word of mouth, through the media
or by a notice at the door) that a sports entertainment will take
place at a particular time.     The provision of a spectator area
for the public does not in itself constitute an invitation.        A
'sporting event* is defined in the 1987 Act as any contest,
exhibition or display of any sport, and 'sport', in its turn, is
defined as including any game in which physical skill is the
predominant factor and any form of physical recreation which is
also engaged in for purposes of competition or display, except
dancing in any form.     'Premises' are defined as any building and
any tent or inflatable structure and part of a sports complex
(see paragraph 7 below).     There is no lower limit to spectator
numbers below which the premises do not require to be licensed.
The licensing requirement applies equally to council-owned as to
any other premises.


Principal purpose rule


5   The qualification is that a licence is only required for an
occasion where the sports entertainment is the principal purpose
for which the premises are being used on that occasion, though
this does not apply to a sports complex (see paragraph 7 below).
The intention is, for example, that a darts competition in a
public house should not require to be licensed but premises hired
for the specific purpose of, say holding a darts competition
would require to be licensed.        The introduction of the 'principal
purpose rule' may result in some deregulation of indoor boxing,
wrestling, judo, karate etc. entertainments.


Sports complexes


6   If any part of a sports complex is being used for a sports
entertainment, that entertainment must be licensed even if it is
not the principal purpose for which the complex is being used on
that occasion.     A sports complex is defined as a building which
provides accommodation and facilities for both those engaging in
sport and spectators, and the parts of which are so arranged that


                                 -    2 -
one or more sports can be engaged in simultaneously in different
parts of the building.       The intention here is to overcome the
problem of deciding whether, in a building in which several
sporting events may be proceeding simultaneously, any one i.s the
principal purpose for which the premises are being used.


The powers of the licensing authority


7    The new powers of the licensing authority and duties and
rights of (prospective) applicants in respect of licences for
indoor sports are exactly as they were for public boxing and
wrestling entertainments in London and entertainments consisting
of, or including indoor boxing, wrestling, judo, karate or any
similar sport in areas of England and Wales outside London.


8     The powers of the authority may be described briefly as the
power to impose general terms, conditions and restrictions when
granting, renewing or transferring licences; to vary those terms
conditions and restrictions; to cancel a licence on request from
the licence-holder; to revoke a licence when the licence-holder
is convicted of an offence under the relevant licensing
provisions; to grant licences provisionally; and to charge a
reasonable fee for the grant, renewal, transfer or variation of
licence.    The 1987   Act    now provides for the payment   of a
reasonable fee for     the    variation of a licence in Englandand
Wales, thus bringing it in line with the position in London.
This does not apply to an application made before 1 January 1988
when Section 46 of     the    1987 Act came into force.


Period of validity of licences


9     The authority may issue a licence either for a set period of
not more than a year - and it will remain in force for that
period unless it is cancelled or revoked - o£ for one or more
occasions specified in the licence.


Giving of notice


10     In London, the applicant for the grant, renewal or transfer
of a licence for a set period must give the licensing authority
                                   - 3 -
                                                                    t


(the Council), the Commissioner of Police for the area in whicl^^
the relevant premises are situated, and the fire authority at
least 21 days* notice of his intention to make an application; if
he is applying for an occasional sports licence (ie for one or
more specified occasions) he must give the Council and the fire
authority (but not the commissioner of police) 14 days1 notice.


11   In England and Wales outside London, the applicant for the
grant, renewal or transfer of an entertainments licence, whether
it is for a set period or for particular occasions, must give the
district council or the council of the Isles of Scilly, the chief
officer of police for the area in which the relevant premises are
situated, and the fire authority at least 28 days1 notice of his
intention to make an application.


Loss of exemptions for indoor boxing and wrestling entertainments
in London


12   Hitherto, boxing and wrestling entertainments provided by
travelling showmen at a pleasure fair, by members of the Boy
Scouts' Association or any organisation consituted by the Boy
Scouts' Association in pursuance of their charter, by any school
or by a bona fide association, club, hospital or society have not
been subject to licensing under the 1963 Act as amended, but
these exemptions are removed by the 1963 Act as amended by the
1987 Act if the   events take place indoors:   (Entertainments by
travelling showmen continue   to    besubject to licensing under the
Public Health Act 1961).


Outdoor boxing and wrestling entertainments


13   In London, boxing and wrestling entertainments which are
held wholly or mainly in the open air will continue to be subject
to licensing under the 1963 Act as amended unless they are
provided by a travelling showman at a pleasue fair, by members of
the Boy Scouts'   Association or    ofany organisation constituted by
the Boy Scouts'   Association in    pursuance of their charter, by any
school or by a bona fide association, club, hospital or society
not carried on for profit.    In England and Wales outside London
outdoor boxing and wrestling entertainments will, as before, not
require to be licensed under the 1982 Act.
                               - 4 -
First Aid


14   Concern was expressed in Parliament during and after the
passage of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
about the provision of first aid at indoor sports
entertainments.   It is, of course, for the licensing authority to
set the terms, conditions and restrictions under which a licence
is issued for indoor sports entertainments, but they will no
doubt remember that they have the power to require the provision
of first aid staff and facilities and in appropriate cases make
that provision a condition under which a licence is issued.


Transitional provisions


15   Boxing and wrestling licences,    granted before 1 June 1988
for indoor premises in London under paragraph 4 of Schedule 12 to
the 1963 Act, will be treated as though they had been granted
under the new paragraph 3A Schedule 12 of the 1963 Act inserted
by the 1987 Act (see paragraph 10 of Schedule 5 to the 1987 Act).


16   Where an application has been made before 1 June 1988 and
not withdrawn, for the use of premises for an indoor sports
entertainment which will be licensable under the 1963 Act or the
1982 Act by virtue of Section 42   or Section 43 of the 1987 Act,
the use of the premises for that   purpose will continue to be
lawful until the disposal of the   application.   (See paragraph 8
of Schedule 5 to the 1987 Act.)


17   Where premises are already licensed for public
entertainments under existing legislation and the Council decide
to grant a licence for indoor sports entertainments as defined in
the 1987 Act, it will be for the Council to decide whether to
endorse the existing licence, or to vary its terms, conditions or
restrictions or to issue a licence with new terms, conditions or
restrictions.




                               - 5 -
1          THE SPORTING EVENTS   (CONTROL O F ALCOHOL ETC) ACT 1985     (P.22/02/12)

1*1      A number of prosecution files submitted for offences committed under the above Act are
being endorsed to the effect that the Court should be invited to make a forfeiture or destruction
order   in respect of any alcohol   etc,   seized from the defendant.


1-2       All   officers should note that NO SUCH POWER is given to the Magistrates by this
legislation.    Ordinarily, therefore, the simplest method of dealing with such seized property is
to invite the defendant to sign a disclaimer (at the time of arrest/report) in order that   it can
be disposed of at the conclusion of the hearing.                    ._ _____ _______            __
-------------
                                                                                                            'PoaUa ha
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                      ftoV X       wisS
                                                                                  REF:
           FROM:   Chief Inspector Ter,non - Legal Services
                                                                                  STATION/DEPT:            Castle Green
           TO:     AGO(MS) Mr T Watson BA
                                                                                  DATE:            "       11 March 1988

                     SUBJECT:      M E SPORTING EMETS (CONTROL OP ALCOHOL ETC,) ACT 1985


                     I refer to the attached self-explanatory CPS memo, and ask that the
                     following item be placed in Part I .Force General Orders to cover the
                     point in issue, please*



                     1.


                     1.1         ■A number of prosecution files submitted for offences committed

                     ■under the above&ct are being endorsed to the effect that the court

  (^s)'              should be invited to make a forfeiture or destruction order in respect

                     of any alcohol (etc.) seized from the defendant.
      %>=!>
                     1.2        ; All officers should note that HO SUCH POWER, is given to the

    x~~i. K j *
              *      ||gistrates by this legislation*                  Ordinarily, therefore, the simplest

                           ef dealing with such seised property is to invite the defendan t to
                                           ,

                     sign a disclaimer (at the time of arrest/report) a# that it can he

                     disposed of at the conclusion of the hearing.




                     Chief Inspeofor



                            A'
                                                                                           w-i_        W w » -




                                                                                                                  I a.     ,


                                       (       ^   \   -   V   ~   ’
  6EN /2

                                      tAi JLX
                       X
                                                                                         I l f ^       6
   CROWN PROSECUTION                                                                     KS POLICE

   MEMORANDUM
                                                                               n 1 MAR 1988               to u r   p    —       [)Z LP C<3S •
        To
                    l^sp -                                                                               J? ef.    PCSOCX          H«^s           pc   2 S S e lli'S
                                                                    ---------M P A P O l I1WIErig— ~l
                                                                                                           bur
      From                                                                   P R O S E C U T IO N S
                                                                                                         ,~pef-


    Subject                                                                                               Date
                 P ro ^ c u ^ tu ^             U A c k /-                    , G v iis                                         |||5 (   s   ? .
                                                                1        o

                     (CcY'ir/'v.J o f-         /ilcc-kj                        1^3
                         Uov/'/oL/C            cfcAwrl.ctv't;


                                                                        ' ^ awt<A4                    P ^ csa4 ^            U A a L r J t^                ^4* ic

                            IA o iv p o si                  <zckttJL    CPS <**£.                             bo q p p ^                    fc^fiuXtA^t            or

                 chArnkjJj^ <J~                                 Jnfci* icxvofe        rw ^ x t,

                  ) C_CVw\        /"&U_ J\Q          rkAss-OS^ f~Or- fcW .          Cow ^        ^joi' Cs/rJ&f~        "\AjO                      I <S O r j ^ t    t ) lc jjt




Printed in the UK for HMSO Dd 8984183 10M 10/87 TP
*
                          S T A T U T O R Y                  I N S T R U M E N T S




                                                1987 No. 1689

          SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

                  The Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation)
                                  Order 1987

                           Made       -                                24th September 1987
                           Laid before Parliament                           1st October 1987
                           Coming into force                               31st October 1987


    In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 1(1) of the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act 1975(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in section 18(4) of
    that Act, I hereby make the following Order:

      1. This Order may be cited as the Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Order
    1987 and shall come into force on 31st October 1987.

      2. The sports stadium at The Athletic Ground, Seamer Road, Scarborough, North
    Yorkshire (being a stadium which in the opinion of the Secretary of State has
    accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators) is hereby designated as a stadium
    requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.



                                                                                         Douglas Hurd
    Home Office                                       One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State
    24th September 1987




    CW.
    Ho
    *5*.   g £-




    (a) 1975 c.52; section 1(1) was amended by Schedule 2 to the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (c.27) but the amendments are not yet in force.
                                  EXPLANATORY NOTE
                             (This note is not part o f the Order)

   By this Order the Secretary of State designates the sports stadium referred to in
article 2 of it as a stadium requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975.




                                               45p n et
                                     ISBN 0 11 077689 5

                     Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                    790    W01497       C ll     10/87    452     7102      PS 7944001
P G Thompson Esq HA (Oxon) C Eng             ACC(OPS)/HMW
Chief Executive Officer                      20 January 1988
Barnsley Metropolitan Borough
Council
Town Hall
Barnsley
S70 2TA



Dear Mr Thompson

Barnsley Football Ground - Safety

I refer to your letter dated 18 January 1988 to which I am
replying on behalf of the Chief Constable.

Mr      fs letter was replied to by the Acting Chief
Superintendent at Barnsley and I enclose a copy of his
reply.

If I can be of any further assistance, please let me know.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable
Operations
                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                         r\J
BARNSLEY
METROPOLITAN   BOROUGH    COUNCIL
                                                       MW

                                                       TOWN HALL
                                                                                       (V            /
Chief Executive Officer                                BARNSLEY
P.G. THOMPSON, M.A.(Oxon.), C.Eng.,                    S70 2TA
                                                       Tel. (0226) 203232
                                                       Fax No. (0226) 248711


MY REF     CEO/DT/Plng.                 ENQUIRIES TO   M r.   Thom pso n                       Ext. 2100

YOUR REF
                                                                South Yorkihira Police
                                                                              //3
                                                                   .§ 9 JAN 1888
 18th January, 1988.
                                                                   /"'V .lr'J' P r .   H l/a     1
 Chief Constable Peter Wright,
 South Yorkshire Police Headquarters,
 Snig Hill,
 Sheffield,
 South Yorkshire.




 Barnsley Football Ground - Safety

 You will have received a copy of a letter from a Mr.             of Bolton,
 addressed to me and dated the 13th January, 1988, concerning the safety of
 Barnsley Football Ground.

 If you would be kind enough to let me have your comments I will include
 them in my reply to Mr           Alternatively if you have already written
 to Mr. Acton I wonder it you iJrould let me have a copy




         OM aA)
                                                                                     •   C . O




                                                            B/mi/irrs/FM
                                                             18 January 1988




Dear S ir

I r e f e r to your lo t tor of the 13 January 1988, regarding g a fc ty conditions at
Barnsley Fo,>tuail Club.

I have forwarded a copy of your l e t t e r to Mr M Spinks, Secretary of Barnsley
f o o tb a ll Cluu, \;;io may woll correspond with you d ir e c t on the m atters ra is e d .

I note that you nave copied your l e t t e r to the Chief F iro O ffice r for Barnsley,
who w ill no Ji'ubt in due course be corresponding wi th you.

As the natt.jrt raised are of d ir e c t relevance to the F ire Service r a t h e r than
to the Pol i.     v 1 U G , I do not intend to take any fu rth e r a ctio n .
                 --j




Yours f a i t h f u l l y




A/Chief Superintendent
                                                                          ^   •1 ^
                                                          13th January 19BB.

Chief Superintendent,
Barnsley Division,
South Yorkshire Police.


Dear Sir,

I enclose herewith a copy of a letter I have today forwarded to the
Chief Executive, Barnsley M.B.C. and I look forward to any comments
you may like to make.

Yours faithfully,
                                                                   13th January 19BB.


Chief Executive,
Barnsley M.B.C.,
Town Hall,
Barnsley,
S70.2TA.

Dear Sir,

Whilst attending the 3rd round F.A. Cup tie between Barnsley and Bolton
Wanderers on Saturday the 9th January 19BB with my wife and two children
I was appalled at the complete disregard of the ground safety recommendations
made after the Bradford City Fire.

I was sat with my family on the front row of the main stand when my 12 year
old son made a comment that if there was a fire he would not like to jump
down to the standing area in front, a drop of over 6 feet. Following his
comments I looked for exits to the front - there were none - I noted the
exists to the rear stand were much narrower than now recommended and I
also noticed two men sat behind us smoking in a stand with wooden roof
and flooring and wooden seats.

How is it that a second division club like Barnsley have bsen able to
ignore present day Ground Safety recommendations whenBoltonWanderers
had to spend approximately £200,000 on complying with these recommendations
to enable them to keep their ground open.

I look forward to your comments.

Yours faithfully,




Copies to the Member of Parliment for Barnsley
   ”   "   ” Chief Superintendent, Barnsley Division, South Yorkshire Police
   ”   M   ” Chief Fire Office, Barnsley.
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE -                        M IN U T E       SHEET



                               F I L E - REFERENCE                                                    MINUTE.SllEf^'SO.


                               SUBJECT                                 'Crfct/vUf                              ^
                                                   Jh 1                                   1^2- ^         1941


\(X>             ■   C2—   •




£r            u g a        /




  WL k m
                                                                                                             /*,   -3      r7» 4 - C
                                                                                                                        /* .           .


  ,   IA             1 -s O b M ’                   ^           /> -d\                            ^



                                                                              3-
           f*iccl©?s

                                       So, ’
                                                                  Ql                            €£.          q A o ^i          -X5» -"®e* ¥«iko*A.

       $        $«*«.           C A X ttM ^€tik.         C «^    «%£- €e»A— cteiww**#'                Vle^                                 .




                                                                       3

                                                                       ii    7

                                                           iOLm)                        U J ^     *                        7 - u - ^
           SOUTH YORKS. POLICE
                                                        - U ~            .          -




                     1fTP !987:

      .C ’■ ) I E F S U P E R I N T E N D E N T
       0 PE RA I ^ W s / T T RAFF I C
                                                                   s         / / f<_
           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



               F IL E    REFERENCE                                                           M IN U T E S H E E T       NO X


              SU B JEC T       / / • O . e ,* e ~ P     ~7f * - 7 1 - / 6 7 .      J r itr tr r o A Y     A i JT".   / ? < z . -« ^ v - A

                                                        -r-
               <Z>^e. 7~/

                                                                        ^       « » .•<                        ^

              C>&C*€        a<u^
                               ^      A                         <Wf




             - £-

              / ? c. c      (/p > 7           '?/l<~r       J


             /L                f,                       —        ’


             /^               / / £ _                                   JA




                    K >
          <^TK                                                                                           \o ~ eAuCu_^




                                                                                                 ^       *i 7 - n




<$*** £ < * W ^ <           « U *         M                                                          ^      <W~£~*e.               ( J .t - < *"*»>

&»   £+*~ 4l4 & £ •+ ■$ *&                                       "^ f                1^1    <"
                                                    *                                                            Q J ^ h e^ X ^ K
  SO U T H Y O R K S H IR E   P O L IC E   -   M IN U T E S H E E T           -



     F IL E   REFERENCE                                                     M IN U T E S H E E T NO >


     SU B JE C T




                                                                                      i >~vCi
                      H o                                   fl




        r>
                                                                                                          :©—
                                                                      I’m         ^
              Mso.
                                                                              |Hut       o -tU ^ ry J >




                                                                                              /U t        Co ^ ulA   <X&d\

                                                                                      C ^ j <^/C(Xe«C       G_-S


                                                                                                ^V7[T7T
                                                                                                       7~




GEN/I
                                                   OPS TWS/SM
SUPT STUART   OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                                              OPERATIONS
CH SUPT HEROLD   OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION                       2 Decenfoer 1987

          HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987 AND 72/1987
          AND STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS 1987 NO 1762 (C.54)
          AND 1987 NO 1941




The above mentioned circulars which cone into effect from 1 January 1988
amend parts of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 in line with the
Government's proposals contained in the consultative document published
in June 1986 in response to the safety recommendationsof the Popplewell
Inquiry set up'following the fire tragedy atValley Parade on 11 May 1985.

The main changes effected by Part II are as outlined below.
I suggest that copies of the Home Office circulars and statutory instruments
be forwarded for the information of divisional commanders and Chief
Superintendent, Operations and Traffic, and that the following item be published
on Part 1 of Force General Orders.

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 -
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)
(HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987)
    Part II of the 1987 Act, effective from 1 January 1988, consisting
    of Sections 19 - 25, amends the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
    (the 1975 Act) in line with the Government's proposals contained
    in the consultative document published in June 1986 in response
    to the safety recommendations of the Popplewell Inquiry set up
    following the fire tragedy at Valley Parade on 11 May 1985. The
    main changes effected by Part II are as follows
    Section 19 - Removes the distinction between sports 'ground*
    and sports 'stadium' with consequential modifications to Section
    1 (2) of the 1975 Act dealing with the contents of safety
    certificates.
    Section 20 - Ehpowers the Secretary of State to vary the
    designation threshold of 10,000 under Section 1 of the 1975
    Act.
    Section 21 - Precludes conditions in safety certificates relating
    to police presence unless the extent of the presence is                  v
    reserved for the Chief Officer of Police.
    Section 22 - Directs appeals under Section 5 of the 1975 Act to
    the courts.
    Sections 23 and 24 - Replaces the existing emergency procedure
    under Section 10 by introducing prohibition notices in the case
    of serious risks to spectators, and provision to appeal against them.
     Section 25 - Places a duty on local authorities to enforce the
     1975 Act and to arrange for annual inspections of designated
     sports grounds in accordance with guidance from the Secretary
     of State.

FIRE SAFEST? AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 -
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)
SECTION 25

INSPECTIONS UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
ACT 1975

HGME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 72/1987

     Further to HOC/71/87 giving advice about th® effects of changes
     brought about by implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and
     Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) this circular
     introduces Statutory Guidance given by the Secretary of State on
     inspections of designated sports grounds under Section 10B of the
     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as inserted by
     Section 25 of the 1987 Act.

     Ujb Statutory Guidance, drawn up following consultation with the
     local authority associations, has effect in respect of any
     inspection carried out under Section 10B of the 1975 Act after
     1 January 1988 when, by virtue of the Cornnsncement Nurrfoer 1 Order,
     Part II of the 1987 Act comes into effect.

Cqpies of the above mentioned documents have been circulated to
divisional commanders.

The Superintendent (Operations) and a divisional senior officer, will
continue to be part of the inspection team and will advise and assist
local authorities with ground inspections.




Superintendent
                                                                              REF:                  MS/DD/JW
FROM:   A s s i s t a n t C hi ef C o n s ta b le , Operations
                                                                              STATION/DEPT:         Headquarters
TO:     See D i s t r i b u t i o n L i s t
                                                                              DATE:                 18 December 1987



        SUBJECT:           HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987 AND 72/1987 AND STATUTORT
                           INSTRUMENTS 1987 NO 1762 (C .5 4 ) AND 1987 NO 1941



        Attached f o r your in fo rm at io n and a t t e n t i o n are c o p i e s o f the above Home
        O f f i c e C i r c u l a r s and S t a t u t o r y I nst ru m ent s.  I a l s o e n c l o s e , f o r your
        c o n f i d e n t i a l i n f o r m a t i o n , an e x t r a c t from C o u n s e l' s ad v ic e obt aine d
        re ga rd in g the matter o f any f u t u r e d i f f i c u l t i e s encountered with our
        local football clubs.




        Encs




        D istribution

        Chief     S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   'A' D i v i s i o n
        C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   ' B' D i v i s i o n
        C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   'C' D i v i s i o n
        C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   ' D' D i v i s i o n
        C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   1E' D i v i s i o n
        C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   'F ' Division
        C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t ,   Operations & T r a f f i c
                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




                                                                              REF:                    MS/DD/JW
FROM:   A s s i s t a n t C hie f C o n s t a b le , Operations
                                                                              STATION/DEPT:           Headquarters
TO:     See D i s t r i b u t i o n L i s t
                                                                              DATE:                   18 December 1987



        SUBJECT:           HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/19 87 AND 72/1987 AND STATUTORY
                           INSTRUMENTS 1987 NO 1762 (C.54) AND 1987 NO 1941



         Attached f o r your in fo rm at io n and a t t e n t i o n are c o p i e s o f the above Home
         O f f i c e C i r c u l a r s and S t a t u t o r y I nst ru m ent s.  I a l s o e n c l o s e , f o r your
         c o n f i d e n t i a l i n f o r m a t i o n , an e x t r a c t from C o u n s e l' s a d v i c e obt ain ed
         reg ar din g the mat ter o f any f u t u r e d i f f i c u l t i e s encountered with our
         local football clubs.




         A s s i s t a n t urnet uo nstaDie
         Operations

         Encs




         D is tr ib u tio n :-

          C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t , 'A' D i v i s i o n
          C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t , ' B' D i v i s i o n
        ..Chief     S u p e r in t e n d e n t , 'C' D i v i s i o n _
          Chief     S u p e r in t e n d e n t , ' D' D i v i s i o n
          Chief     S u p e r in t e n d e n t , 1E' D i v i s i o n
          Chief     S u p e r in t e n d e n t , ' F ' D i v i s i o n
          C hi ef   S u p e r in t e n d e n t , Operations & T r a f f i c
                                            H O M E O FFICE
                                    Queen Anne’s Gate L ondon SW1H 9AT
                                             Direct line: 01-213
                                          Switchboard: 01-213 3000

Our reference:    FEP/87 6/233/14
Your reference:
                                                         25 November 1987
       Chief Executives - County Councils +
                          Metropolitan District Councils
                          London Boroughs
                          Common Council of the City of London

       Dear Sir,
       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987                                          I

       FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:-                 I
       IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)                 i

       Introduction

       1.    As foreshadowed by HOC No 42/1987 the Secretary of State has
       now made a commencement order under section 50(2) of the Fire
       Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act)
       bringing in Part II of the 1987 Act with effect from 1 January
       1988.                                      ------

       2.   This circular, together with Annex A, introduces the
       provisions of Part II of the 1987 Act and gives advice on the
       effects and operation of them. Advice on those provisions of
       Part I of the 1987 Act (fire safety) which are to be brought into
       force by the first commencement order is the subject of Fire
       Precautions Act Circular, 14/1987.
                                   v
                                    V
       Implementation of Part II (Safety of Sports Grounds)

       3.   Part II of the 1987 Act, consisting of sections 19 - 25,
       amends the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) in
       line with the Government's proposals contained in the
       Consultative Document published in June 1986 in response to the
       safety recommendations of the Popplewell Inquiry set up following
       the fire tragedy at Valley Parade on 31 May 1985. The main
       changes effected by Part II are as follows.-

       Section 19:- removes the distinction between sports "ground" and
       sports "stadium" with consequential modifications to section 2(2)
       of the 1975 Act dealing with the contents of safety certificates.

       Section 20:- empowers the Secretary of State to vary the
       designation threshold of 10,000 under section 1 of the 1975 Act.
Section 21:- precludes conditions in safety certificates              1
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for the Chief Officer of Police.


Section 22:-     directs appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act to
the courts.
Sections 23 and 24:- replaces the existing emergency procedure
under section 10 by introducing prohibition notices in the case
of serious risks to spectators; and provision to appeal against
them.
Section 25:- places a duty on local authorities to enforce the
1975 Act and to arrange for annual inspections of designated
sports grounds in accordance with guidance from the Secretary of
State.
4.   Annexes A and B to Home Office circular No 7/1986 which
gives advice on the 1975 Act should be noted as necessary and
cross referenced to this circular. Particular attention is drawn
to the latest guidance on the new procedure for the issue of
prohibition notices to deal with serious risks to spectators.
Local authorities are asked to copy all such notices to the Home
Office for information until further notice. To assist local
authorities to draw up a prohibition notice a suggested format is
reproduced at Annex B to this circular.

Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987
5.   A copy of the revised regulations is also enclosed with this
circular. The regulations reflect the changes brought about by
sections 22 and 24 of the 1987 Act and lay down time limits for
appeals. Provisions on procedures for applications for safety
certificates, their issue, amendment, transfer and replacement
are incorporated in the regulations which also authorise the
determination of fees to be charged in respect of applications
for the issue, amendment, transfer and replacement of safety
certificates.

Transitional
6.   Under the provisions of Schedule 5 of the 1987 Act any
existing court order made under section 10 of the 1975 Act
remains in force. Similarly any appeal lodged prior to 1 January
1988 and still extant on that date will remain subject to the
appeal procedures of the Safety of Sportr. Grounds Regulations
1976 (SI 1976/1263).

R eso u rce and manpower im p lic a tio n s
7.   The contents of this circular do not result in any cost or
manpower implications other than those arising from the
inspections to be carried out on designated sports grounds under
section 10B(1) as introduced by section 25 of the 1987 Act.
Circulation of Statutory Guidance under section 10B(2) of the
1975 Act on these inspections together with any supplementary
advice is being done separately and will cover, as necessary, any
resource implications arising therefrom.


Supplementary
8.   The information and advice in this circular and in Annex A
on the 1987 Act are given in good faith but it should be
understood that ultimately only the courts can rule
authoritatively on points of law.

9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to

                                          Yours faithfully




 enclosures     1) Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations
                2) Commencement No 1 Order
copies for information to:-
ACC
AMA
LBA
ADC
ACPO
♦Clerks to Police Authorities
+Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
Chief Officers of Police
Magistrates Association
Justices Clerks Society
Sports Council

♦without enclosures
+without enclosure (2)
                                                         ANNEX A
ANNEX A TO HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
Advice note by the Home Office on Part II of The Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (The 1987 Act) emending The
Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (The 1975 Act)

Introduction
1.   The general background to the 1975 Act together with a
summary of local authority powers and functions under that Act,
and procedures for the issue of safety certificates is set out in
Annexes A - D of Home Office Circular 7/1986 issued 7 February
1986 (taken from earlier Home Office circulars 150/1975, 130/1976
and 187/1976). This guidance should therefore be read in
conjunction with Annexes A - D of Home Office Circular 7/1986
which will need to be cross-referenced.
2.   The popplewell Inquiry set up after the fire tragedy at
Valley Parade concluded that the 1975 Act had worked
satisfactorily at designated grounds but recommended changes to
improve its operation. The Government's response was contained
in a consultative document published in June 1986. Parts II and
III of the 1987 Act implement these proposals and introduction of
Part II as from 1 January 1988 is the first phase of this
implementation.
3.   The main mechanism for securing safety at sports grounds
remains the safety certificate. Guidance on safety standards is
contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green
Guide) revised in October 1986. Local authorities are reminded
of the advice contained in paragraph 5 of Annex B to Home Office
Circular 7/1986 highlighting the need to maintain flexibility in
order to take account of the different circumstances at
individual grounds.
SUBSTANCE OF THE AMENDMENTS EFFECTED BY PART II OF THE 1987 ACT
Section 19: Application of the 1975 Act to all sports grounds
4.   Section 19, together with the textual amendments of Schedule
2 to the 1987 Act removes the distinction in the 1975 Act between
a sports "ground" and a sports "stadium". As amended the
provisions of the 1975 Act apply to all sports grounds as defined
in section 17(1) of that Act. The Secretary of State may thus
designate any category of sports groond without first having to
make an order extending the provisions of the Act to that
particular class of ground.
5.   In consequence of this wider power, section 2 of the 1975
Act (originally formulated with "stadia" in mind, particularly
football stadia) has also had to be amended, by section 19 (2) of
the 1987 Act, so that safety certificates are no longer required
to contain certain obligatory terms and .conditions. The
Secretary of State is however empowered to stipulate by order the
contents of a safety certificate for any class of sports ground.
In this way those grounds of a particular type, or grounds used
for a particular sport need not be subject to requirements which
would be inappropriate to them.

6.   As there are no present plans to extend designation to other
classes of sports ground it is not envisaged that an order under
this new power will be necessary. The discretion given to local
authorities under section 2(1) of the 1975 Act means that with
the possible exception of clauses in safety certificates relating
to police presence (see paragraph 9 below) the contents of safety
certificates will not automatically require amendment as a result
of the removal of the obligatory terms of section 2 of the 1975
Act. Safety certificates should continue to specify maximum
spectators; include terms and conditions as to size, situation
of entrances/exits to and from the ground and parts of it
(including means of escape in the case of fire or other
emergency) plus means of access to any such entrances and exits;
terms and conditions should continue to require those entrances,
exits and means of access to be properly maintained and kept free
from obstruction; and terms and conditions should continue to
deal with the number, strength and situation of any crush
barriers.

7.   Section 19(2) also widens the regulation powers given to
the Secretary of State by insertion of a new subsection (1A) to
section 18 of the 1975 Act thereby enabling regulations to make
different provision for different classes of sports grounds.

Section 20:   Designation of grounds - variation in qualifying
              spectator capacity

8.   Section 20 inserts subsections (1A) and (IB) in section 1 of
the 1975 Act to give the Secretary of State power to vary by
order the numerical threshold above which grounds may be
designated as requiring a safety certificate. The threshold is
at present set at 10,000 by the Act.

Section 21:   Safety certificates - police presence
9.     Section 21 adds subsection (2A) to section 2 of the 1975
Act.    Where the local authorityincludes in a safety certificate
a provision which requires the presence of the police, the
subsection requires that determination of their number is to be
left to the Chief Officer of Police. This is already the usual
if not invariable practice and this provision does no more than
give statutory force to existing arrangements. Safety
certificate conditions which do noc comply with this provision
will however be void and local authorities are advised to ensure
that any such conditions comply with the new provisions.

Section 22:   Safety certificates - appeals
10.    Section 22 of the 1987 Act directs appeals under section 5
of the 1975 Act to the courts instead of to the Secretary of
State as hitherto. Such an appeal is to the Magistrates Court by
way of making a complaint (new subsection (3A) of section 5).
There is also provision for an appeal to the Crown Court against
an order made by a Magistrates Court on determining a complaint.
Such an appeal may be made by the local authority or by any
"interested party" as defined in section 5 of the 1975 Act.
11. Subsections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 5 are repealed
in consequence of the removal of the Secretary of State's
functions in respect of appeals. However the Secretary of State
is given the power to prescribe by regulation the time within
which appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act are to be brought.
These regulations will also come into effect as from 1 January
1988. There is however transitional provision contained in
paragraph 6 of Schedule 5 to the 1987 Act to preserve the
existing appeal procedures/powers in respect of appeals made to
the Secretary of State before 1 January 1988 and which are still
extant on that date.
12. Section 22(8) of the 1987 Act makes a number of
consequential amendments to section 7 of the 1975 Act
(determinations and appeals/supplementary). Subsection (8)(a)
amends section 7(1) of the 1975 Act so that it provides for an
application to be deemed to be withdrawn if the local authority
serve a notice under section 5(1) that an applicant is not
qualified for the issue of a certificate, once the time limit for
an appeal has expired. It also removes from the 1975 Act section
7(1)(b) which misleadingly implies that the local authority can
determine without an application having been made that an
existing holder of a safety certificate no longer qualifies to
hold it.   Subsection (8)(b) amends section 7(2) to make
provision to suspend the effect of the local authority decision
that an applicant is not a qualified person if an appeal is made
in the prescribed time limits. This suspension has effect until
the appeal is either withdrawn or determined by the court in
favour of the authority. Subsection 8(c) amends section 7(3) of
the 1975 Act and subsection (8)(d) repeals the provision in
section 7 of the 1975 Act by which a court could, on the
application of the local authority, give immediate effect to a
term or condition of a safety certificate which had been
suspended as a result of an appeal.
Section 23: Special procedure in case of serious risk -
prohibition notices: and
Section 24: Prohibition Notices: appeals
13. Section 23 of the 1987 Act replaces the existing section 10
of the 1975 Act with provision for a system of prohibition
notices. Section 24 of the 1987 Act provides for appeals against
a prohibition notice.
14. A prohibition notice may be served in respect of any sports
ground as defined in section 17(1) of the 1975 Act or part of
such a sports ground. The criteria for issuing a prohibition
notice are set out in the new section 10(1) and local authorities
should not feel inhibited from using the new powers when
necessary. These powers are nonetheless potentially far reaching
(see also paragraph 20 below) and local authorities are therefore
asked to ensure that they are used with due discretion. In
practice, the considerations leading to the issuing of a
prohibition notice are likely to be comparable to those which now
apply to seeking a court order, and prohibition notices should in
general be used as a last rather than a first resort, after
consultations with the ground operator have failed to secure
reasonable safety improvements and amendment of a safety
certificate (where issued) is not considered to be an effective
way of dealing with the risk(s). It is, of course, nonetheless
important for local authorities to ensure that they have an
effective machinery for the issue of such a notice urgently
should the need arise. Authorities may therefore wish to
consider delegating to a limited number of senior officers the
authority to act on behalf of the council and issue such a notice
containing directions.

15. Prohibition notices must contain the information specified
in new section 10(2). Local authorities are also encouraged to
include in the notice directions under new section 10(4)
detailing the required remedial measures. A notice can apply
generally or to a specific occasion (new section 10(3)). A
notice may not however include directions compliance with which
would require the provision of police unless the Chief Officer of
Police has consented to their inclusion (new section 10(5)). The
extent of the provision is also reserved for his determination.
16. A prohibition notice and any amendment to it should be
served on the persons specified in new section 10(6). Where it
applies to an occasion for which a special safety certificate is
in force, notice should be served on both the holder of the
special safety certificate and the holder of the general safety
certificate. Failure to do so does not however affect the
validity of the notice.

17. New section 10(7) provides that a prohibition notice can
take effect immediately if the risk to spectators is imminent or,
in other cases, at the end of the period specified in the notice.
Where the notice is to take immediate effect, the notice must
state that the local authority are of the opinion that the risk
to spectators is or, as the case may be, will be imminent.
18. A copy of the prohibition notice and any amendment to it
must be sent to the officer and authorities named in new section
10(8). In most cases these authorities are likely to be
represented in any safety team and are likely to have been
consulted in advance.

19. Under section 10(9) a prohibition notice may be amended and
any amendment must specify the date on which it is to come into
operation (section 10(10)). Under section 10(11) a prohibition
notice may be withdrawn. Section 23(2) of the 1987 Act amends
section 12 of the 1975 Act (offences) to take account of the
changes to section 10. Section 23(3) adds to the definitions of
section 17(1) of the 1975 Act.
Appeals

20. Section 24 of the 1987 Act introduces new section 10A to the
1975 Act which provides for a system of appeals against
prohibition notices issued under new section 10 as inserted by
section 23 of the 1987 Act. The bringing of an appeal does not
suspend the operation of the notice or of any amendment to it
(section 10A(6)) so, particularly if the notice is to apply to a
"one-off" fixture, it is important that it is served, wherever
possible, well in advance so as to enable the recipient to
exercise effectively his right of appeal. The appeal procedure
is by way of complaint to a Magistrates Court. On appeal the
court may cancel the notice or affirm the notice, either in its
original form or as amended, or with such modifications as the
court thinks fit. There is provision for a further right of
appeal to the Crown Court against the decision of the Magistrates
Court. Persons entitled to make such an appeal are listed in new
section 10A(7). "An aggrieved person" referred to in sub-section
(7)(a) is defined in sub-section (9).

Section 25:   Enforcement : Inspections and offence of obstruction
21. Section 25(1) of the 1987 Act adds a new section 10B to the
1975 Act which provides for local authorities to enforce the
Act's provisions and, for that purpose, to arrange for the
inspection of designated grounds at least once every twelve
months in accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of
State.
22. Section 25(2) updates section 12(6)(d) of the 1975 Act by
amending the term "wilfully" to "intentionally".




G2 Division
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
                                              HOC 71/1987 .ANNEX 8


[Name and address of local authority]

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
PROHIBITION NOTICE

Name (a)
Address (b)
     being - *the holder of a general safety certificate for (c)
              - *the holder of a special safety certificate for    (c)
              - *the person who appears to the (e) council to be
                responsible for the management of (c)
              - *a person who appears to the (e) council to be
                responsible for organising an activity at (c)

     on    (d)


Notice is hereby given that (e) Council are of the opinion that
the admission of spectators to *[the (c) sports ground]* [parts of
the (c) sports ground which are] specified in the Schedule to
this notice *[involves]*[will involve] a risk to them so serious
that until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable
level the admission of spectators to *[the ground] *[that part of
the ground] ought to be * [prohibited] *[restricted].

The matters which in the council's opinion *[give] *[will give]
rise to that risk are as follows . . . .




The (e) Council hereby direct that *[no spectators]*[no more than
the number of spectators specified in the schedule which forms
part of this notice] shall be admitted to *[that sports ground]
*[the parts of that sports ground specified in the schedule]
until those matters detailed above have been remedied.
*The (e) Council is of the opinion that the risk to spectators
*[is]*[will be] imminent, and the * [prohibition] *[restriction]
is to take effect immediately.
The * [prohibition] * [restriction] is to tike effect after   /1 9
, and relates to the admission of spectators * [generally] *[on
the occasion(s) specified in the schedule]..

*The (e) Council further direct that the steps specified in the
schedule which forms part of this notice will have to be taken to
reduce the risk to a reasonable level.




Signature                                        ' Date
(Block Capitals)

Position held in Council .............

[Being a person authorised by (e) Council under section 101 of
the Local Government Act 1972 to issue such a notice]

(a)   Name of person on whom the notice is being served
(b)   Address at which it is intended to serve the notice
(c)   Name of sports ground
(d)   Date of event covered by a special safety certificate to
      which the notice applies
(e)   Name of the local authority




♦delete as appropriate.
*'   Schedule
     1.* No more than the following numbers of spectators may be
     admitted to the ground/the parts of the ground specified below*:

     2.* The following steps must be taken to reduce the risk to
     spectators to a reasonable level:

     3.* The prohibition/restriction* applies to the admission of
     spectators on the following occasions:



     ♦delete as appropriate
           THESE NOTES SHOULD BE PRINTED ON THE BACK OF THE
                          PROHIBITION NOTICE

NOTES
Offences

1.    Contravention of any prohibition notice or restriction
imposed by a prohibition notice is an offence provided by section
12(l)(e) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act)
as amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 (the 1987 Act) and renders the offender liable, on summary
conviction, to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum
(currently £2,000) or, on conviction on indictment, to an
unlimited fine, or imprisonment for not more than two years, or
both.
2.   Where any person is charged with an offence under section
12(1)(e) of the 1975 Act it shall be a defence to prove
(a)     that the admission of spectators in contravention of the
        notice was without his consent; and
(b)     that he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all
        due diligence to avoid the commission of such an offence by
        himself or any other person under his control.

3.   Section 12(7) of the 1975 Act provides that where an offence
under that Act which has been committed by a body corporate is
proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of,
or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of, a director,
manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body
corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in any such
capacity, he, as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of
that offence and be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
4.   Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, section 12(7) of the 1975 Act shall apply in relation to
the acts, and defaults of a member in connection with his
functions of management as if he were a director of the body
corporate.
5.   The validity of a prohibition notice served on any person
shall not be affected by a failure to serve another person
required to be served with such a notice.


Appeals
6.   Your attention is drawn to the provision for appeal to a
magistrates' court against this notice in section 10A of the 1975
Act as inserted by the 1987 Act.
Regulations made under section 10A(1) of the 1975 Act stipulate
that a person on whom a prohibition notice is served may appeal
to the court within 21 days after the day on which the notice is
served on him.
                                                             •*v <

Where an appeal is brought under this section against a
prohibition notice or an amendment of it, the bringing of the
appeal does not have the effect of suspending the operation of
the notice.
                                                HOME OFFICE
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate L o nd on SW1H 9 AT
                                                Direct line: 01-213
                                             Switchboard: 01-213 3000

Our reference:    FEP/87 6/233/14
Your reference:
                                                           25 November     1987

        The Chief Executives
                               County Councils
                               Metropolitan District Councils
                               London Borough Councils
                               Common Council of the City of London


        Dear Sir
        HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 72/1987
        FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 :
        IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)            SECTION 25


        INSPECTIONS UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
        1975



        Introduction
        Further to HOC/71/87 giving advice about the effects of changes
        brought about by implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and
        Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) this circular
        introduces Statutory Guidance given by the Secretary of State on
        inspections of designated sports grounds under section 10B of the
        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as inserted by
        section 25 of the 1987 Act.

        General
        The Statutory Guidance, drawn up following consultation with the
        local authority associations, has effect in respect of any
        inspection carried out under section 10B o l the 1975 Act after 1
        January 1988 when, by virtue of the Commencement Number 1 Order,
        Part II of the 1987 Act comes into effect.
        Local authorities should bear in mind the mandatory nature of the
        Statutory Guidance on inspections carried out under section 10B
        of the 1975 Act whereas the supplementary, explanatory memorandum
        enclosed with the Statutory Guidance is not binding.
R e so u r c e I m p li c a t io n s

Whilst it is not intended to restrict the time local authorities
may feel should be devoted to this task, inspections under
section 10B (when taken with existing commitments to inspect
designated sports grounds) should not result in significant
resource implications. The scope of inspections under paragraphs
3 and 4 of the Statutory Guidance, together with associated
report work, are not intended to be as detailed or extensive as
that often required of the holder of a safety certificate, or
that which may sometimes be necessary prior to the issue of a
safety certificate. In general, inspections are not expected to
take more than about 2 man days per ground on average.
To assist local authorities prepare a report and record of
inspections a suggested basic format which can be adapted
according to preference is enclosed at Annex A.
Supplementary

Any enquiries about tl^is circular or the statutory Guidance
should be directed to

                                        Yours faithfully




Copies for information sent to:-

ACC, AMA, LBA, ADC, ACPO
Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
Chief Officers of Police
Clerks to Police Authorities
Sports Council
HOC 72/1987

STATUTORY GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON INSPECTIONS TO BE
CARRIED OUT UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
1975


The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Ground Act
1975 (as inserted by section 25(1) of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987).


General
1. _ The local authority should be satisfied that inspections
under this guidance are carried out by a person or persons
qualified for that purpose.
Scope of inspection

2.    Inspection of the ground should, where practicable, include
inspection of the following certificates of testing and records
as required under the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate to be kept by the holder and/or submitted to the
local authority.

(a)   any certificate covering testing of
(i) strength/loading tests carried out on crush barriers, guard
rails, hand rails, balustrading, walls or fences;
(ii) strength, stability of buildings or other structures;
(iii) inspections and condition of electrical installations.


(b)   records of the following

(i)   spectator attendances;

(ii) accidents involving spectators;

(iii) maintenance and other inspections of buildings, components
     and. installations, together with identified deficiencies and
     recorded remedial measures taken;
(iv) tests and checks on emergency lighting, public address
     system, fire fighting equipment, fire warning system (if
     installed);
(v)   emergency evacuation procedures and steward training
      sessions.
3.   The inspection of the ground should normally include
inspection of the following items:-

(a) any part of the ground where an accident or incident
resulting in serious injury to spectators has occurred since the
last inspection;

(b) any recorded defect or deficiency which has arisen since the
last inspection and which, in the opinion of the inspecting
officer would be likely to lead to an accident which could result
in serious injury to spectators;

(c) major remedial work carried out since the date of the last
inspection to ascertain that it has been satisfactorily carried
out;

(d) all public stairways for their general condition, slip
resistance, condition of hand-rails (see also (j) below), trip
hazards especially at the head of stairways, adequacy of lighting
and structural fire separation;

(e) all egress routes used by the public, including emergency
exit routes, for obstructions, operation of exit gates, adequacy
of sign-posting and lighting, presence of any uncleared litter;

(f) fire fighting equipment and fire warning system (if
installed);

(g)   for the presence of any accumulation of litter,

(h) the emergency lighting system including any generator or
batteries

(i)   first-aid facilities and equipment;
(j) 10% of any crush barriers, balustrading and hand-rails for
overt signs of weakness which might signal the need for further
testing, remedial action or (additional) restriction on the
number of spectators allowed to occupy that part of the ground;
(k) 10% of the terraces or viewing slopes for general surface
condition, even-ness and slip resistance;

(1)   anchorage and fastening of 10% of any fixed seating.
(m)   any provision for the disabled.

Where the inspection of a sample as in paragraphs (j), (k) and
(1) reveals matters giving rise to serious concern for the safety
of spectators, the authority should go on to inspect all the
crush barriers etc, terracing or seating in that part of the
ground where the sample indicated that there were deficiencies.
Testing of equipment

4.   Tests should if possible be carried out to confirm that the
following is in working orders-
(a)   lighting, particularly on stairways and exit routes;
(b)   emergency lighting;

(c) public address system, including the proper functioning of
zoning where this facility is part of the requirements of the
safety certificate;
(d)   fire warning system (if installed);

(e) 10% of any metering system for recording the admission of
spectators to parts of the ground.




Home Office

25 November 1987
Supplementary advics and explanatory notes to the Statutory
Guidance to local authorities given by the Secretary of State
under section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975


Introduction
1.   The following advice does not form part of the Statutory
Guidance given tinder section 10B of the 1975 Act. The following
advice is given in good faith but it should be remembered that
only the courts can rule authoritatively on interpretation of
points of law.
Objective of Inspections
2.     The object of the inspections is to monitor the suitability
of the terms and conditions of the safety certificate (where
issued) in the light of any change in the condition of the ground
and.- secondly, to assist local authorities in enforcing compliance
with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate or other
notice served on the ground occupier.
3.   Local authorities may wish to note that the inspection is
not intended to shift responsibility for spectator safety away
from the holder of any safety certificate or ground occupier, but
rather to help see that he succeeds in achieving (and
maintaining) the safety standards intended to be set by any
certificate for the number of spectators authorised to enter the
ground for a specified activity.

General
4.    As the size, age, configuration, condition and usage of
designated sports grounds as well as the attitude of management
can give rise to different inspection needs, the discretion of
local authorities to carry out more frequent or more extensive
inspections than is laid down by section 10B of the 1975 Act is
not restricted. The requirements of the Statutory Guidance have
been set at what is seen as the desired minimum likely to achieve
the objective described above leaving authorities free to add to
the content of the inspections or increase their frequency
according to locally determined needs. In this context local
authorities may wish to bear in mind that inspections carried out
tinder section 10B of the 1975 Act are in addition to, not a
substitute for those required to be carried out under the terms
and conditions of the safety certificate by or on behalf of the
holder.
Inspection frequency
5.   As section 10B(3) of the 1975 Act stipulates that an
inspection should take place of a MdesignatedM ground at least
once every twelve months, this frequency must be observed even if
the issue of a safety certificate is delayed. Where a safety
certificate has not been issued, the inspections carried out^
prior to its preparation and issue should be such as to fulfil
the requirements of the Statutory Guidance. Once a safety
certificate has been issued at least one further inspection of
 the ground should be carried out either:-
within a year of its issue, or

within a year of the last inspection, whichever is the earlier«,

Thereafter, inspections should take place at least annually from
the date of the last inspection.

Where an inspection of a sports ground takes place at the
discretion of the local authority for some other reason, for
example as a result of proposed alterations or an application for
amendment to the safety certificate, that inspection can be
regarded as an inspection carried out under section 10B of the
1975 Act provided the criteria of the Statutory Guidance are meto
Inspection Teas

®    The Statutory Guidance allows the local authority to
determine how best to arrange and effect inspections under
section 10B of the 1975 Act and does not stipulate that they
should be carried out by a particular professional discipline.
As it is nonetheless important that inspecting officers are
qualified for that purpose, the guidance places an onus on the
local authority to be satisfied on this account.  (The Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (paragraph 36) envisages that
inspections arranged by ground management will be carried out by
someone who is professionally qualified. Local authorities may
wish to consider whether inspecting officers should also be
professionally qualified.)

7.   Local authorities are also asked to bear in mind the
potential advantages of a team approach to inspections under the
Statutory Guidance and the role of the fire authority, building
authority and the police. Local authorities in London and
metropolitan counties may therefore wish to arrange at least one
inspection per year to be carried out with a representative of
the fire authority in attendance. Elsewhere, local authorities
will no doubt wish to consider inclusion of a member of the fire
service as well as a representative of the building authority.
Local authorities may also wish to consult the Chief Officer of
Police so that the opportunity can be given for a police officer
to attend at least one inspection each year.  (It is not intended
that these considerations should interfere with any internal or
locally agreed arrangements between the local authority, fire
authority, building authority, police and any other agency with
an interest in safety at the ground.)
Scope of Inspections

8.   Where possible all the items listed in paragraphs 3 and 4
of the Statutory Guidance should be inspected and tested. It is
recognised however that there may be occasions when one or more
of these elements cannot, for some reason, be inspected. For
this reason there is a degree of discretion within paragraphs 2 -
 4 of the Statutory Guidance. In this way it is hoped to avoid
the situation where the local authority has to pay repeated
visits to a ground in order to comply with the Statutory
Guidance.

9.   The Statutory Guidance does not require that an inspection
should take place at any particular time so the local authority5s
discretion to carry out an inspection whilst the ground is in *use
is not restricted. An "in-use” or "during performance"
inspection could therefore constitute part of the inspection
required by section 10B of the Act even though it might not be
sufficient (having regard to the requirements of the Statutory
Guidance) to be an inspection itself.

Records
10. Local authorities will doubtless need to keep a record of
all inspections carried out under the Statutory Guidance and may
wish to consider whether a copy of any report/record should be
sent to the holder of the safety certificate. Local authorities
are also asked to consider affording a reasonable opportunity for
any such report to be made available for inspection/ if so
requested, by members of the public.




Home Office

25 November 1987
•Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                       Record o f Inspection under section 10B
   (as amended by section 25 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987)

   Name of Local Authority




                                                    PART 1
   Name/address of sports ground




   Designated on


    Last safety certificate issued by
                                                                                                   on

    Last inspection carried out by
                                                                                                   on

    This inspection report compiled by
                                                                                                   on

    Position in local authority


    Copies of this report sent to:-      *Delete as appropriate

    Fire Authority*           on                                           Building Authority*     on


    Chief Police Officer*     on                                  Holder of Safety Certificate*    on


    Other (specify)*                                                                               on


                                                    PART 2
                        Inspection of Test/Inspection Certificates and Records
   CERTIFICATES
 1. Certificate(s) of testing of:- crush-barriers; hand-rails; guard-rails; walls/fences.
      seen                         not seen                               Date of certificate(s)

    Name and qualification of certifying officer




      seen                         not seen                               Date of certificate(s)

    Name and qualification of certifying officer
3. Certificate of inspection on condition of electrical installation.
     seen                        not seen                               Date of certificate

   Name and qualification of certifying officer



4. What (if any) action is considered necessary in the light of the contents of the certificates, and by whom?
   (use a separate action sheet if desired)




   RECORDS
5. Records relating to the following items have been inspected:
  (a) spectator attendances since [                                 ]
  (b) accidents or incidents involving spectators
  (c) maintenance inspections, defects and remedial action taken
  (d) Tests on’.emergency lighting;public address system; fire fighting equipment;any fire warning system
  (e) evacuation procedures
   (f) training of stewards

6. (a) Do the records indicate that the terms and conditions of the safety certificate are complied with?
      Yes                       No

   (b) What (if any) further action is considered to be required, and by whom?
   (use a separate action sheet if desired)




7. Any other comments or observations arising from 1 —6 above.




                                                    PART 3
                                         Visual Inspections and Tests
8. (a) State here the locations identified by the records under 5b above which have been inspected:




   (b) State here the defects/deficiencies and remedial work identified under 5c above which have been inspected:




9. Arising from the inspection under 8 above the following action is considered necessary: -
   (use a separate action sheet if desired)
         ollowing items have been inspected: -
   ((iTf ipublic stairways
   ( b) public egress routes
   ( c) fire-fighting equipment
   ( d) First Aid facilities
   ( e) emergency lighting provision
   ( f) “housekeeping" arrangements including storage of flammables
   ( g) fire warning system, if installed
   (h) any provision for the disabled.

11. Arising from the inspection at 10 above the following action is considered necessary:
   (use a separate action sheet if desired)




12. (a) At least [ %] of the following elements have been inspected (for overt signs of weakness).
    (i) crush-barriers (if any)
    (ii) balustrading
    (iii) hand-rails or guard-rails
    (b) Identify below the elements and their location (by reference to ground plans if desired).




13. Arising from the inspection at 12 above the following action is considered necessary
   (use a separate action sheet if desired)




14. (a) At least [ %] of the following have been inspected:-
   (i) terraces/viewing slopes (if any)
   (ii) fixed seating (if any)
   (b) Identify below tbs location of the area/items inspected (by reference to ground plans if desired).




15. Arising from the inspection at 14 above, the following action is considered necessary
   (use a separate action sheet if desired).




16. (a) The following items were tested on the day erf the inspection: -
   (i) lighting
   (ii) emergency lighting
   (iii) public address system
   (iv) fire-warning system (if installed)
   (v) [     %] of any metering system for recording admission of spectators.
   (b) The following items did not satisfactorily fulfil their function




17. Arising from the tests carried out at 16 above what action is considered necessary?
    (use a separate action sheet if desired).




18. Any general comments or observations arising out of the inspections/tests at 8 — 17 above.




                                                  PART 4
   SUMMARY
   Respond to the following questions in the light of your knowledge of the ground and the information gained
   from the inspection of it.
19. (a) Is the holder complying with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate?
       Yes                        No
   (b) If no, in what respect is the holder failing to comply?




   (c) What action is needed to rectify (b)?




20. Does the safety certificate require amendment? If so, in what way?




21. (a) Have you identified a risk to spectators so serious that, in your opinion, notwithstanding the existence of
    the safety certificate, a notice under section 10 of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 should be issued.

       Yes                          No

    (b) What action is being done about 21(a)?




    Full Name (Block Capitals)
                                                                      Signed

     Position held in Local Authority
                                                                      Date
                         STATUTORY              INSTRUMENTS



                            1987 No. 1762 (C. 54)
              FIRE PRECAUTIONS
     SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
  The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
           (Commencement No. 1) Order 1987

                     Made   .    .   .    .                     6th October 1987


In exercise of the powers conferred on me by section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), I hereby make the following Order:

  1. This Order may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
(Commencement No. 1) Order 1987.

  2. The provisions of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified
in the Schedule to this Order shall come into force on 1st January 1988.


Home Office                                                                  Douglas Hurd
6th October 1987                         One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                         SCHEDULE                                         A rticle 2

PROVISIONS OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT
       ACT 1987 COMING INTO FORCE ON 1st JANUARY 1988

Provisions o f the Act          Subject matter o f provisions

In Part I:
  Section 3                     Charges for fire certification work
  Section 4                     Means of escape: scope of regulation
  Section 8                     Duties as regards safety pending determination of applications for
                                  fire certificates
  Section   9                   Special procedure in case of serious risk: prohibition notices
  Section   11                  Disclosure of information obtained in premises
  Section   12                  Civil and other liability
  Section   13                  Removal of exemption for premises used for public religious
                                  worship


(a) 1987 c.27.
Provisions o f the Act              Subject matter o f provisions

  Section 14                        Breaches of fire certificate requirements: restriction of defence
  In section 16, subsection         Special provision for certain premises
     (1), subsection (2) to the
     extent necessary to give
     effect to the provisions of
     Schedule 1 specified in
     this Schedule, and
     subsection (3)
  Section 17                        Extension of power to apply the Fire Precautions Act 1971(a)
  In section 18, so much of         Application to the Crown
     subsections (1), (2) and
     (3) as amends section 40
     of the Fire Precautions
     Act 1971 by providing-
     (a) that in subsection
     (l)(a) of that section after
     “4” there shall be
     inserted “5(2A)”; and
     (b) that in subsection
     (l)(b) of that section after
     “8” there shall be
     inserted “8B” and after
     “ 10” there shall be
     inserted “ 1OB”
Part II                             Safety of sports grounds
In Part V:
  Section 46                        Entertainment licences: fees for variation
  Section 49, to the extent         Repeals and transitional and saving provisions
     necessary to give effect to
     such of the repeals in
     Schedule 4 and provisions
     of Schedule 5 as are
     specified in this Schedule
     and the Appendix to this
      Schedule
  In section 50, subsections        Short title, commencement and extent
     (1), (2) and (3) and so
     much of subsections (4)
      to (7) as has effect in
      relation to Part II of the
      Act
In Schedule 1, Part I of            Fire precautions: special provision for certain premises
   Schedule 2 to the Fire
   Precautions Act 1971 and,
   in Part II of Schedule 2 to
   that Act, in paragraph 3,
   sub-paragraphs (1) and (2)
   and so much of sub-
   paragraph (3) as has effect
   in relation to the references
   to the occupier in sections
   5(2A), 7(3A), 7(4) and 8B(1)
   of that Act
 Schedule 2                         Extension of application of Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975(b)
                                      to sports grounds
 In Schedule 4, so much of the      Repeals
   entries as is specified in the
   Appendix to this Schedule
 In Schedule 5, paragraphs 1,        Transitional and saving provisions
    3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9

 (a) 1971 c.40.                     (b) 1975 c.52.


                                                     2
                       APPENDIX TO THE SCHEDULE
             REPEALS TA K IN G EFFECT O N 1st JANUARY 1988


Chapter        Short title             Extent o f repeal
1971 c.40      Fire Precautions Act    In section 2, the words from “of any of the following” to
                  1971                   “any premises” where last occurring
                                       In section 12(1), the words “other than paragraph (d)”
                                       In section 43(1), in the definition of “the court”, the
                                         words “and the Schedule thereto”
                                       Section 43(2)
1975 c.52      Safety of Sports        Section 5(4), (6), (7) and (8)
                 Grounds Act 1975      In section 7, in subsection (3), the words “, subject to
                                          subsection (4) below,” and subsections (4) and (5)
                                       In section 12(2), the words “stadium or other”
                                       Section 15
                                       In section 17(1), the definition of “sports stadium”




                                 EXPLANATORY NOTE
                             (This note is not part o f the Order)

  This Order brings into force on 1st January 1988 the provisions of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified in the Schedule to the Order.




                                               3
             STATUTORY                      INSTRUMENTS



                      1987 No. 1762 (C. 54)
          FIRE PRECAUTIONS
 SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
         (Commencement No. 1) Order 1987




                                         85p net
                               ISBN 0 11 077762 X

             Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office


       790   W01551      C29     10/87     452/3    4235     PS 7944007      872617P
^             v*'e-



                             STATUTORY                         INSTRUMENTS




                                                  1987 No. 1941
           SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
               The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987
                            Made -                                        16th November 1987
                            Laid before Parliament                        25th November 1987
                            Coming into force                                  1st January 1988



    In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by sections 6(1) and (4) and 10A(1) and (2) of
    the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in
    section 18(4) of that Act, I hereby make the following Regulations:

    Citation, commencement and extent
      1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations
    1987 and shall come into force on 1st January 1988.
       (2) These Regulations do not extend to the Isles of Stilly.

    Revocation
       2. The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976(b), the Safety of Sports Grounds
    (Scotland) Regulations 1976(c) and the Safety of Sports Grounds (Amendment)
    Regulations 1986(d) are hereby revoked, except for the purposes of any appeal to which
    paragraph 6 of Schedule 5 to the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (transitional provisions as respects appeals about safety certificates)(e) applies.

    Interpretation
      3. For the purposes of these Regulations “ the 1975 Act ” means the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act 1975.

    Applications
      4.—(1) An application for a safety certificate shall be in the form contained in the
    Schedule to these Regulations or a form to the like effect.
       (2)    An application for the amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate
    shall be made in writing and any such application shall set out the names and addresses of
    any persons who to the applicant’s knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring
    compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate as amended, replaced or
    transferred.

    Notices by local authority
      5.—(1) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided—
        (a) to issue a safety certificate (including an issue by way of replacement of a safety
            certificate); or
        (b) to amend a safety certificate; or
        (c) to refuse to amend or replace a safety certificate,
    (a) 1975 c.52; section 6(1) (c) was substituted by section 22(7) of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
        (c.27) and, section 10A was inserted by section 24 of that Act.
    (b) S.I. 1976/1263.      (c) S.I. 1976/1300.     (d) S.I. 1986/1045.       (e) 1987 c.27.

                                                                1
they shall serve on every interested party notice in writing of their decision setting out the
information referred to in paragraph (4) below, together, in the case of a refusal, with their
reasons for it.

  (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
determined to refuse that application on grounds other than the one referred to in section
5(1) of the 1975 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal serve on the
applicant notice in writing of their decision, together with their reasons for it.

  (3) Where on an application for the transfer of a safety certificate a local authority—
     (a) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is not
         a qualified person, they shall, in addition to the notice referred to in section 5(1)
         of the 1975 Act, serve on the holder of the certificate a copy of that notice;
     (b) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is a
         qualified person but decide not to transfer the certificate, they shall serve on that
         person and the holder of the certificate notice in writing of their decision together
         with their reasons for it.

  (4) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of any application in respect of which the local authority’s decision
was taken is available for inspection at a place and at the times specified in the notice.

   (5) A soon as may be after the decision referred to in paragraph (1) above, the local
authority shall cause to be published in a newspaper circulating in the locality of the sports
ground to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision and the
information referred to in paragraph (4) above.

  (6) In this regulation “ interested party ” means—
     (a) the holder of a safety certificate whose application to have it amended or replaced
         has been refused;
     (b) any other person known to the local authority to be or likely to be concerned in
         ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate;
     (c) the chief officer of police; and
     (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
         authority or, in any other case, the building authority.



Appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act
  6.—(1) An appeal under section 5 of the 1975 Act(a) shall be brought (in accordance
with subsection (3A) or, as the case may be, subsection (3B) of section 5 of that Act(b)) in
the case of an appeal in respect of—
     (a) a general safety certificate, not later than twenty-eight days, and
     (b) a special safety certificate, not later than seven days,
after the relevant date.

   (2) In paragraph (1) above “ relevant date ” means—
      (a) in the case of a person to whom a safety certificate is issued, the date of the receipt
          by him of that certificate;
      (b) in the case of a person on whom a notice is served under section 4(1) (a) or 5(1) of
          the 1975 Act or regulation 5(1), (2) or (3) above, the date of the receipt by him of
          that notice; and
      (c) in the case of any other person, the date of the publication of the notice required
          by regulation 5(5) above.
(a) Section 5 was amended by paragraph 7(1) of Schedule 8 to the Local Government Act 1985 (c.51) and by section
    22 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.
(b) Subsections (3A) and (3B) of section 5 were inserted by section 22(3) of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Appeals under section 10A of the 1975 Act
  7.—(1) An appeal by an aggrieved person against a prohibition notice under section
10A(1) of the 1975 Act(a) shall be brought (in accordance with subsection (3) or, as the
case may be, subsection (4) of section 10A of that Act) not later than twenty-one days after
the day on which the notice was served on him under section 10(1) of the 1975 Act(b).
  (2)    An appeal by an aggrieved person against an amendment to a prohibition notice
under section 10A(1) of the 1975 Act (as extended by section 10A(2) of that Act) shall be
brought (in accordance with subsection (3) or, as the case may be, subsection (4) of section
10A of that Act) not later than twenty-one days after the day on which the notice amending
the prohibition notice was served on him under section 10(9) of the 1975 Act.

Fees
  8. A local authority may determine the fee to be charged in respect of an application
for the issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate but such a fee shall
not exceed an amount commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done by or on
behalf of the local authority in respect of the application.



Home Office                                                                                              Douglas Hurd
16th November 1987                                                   One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                                                   SCHEDULE                                                               Regulation 4(1)

                                SAFETY OF SPORTS G RO U N D S ACT 1975
                              A PPLICA TIO N FO R A SAFETY CERTIFICA TE
When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive of:
   (a) the county council where the sports ground is situated in a non-metropolitan county in England
       or Wales; or
   (b) the borough council where the sports ground is situated in Greater London; or
   (c) the district council where the sports ground is situated in a metropolitan county in England; or
   (d) the regional/islands council where the sports ground is situated in Scotland.

To be completed in all cases
I hereby apply for a *[general] [special] safety certificate in respect of the sports ground described
below to be issued to ..............................................................................................................................


I make the application *[on behalf of] [as]                               ................................................................ ..........................
 o f t ...........................................................................................................................                            ...



Date        .....................................................................           Signed........................ ...................................

Address ............................................................
                     .......................................... ..                     Tel. N o...............................................................
* Delete as appropriate
t I f applying on behalf o f a sports club, company or some other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).

  Under the provisions of section 3 (1) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, a local authority
receiving an application for a safety certificate have to determine whether the person to whom the
certificate may be issued is likely to be in a position to prevent contravention o f the terms and
conditions of the certificate. The applicant should therefore furnish below the information required
so as to enable the local authority to make such a determination. Under section 3(4) of the Act the
local authority may also require the applicant to submit plans and further information.
(a) Section 10A was inserted by section 24 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.
(b) Section 10 was substituted by section 23(1) of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.
  1.         (a) Name and address of sports ground




       (b)     Name of the occupier...........

             Name and address of the owner



       (c)    Names and addresses of any persons other than the proposed holder of the certificate who
             to his knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with the terms and
             conditions of the safety certificate for which this application is being made.




Complete Part I onlyfo r an application fo r a general safety certificate ( to cover activities held over an
indefinite period).
Complete Part II onlyfo r an applicationfor a special safety certificate ( to cover one occasion or a series
o f occasions).



PART I: GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
  2.         List activities to be covered by general safety certificate




  3.     Give the approximate date of the construction of the spectator accommodation on the sports
ground and details of any subsequent extension, major alteration or re-construction of the spectator
accommodation on the sports ground, together with relevant dates.




  4. Give particulars of current fire certificates covering any premises on any part of the sports
ground:
       (a) name of issuing fire au th o rity ...................................................................................................

       (b) name of holder of fire certificate...............................................................................................

       (c) date of issue of fire certificate...................................................................................................

       (d) description of premises covered by the fire certificate...........................................................

  5. Give particulars o f any current statutory licences granted in respect of the sports ground or
parts of it:
       (a) name of issuing licensing authority..........................................................................................

       (b) name of licensee.........................................................................................................................

       (c) type of licence (liquor, gaming etc.)                          ......................................................................................

       (d) date of e x p iry ...................... ...................................................... ................................................

       (e) description of the part or parts of the sports ground covered by the licence                                                     ....................



                                                                            4
   6.—(1) State maximum capacity for which spectator accommodation at the sports ground is
intended:
     (a) seated spectators........................................................................................... ..............................

       (b) standing spectators......................................................................................................................

   (2) State any restrictions on that capacity:
       (a) seated spectators..........................................................................................................................

       (b) standing spectators......................................................................................................................


  7. Set out separately for each of the last three years the total number of seated spectators and
the total number of standing spectators for each activity other than reserve team matches, practice
sessions or community use, held at the sports ground. Each activity (other than those excluded)
should be named, together with the number of occasions on which each activity took place during
each of those years.

  8. Set out separately for each activity the total number of seated spectators and the total number
of standing spectators attending at the occasion during the last three years when that activity took
place which attracted the highest number of spectators. Give the date of that event and the name of
the activity taking place.


PART II. SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
    9. Name event for which special safety certificate is required



    10. Give date(s) of event


  11. Give the number o f occasions on which this special event has taken place at the sports
ground during the last three years ........................................................................................................

    12. Set out separately the total number of seated spectators and the total number of standing
 spectators at any similar event held within the last three years at the sports ground, giving the name
 of the event and the date on which it was held.




                                                  EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                          (This note is not part o f the Regulations)
  These Regulations, which apply throughout Great Britain (except the Isles of Stilly),
replace the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 (“ the 1976 Regulations ”) and the
Safety of Sports Grounds (Amendment) Regulations 1986 (which apply in England and
Wales, except the Isles of Stilly) and the Safety of Sports Grounds (Scotland) Regulations
1976 (“ the 1976 Scottish Regulations ”).
   Regulations 8 to 13 of the 1976 Regulations and regulations 9 and 10 of the 1976 Scottish
Regulations made provision for the procedure for appeals to the Secretary of State in
respect of safety certificates under section 5 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (“ the
1975 Act ”). When the amendments made by section 22 of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (“ the 1987 Act ”) come into force, those appeals will be made to
magistrates’ courts in England and Wales and by summary application in Scotland and
regulations 8 to 13 of the 1976 Regulations and regulations 9 and 10 of the 1976 Scottish
Regulations will no longer be necessary. By virtue of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places
of Sport Act 1987 (Commencement No. 1) Order 1987 (S.I. 1987/1762), Part II of the 1987
Act (in which section 22 is contained) comes into force on 1st January 1988, the same date
as the coming into force of these Regulations. Accordingly, these Regulations no longer
include provision corresponding to regulations 8 to 13 of the 1976 Regulations and
regulations 9 and 10 o f the 1976 Scottish Regulations (the enabling power for which is, in
any event, replaced by section 22 (7) of the 1987 Act) but provide instead (in regulation 6)
for the time within which an appeal must be brought before a magistrates’ court in England
and Wales or by summary application in Scotland.
  These Regulations also differ from the 1976 Regulations and the 1976 Scottish
Regulations in that they no longer prescribe a minimum time before the event for which
the application is made for the submission o f an application for a special safety certificate.
They also do not require the local authority to have made decisions in respect of such
applications by specified periods.
  Regulation 5 of these Regulations requires certain notices to be given to interested
parties (as defined) and a newspaper notice to be published. Regulation 8 of these
Regulations differs from regulation 14 of the 1976 Regulations and regulation 11 of the
1976 Scottish Regulations in that it allows local authorities to charge fees in respect of
applications for the replacement and transfer of safety certificates as well as for
applications for their issue and amendment.
  These Regulations also differ from the 1976 Regulations (as amended) and the 1976
Scottish Regulations in that they refer only to sports grounds and not to sports stadia in
consequence of the amendments made to the 1975 Act by section 19 of, and Schedule 2 to,
the 1987 Act (which provisions also come into force on 1st January 1988 by virtue of the
Commencement Order referred to above).
  Regulation 7 of these Regulations is a new provision which prescribes the period within
which appeals in respect of prohibition notices (and amendments to those notices) issued
under section 10 of the 1975 Act (as substituted by section 23 (1) of the 1987 Act) must be
brought under section 10A (1) and (2) of the 1975 Act (as inserted by section 24 o f the 1987
Act).




                                              £1 *30 net
                                  ISBN 0 11 077941                    X
                      Printed in the United Kingdom by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                                     790/W 01734 C13 11/87 3174871
            Iri'summary,           therefore,            X take the v i e w that          action can be t a k e n by

mean-5 of an o r d e r u n d e r -section 30 of the 3 975 Act,                              a-s o r i g i n a 3 1 y enacted,

before       the n e w Act cones into force,                          and that w h e n the ne w Act          is in force,

 a prohibition notice                    can be s e r v e d u n d e r the n e w s e c t i o n      30.     These     are

 the mos t di r e c t m eans              of p r o h i b i t i n g footba3 1 m a t c h e s     from taking p 3 a c e if

 charges      are no t           pai d    and the C h i e f C o n s t a b 3 e n o      3cnger wi s h e s     to prov i d e

spec i a 3 s e r v i c e s .       Other methods              of a c h i e v i n g this result       are set      out   above

 It s h o u 3 d be noted,            ha-ever,that the C h i e f C o n s t a b 3 e wi33 n e e d the co-oner-
                                     I
 ation of the            3oca3     authority, s i n c e that b o d y ajone has the p o w e r at presen

to a pp3y to the M a g i s t r a t e s                C ourt for a s e c t i o n      30 o r d e r and in f uture wi3 3

be thre b o d y        to issue          a prohibitiorr-notice.                N e v e r t h e 3ess , as a 3ast resort,

the    3oca3       a u t h o r i t y can be r e q u i r e d       to p e r f o r m   its duties u n d e r the Act b y

an o r d e r for mandamus,                 obtained         on judicia3        review.



            Quite       apart from the p r o v i s i o n ?             of the two Acts mentioned,                 it is

po s s i b l e that       the- C h i e f C o n s t a b l e m a y be       ab3e to act u n d e r the provi s i o n s

of s e c t i o n     3^1 of the Pu b 3 i c            O r d e r Act   3986,     T h i s .empowers h.in to give

dire c t i o n s    i m p o s i n g on the person-* o r g a n i s i n g or t a k i n g part              in a pub3ic

assemb3y such            conditions             as,    for exnnp]r> to the m a x i m u m n u m b e r of persons

wh o m a y c o n s t i t u t e     it,     as    appear to him n e c e s s a r y to p r e v e n t serious            public

disorder,          ser i o u s   da m a g e     to p r o p e r t y or serious        d i s r u p t i o n to the   3 if e of
      c o mmunity.        Public      a s s e m b l y is defi n e d    in s e c t i o n    l6 of the Act as

m e a n i n g an a s s e m b l y of 20 or m o r e p e r s o n s in a p u b l i c p l a c e w h i c h is

w h o l l y or p a r t l y o p e n to the air,          and the piifllic p l a c e         is any p l a c e to

which     at the m a t e r i a l time the pu b l i c has              access on p a y m e n t or o t h e r w i s e <=

A l t h o u g h this p r o v i s i o n was no t s p e c i f i c a l l y d i r e c t e d   towa r d s football

matches,      the d e f i n i t i o n of a p u b l i c     a s s e m b l y is   a r g u a b l y w i d e en o u g h to

c ov er s u c h   an event.         The sole       a d v antage of ac t i n g u n d e r this p a r t i c u l a r

p r o v i s i o n is that     it does n o t r e a u i r e the i n t e r v e n t i o n of the            local

authority.          Accordingly,         s i n c e the m a t t e r    is arguable,          I would not rec­

o m m e n d p r o c e e d i n g u n d e r this   Act un l e s s   a local       a u t h o r i t y r e f u s e d to

co-operate by          acting u n d e r the         1975 or "the 19&7 Act,                as the case m a y be.
              FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - IMPLEMENTATION OF PART ii (SAFETY
              OF SPORTS GROUNDS) (HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987) (P.22/02/12)   —     „ .                    /   j

1.1       Part ;i'l'of the 1987 Act, effective J r o m l January 1988,^consisting 'of Sections 19 to 25,
amends the' Safety "of," Sports Grounds^Act J1975 / (the''1975 ^Act)’ Irr 11 ne; with ’J h e Government's
proposals contaIned In the consultative document published In June 1986 In response to the safety
recommendations of the PopplewelI jnqujry set up following the fire tragedy at Valley Parade o p
11 May 1985. The main changes effected by Part 11 are as foilows:- .         *r'

              Section 19 - Removes the distinction between sports 'ground' and sports
              'stadium' with consequential modifications to Section 1 (2) of the 1975 Act
              dealing with the contents of safety certificates.

              Section 20 - Empowers the Secretary of State to vary the designation threshold
              of 10,000 under Section 1 of the 1975 Act.

               Section 21 - Precludes conditions In safety certificates relating to police
    ‘         presence unless the extent of the presence Is reserved for the Chief Officer
              of Pol Ice.
        ..J                              •

              Section 22 - Directs appeals under Section 5 of the 1975 Act to the Courts.

              Sections 23 and 24 - Replace the existing emergency procedure under Section 10
              by Introducing prohibition notices In the case of serious risks to spectators,
              and provision to appeal against them.

        " Section 25 - Places a duty on Local Authorities to enforce the 1975 Act and to
          arrange for annual Inspections of designated sports grounds in accordance with
          guidance from the Secretary of State.

1.2           Copies of the above mentioned document have been circulated to divisional commanders.

2             FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 -         IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY
              OF SPORTS GROUNDS) SECTION 25      (P.22/02/12)

2.1           Inspections Under Section 10B of the Safety       of Sports Grounds Act   1975


2.1.1         Home Office Circular No. 72/1987

              Further to Home Office Circular 71/1987 giving advice about the effects of
              changes brought about by implementation of Part ii of the Fire Safety and
              Safety of Places of Sport   Act 1987 (the 1987 Act), this circular introduces
              Statutory Guidance given      by the Secretary of State on      inspections of
              designated sports groundsunder Section 10B of the     Safety of Sports Grounds
              Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as   insertedby Section 25 of the 1987 Act.

              The Statutory Guidance, drawn up following consultation with the^ Local
              Authority Associations, has effect in respect of any inspection carried out
              under Section 10B of the 1975 Act after 1 January 1988 when, by virtue of the
              Commencement Number 1 Order, Part 11— of the 1987 Act comes intoeffect.


2.2           Copies of the above mentloned docurnent have been
                                                             G rO   P h /V : X   €3=1 te rn j u v j

                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                      REF:   OPS TWS/SM
FROM:     SUPT STUART OPERATIONS DIVISION            STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
TO:      CH SUPT HEROLD OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION       DATE:              2 December 1987

         SUBJECT:   HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987 AND 72/1987
                    AND STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS 1987 NO 1762 (C.54)
                    AND 1987 NO 1941




         The above mentioned circulars which come into effect from 1 January 1988
         amend parts of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 in line with the
         Government's proposals contained in the consultative document published
         in June 1986 in response to the safety recommendations of the Popplewell
         Inquiry set up following the fire tragedy atValley Parade on 11 May 1985.

         The main changes effected by Part II are as outlined below.

         I suggest that copies of the Home Office circulars and statutory instruments
         be forwarded for the information of divisional commanders and Chief
         Superintendent, Operations and Traffic, and that the following item be published
         on Part 1 of Force General Orders.

        fFIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 -
         IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)       Pu l \ o v f w
         (HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987)

              Part II of the 1987 Act, effective from 1 January 1988, consisting
              of Sections 19 - 25, amends the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
              (the 1975 Act) in line with the Government's proposals contained
              in the consultative document published in June 1986 in response
              to the safety recommendations of the Popplewell Inquiry set up
              following the fire tragedy at Valley Parade on 11 May 1985. The
              main changes effected by Part II are as follows

              Section 19 - Removes the distinction between sports 'ground'
              and sports 'stadium' with consequential modifications to Section
              1 (2) of the 1975 Act dealing with the contents of safety
              certificates.

            , Section 20 - Empowers the Secretary of State to vary the
              designation threshold of 10,000 under Section 1 of the 1975
              Act.

              Section 21 - Precludes conditions in safety certificates relating
              to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
              reserved for the Chief Officer of Police.

              Section 22 - Directs appeals under Section 5 of the 1975 Act to
              the courts.

              Sections 23 and 24 - Replaces the existing emergency procedure
              under Section 10 by introducing prohibition notices in the case
              of serious risks to spectators, and provision to appeal against them.
     Section 25 - Places a duty on local authorities to enforce the
     1975 Act and to arrange for annual inspections of designated
     sports grounds in accordance with guidance from the Secretary
     of State.

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 -
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)
SECTION 25

INSPECTIONS UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
ACT 1975

HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 72/1987

     Further to HOC/71/87 giving advice about the effects of changes
     brought about by implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and
     Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) this circular
     introduces Statutory Guidance given by the Secretary of State on
     inspections of designated sports grounds under Section 10B of the
     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as inserted by
     Section 25 of the 1987 Act.

     The Statutory Guidance, drawn up following consultation with the
     local authority associations, has effect in respect of any
     inspection carried out under Section 10B of the 1975 Act after
     1 January 1988 when, by virtue of the Commencement Number 1 Order,
     Part II of the 1987 Act comes into effect.

Copies of the above mentioned documents have been circulated to
  visional commanders.

The Superintendent (Operations) and a divisional senior officer, will
continue to be part of the inspection team and will advise and assist
local authorities with ground inspections.




Superintendent
F /L a / A /5645(43)

                                ROTHERHAM METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL
                                                                                                                                                              oi    a
                                                                                                                                                                   ('
                                 T. C. MUMFORD, M.A., Solicitor
                                 Director of Legal and Administrative Services

                                Civic Building,
                                Walker Place,
                                Rotherham, S65 1 UF.

M y R e fe re n c e :             Y o u r R e fe re n c e :          T e le p h o n e :                E x tg n § jo n
 MDF/CAS                            MS/JBB/JW                                                            3 ; ‘§ r n -          11th December, 1987.
                                                                     R o th e r h a m
 10.10                                                               (0 7 0 9 ) 3 8 2 1 2 1




 The C hief Constable,                                                                                                              ■so u th
 South Yorkshire Police,
 Snig Hill,
 SHEFFIELD.       S3 8LY                                                                                                                          1 5DECW&7


 Dear Sir,

 Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport A ct 1987
 Safety C ertifica te - Millmoor Football Ground

 I refer to your le tte r of 3rd Decem ber relating to the above.          As Safety
 C ertifica tes are the responsibility of an Environmental Health C om m ittee I have
 forwarded your le tte r to the Director of Environmental Health and requested him
 to take the appropriate action thereon.

  Yours faithfully,




                                                »---------------
  for the Director of Legal and Administrative Services.



P le a s e a d d r e s s le t t e r s im p e r s o n a lly t o t h e D ir e c t o r o f L e g a l a n d A d m in is t r a t iv e S e r v ic e s
                                                                         P/'J • k- fotJocMCw




       The Chief Executive                              Your Ref;
       Rotherham Civic Building
       Walker Place                                     Our Ref: MS/JDB/JW
       ROTHERHAM
                                                        Date:       3 December 1987




       Dear Sir

       RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
       IN RESPECT OF MILMOOR FOOTBALL GOUND

       1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
       police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
       issued in respect of Milmoor Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
       Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
       implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
       Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

       The terms of this condition, in its reference to the number of police
       officers required to attend at football matches being agreed, are
       incompatible with the provisions of the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
       2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
       officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
       become void.

       I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
       of amendment under Section 4 of the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
       changes.

       I await hearing from you.

       Yours faithfully




       Chief Constable



'to*   A          (towed ^ I.                         3 ^ SwwWo)' omX       w*   o*.        +
       The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Insp. Bennett    Ext: 3438 C jC.
       All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable"
                                                                                       *
                                                              i-jo




The Chief Executive                             Your Ref:
Barnsley Town Hall
BARNSLEY                                        Our Refs    MS/JDB/JW

                                                Date;       3 December 1987




Dear Sir

RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
IN RESPECT OF OAKWELL FOOTBALL GOUND

1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
issued in respect of Oakwe11 Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

The terms of this condition, in its reference to the number of police
officers required to attend at football matches being agreed, are
incompatible with the provisions of the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
become void.

I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
of amendment under Section 4 of. the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
changes.

I await hearing from you.

Yours faithfully •




Chief Constable




The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Insp. Bennett      Ext: 3438
All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable"
                                                           f-'/o : k.-




                                                                   \


The Legal and Admin Department                  Your Ref
Sheffield Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                       Our Ref:    MS/JDB/JW
SI 2HH
                                                Date:       3 December 1987




Dear Sir

RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATES
IN RESPECT OF BRAMALL LANE AND HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUNDS

Having in mind the implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987 on 1 January 1988, I shall be obliged for your
confirmation that the condition relative to the attendance of police officers
at football matches in the Safety Certificates issued in respect of Bramall
Lane and Hillsborough has been amended to comply with the new Sub Section
(2A) added to Section 2 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable




The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Insp. Bennett        Ext: 3438
All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable”
                                                            P/o'      x>o^ic ouotsJ




The Chief Executive                              Your Ref
PO Box 71
Copley House                                     Our Ref: MS/JDB/JW
Waterdale
DONCASTER                                        Date       3 December 1987




Dear Sir

RE: FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
IN RESPECT OF BELLE VIEW FOOTBALL GOUND

1 would draw your attention to the condition relative to the attendance of
police officers at football matches contained in the Safety Certificate
issued in respect of Belle View Football Ground under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and the need for this to be amended arising out of the
implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 on 1 January 1988.

The terms of this condition, in       its reference to the number of police
officers required to attend atfootball matches being agreed, are
incompatible with the provisions of^the new Sub Section (2A) added to Section
2 of the 1975 Act and require amendment to provide for the number of police
officers to be determined by the Chief Constable if the condition is not to
become void.

I shall be obliged for your confirmation that you will exercise your powers
of amendment under Section 4 of     the 1975 Act to effect the necessary
changes.

I await hearing from you.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable




The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Insp. Bennett    Ext: 3438
All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable"
      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



         F IL E REFERENCE             ^        ■   02.   )?                MINUTE SHEET NO


         SUBJECT            ~ 7 l ,




        CLo>(               S                       (k. s
                             rvu^          "jjuzA             ijLJc           kJ»~o                      N.
             £ ) * J b tJ       to                 L jk U * .      f~ e J U u * j.c ^   (s»       <0.5



                                               W              ^   c4                    ^     ^




                                          jl
 SOUTH YORKS. POLICE
                    q

     ~ 5 MOV 11


                             d
CHIEF §UPEf;!K-1€f'; D£WT !
MA.NAGe^UM SERVICES




  G E N /1
                                                                                                w                 SOUTH YORKS, POLIC8 "


                     S T A T U T O R Y                  I N S T R U M E N T S
                                                                                                                       3     NOV 1967
                                                                                                                     HEADQUARTERS         ~

                                            1987 No. 1689
                                                                                                                  !' c x y p v I LD c a
     SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS                                                                                      \J Jzrrr'


             The Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation)
                             Order 1987

                       Made       -     -      -                  24th September 1987
                       Laid before Parliament                          1st October 1987
                       Coming into force                              31 st October 1987


In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 1(1) of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in section 18(4) of
that Act, I hereby make the following Order:

  1. This O rder may be cited as the Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Order
1987 and shall come into force on 31st October 1987.

  2. The sports stadium at The Athletic Ground, Seamer Road, Scarborough, North
Yorkshire (being a stadium which in the opinion of the Secretary of State has
accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators) is hereby designated as a stadium
requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.



                                                                                       Douglas Hurd
Home Office                                        One of H er Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State
24th September 1987




(a) 1975 c.52; section 1(1) was amended by Schedule 2 to the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
(c. 27) but the amendments are not yet in force.
                                   EXPLANATORY NOTE
                             (This note is not part o f the Order)

   By this O rder the Secretary of State designates the sports stadium referred to in
article 2 of it as a stadium requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975.




                                               45p net
                                     ISBN 0 11 077689 5

                     Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                    790    W01497       C ll     10/87    452     7102      PS 7944001
:
.,\ uu10

   ;G(M.S)




^^tiL      I   vAXflL^C-
                 MINUTES OF MEETING BETWEEN LOCAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS         -
           OFFICIALS AND SENIOR POLICE OFFICERS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
       HELD AT 11.30 AM ON FRIDAY 24 JULY 1987 AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD



    PRESENT

W W Jackson Esq, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) - Chairman
Chief Superintendents Meadows, Lodge, Broomhead
Superintendents Doyle, Vallance, Duckenfield
Chief Inspectors Waring and Murray
M Spinks Esq - Secretary Barnsley Football Club
R Buckle Esq - Chairman Barnsley Football Club
K G Hulley Esq, Director - Sheffield Wednesday FC
G McKreel Esq, Secretary SWFC
Mrs S L Lane. A/Secretary - SWFC
K Booth Esq, Chairman Rotherham United FC
N Darnall Esq Secretary Rotherham United FC
K Agar - Commercial Manager - Doncaster Rovers FC
Mr K J Oldale - Doncaster Rovers FC
G E Smith Esq - Secretary Sheffield United FC

APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies for absence were received from Derek Dooley Esq, Sheffield United
Football Club.

MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 6 August 1986 which had been previously
circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record.

MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

a       Close Circuit Television

        The Chairman invited comment from the members as to the success or
        otherwise of Close Circuit Television over the last season.

        Chief Superintendent Lodge said that the equipment at Barnsley had proved
        success and a number of excellent arrests had resulted from it.

        He continued by saying the equipment had also proved invaluable for
        intelligence gathering.

        A short discussion took place and it was generally agreed that the
        installation of Close Circuit Televisions at football grounds within South
        Yorkshire had been a success.

        Item discharged.

b      Conduct of Players and Officials

       Mr Jackson referred to item 3 on the previous minutes and said that in
       general the conduct of players and officials was good and every
       encouragement should be given for this to continue.
s                                         - 2 -



         Members of the meeting agreed with the comments made by the Chairman.

         Item discharged.

    c    Supply of Alcohol

         Club representatives queried the need for control of sale of alcohol in the
         grounds and said that it created a tendency to drink outside the ground and
         supporters arrived not too long before the match started.

         Mr Jackson said there was plenty of evidence by way of practical experience
         and research that alcohol was a motivating factor in the commission of
         offences and a causation of hooliganism. He said that prior to the
         legislation he had policed a first division ground and the fans arrived not
         long before the game started having been drinking elsewhere. He said it
         was the topping up of alcohol inside the ground that could cause problems.

         He had noticed a tendency, however, for problems to develop away from the
         grounds and that he was a member of the National Working Party who would be
         considering all such matters to try in co-operation with clubs and everyone
         else with a vested interested, to resolve the issues. In the meantime,
         clubs and the police should continue their efforts to fight hooliganism and
         make their views known as certainly had been done so in the past.

    EMERGENCY EVACUATION AND STEWARDING

    The Chairman referred to documentation previously circulated outlining notes of
    guidance for Stewarding and Emergency Evacuation Procedures. He stressed the
    need to ensure that there was appropriate briefing by the clubs and the
    appointment of fit and responsible persons. For our part, we would assist and
    give advice.

    It was agreed by everyone that we should continue to ensure that public safety
    wasparamount and that the high standard of awareness would continue.

    Item discharged


    EXCLUSION ORDERS

    The Chairman circulated guidance and said that from 1 August 1987 persons
    arrested at football grounds having committed certain types of offences would be
    subject to Exclusion Orders.

    Mr Jackson briefly outlined the procedure to obtain Exclusion Orders and its
    effect on police and football clubs.
:                                    - 3 -



ALL TICKET MATCHES - FANS ARRIVING AT MATCHES WITHOUT TICKETS

Chief Superintendent Lodge said that their first match of the season was Leeds
United v Barnsley and although it was an all ticket match a substantial amount
of supporters would attend without tickets.

He continued by saying that this could create policing problems and there had
been suggestions that supporters could be allowed entry to the ground but this
would defeat the object of all ticket matches.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that this created two police operations one
inside the ground and another outside and by allowing persons into the ground
without tickets, would lose the credibility of all ticket matches and cause
general problems for others.

Mr Broomhead continued by saying that it was general policy to publish in the
local press and the programmes that persons attending without tickets would be
turned away.

Mr Jackson agreed with the general view of the members that persons without
tickets should not be allowed entry or otherwise we would never stop non-ticket
holders coming thus aggravating future policing operations.


MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES

The Chairman said that this was a government initiative aimed at lessening
hooliganism at grounds.

He noted that clubs in South Yorkshire had not gone for a scheme which included
photographs and said it was generally felt that photographs should have been
included on the cards.

Mr Spinks, Secretary of Barnsley Football Club said that to date, they had not
agreed on a Membership Scheme as the Football League Working Party had rejected
their Scheme on a technicality and proposed an amended Scheme.

He continued by saying that the amended scheme was unacceptable in relation to
the segregation of members and non members and therefore was rejected by the
club.

Mr Spinks said that they intended resubmitting proposals back to the Football
League Working Party and welcomed any comment the police wished to make and
indeed invited officers to attend the ground to facilitate those actions.

The Chairman said that Barnsley Football Club should try and resolve the
situation with the Football League Working Party and as it was their
responsibility to consider them and monitor them, but there was no doubt the
police would be asked to comment to assist the future evaluations.
                                     - 4 -



Representatives from Barnsley Football Club said they would rather have no
scheme than accept proposals that were not constructive and workable. The
Chairman said that future developments and evaluations would hopefully determine
the use of such schemes.

Item deferred.

POLICE ROOM AT OAKWELL GROUND - UP DATE

Chief Superintendent Lodge said that the new police control room at Oakwell
Football Ground would be an asset to all concerned.

He thanked the representatives of Barnsley Football Club for their help and said
that the new control room would assist in better policing especially inside the
ground, ie: camera sightings, personnel address system and possible evacuation
procedures.

The Chairman agreed and thanked everyone concerned.

Item discharged.

POLICING ARRANGEMENTS 1987/88

The Chairman said that in addition to comments made earlier under Policing
Arrangements 1986/87, we should continue to work together and any problems
encountered by football clubs within the area should be discussed with the
appropriate commander.

Mr Jackson said that football is a national sport to be enjoyed by families and
we should strive to stamp out hooliganism in whatever form.

Item discharged.

There being no further business the meeting closed at 12.25 pm.
      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



           F I L E REFERENCE                                                                           MINUTE SHEET NO / '


           SUBJECT




    A          £ fh * 4 t£ *                                                                           if         «-*~y



|    v v w " i      i v n .v ij,   * UUUC            1         S O U T H Y Q R ;< S .   p o l ic e




               16S£pm                                                    1 7 5 E P 1987
    C F !D P   S •; H : R 1; \ ' T E f t D E N T
                                                              C H IE r   3 ji> F .filN T E N O E N T
^   MANAGEMENT                 s e r v ic e s      ""™
                                                              O P E R A T IO N S % T R A F F IC




    >c ^
                                                                                                            |v4
                                                   (v e > ^




    G E N /I
                                                              tfeSES- Is®
                                       H O M E 01
                              Queen Anne’s Gate Lo                     £R§^
                                          Direct line C     Tn^iNTsTRA^O^
                                       Switchboard 01-


Our reference
                 QPE/86 52/3/52                           14 September 1987
Your reference



  The Chief Officer of Police (England and Wales)
  The Chief Clerk to the Crown Court
  The Clerk to the justices (with a copy to the Chairman of the
    Bench for the information of the Justices)
  The Chief Executive of county, district and London borough
    councils, and of the Common Council of the City of London
  The Clerk to the Police Authority
  The Circuit Administrator
  The Clerk to the Magistrates' Courts Committee
  The Courts' Administrator




  Dear Sir


  HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR HO 54/1987
  THE SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS (DESIGNATION) (AMENDMENT)
  ORDER 1987


  This circular concerns the Sports Grounds and Sporting Events
  (Designation) (Amendment) Order 1987 which comes into force on
  30 September 1987. A copy of the Order (SI 1987 No 1520) is
  enclosed. The Order extends to England and Wales only.

  2.   The Sports Grounds and Sporting Events (Designation)Order
  1985 (SI 1985 No 1151) set out those matches designated for the
  purposes of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act
  1985. Home Office Circular No 59/1985 refers. Paragraph 3 of
  Part I of Schedule 2 to that Order incompletely describes two of
  the three international competitions as the "European Cup* and
  the "Cup Winners' Cup". The full formal titles of these
  competitions are the "European Champion Clubs' Cup" and the
  "European Cup Winners' Cup". The full titles were included in
  Article 3 of the recent Public Order (Football Exlusion) Order
  1987 (SI 1987 No 853).
   3.   The Sports Grounds and Sporting events (Designation)
   (Amendment) Order 1987 corrects the titles in the earlier order
   to ensure that confusion does not arise over the same matches
   being described in different terms under different legislation.
   The amendment is solely one of terminology and will have no
   effect on the operation of the legislation.
4.    Any enquiries about this circular should be addressed to



                                                Yours faithfully




ENC
                      S T A T U TO R Y             INSTRUMENTS                     SOUIH YORKS. P O tic T "


                                                                                          16SEPB87
                                        1987 No. 1520
                                                                                       h eadquarters
        SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EV|E N T ^ M fi'S T R ^ :iO!:N                                     r~

 The Sports Grounds and Sporting Events (Designation)
              (Amendment) Order 1987

                      Made    -                               25th August 1987
                      Laid before Parliament                4th September 1987
                      Coming into force                    30th September 1987


In exercise of the powers conferred on me by section 9(3) of the Sporting Events (Control
of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985(a), I hereby make the following Order:

  1. This Order may be cited as the Sports Grounds and Sporting Events (Designation)
(Amendment) Order 1987 and shall come into force on 30th September 1987.

  2. Paragraph 3 of Part I of Schedule 2 to the Sports Grounds and Sporting Events
(Designation) Order 1985 (b ) and paragraph 2 of Part III of that Schedule shall be amended
by-
    (a) inserting in sub-paragraph (a) of each of those paragraphs, after the word “Euro­
         pean”, the words “Champion Clubs’ and
    (b) inserting in sub-paragraph (b) of each of those paragraphs, after the word “the”,
         the word “European”.




Home Office                                                                      Douglas Hurd
25th August 1987                             One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                       EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                  (This note is not part o f the Order)

  This Order amends the Sports Grounds and Sporting Events (Designation) Order 1985
(which designates sports grounds and sporting events for the purposes of the Sporting Events
(Control of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985) by substituting the current full formal titles of certain
competitions referred to therein. The change is purely one of nomenclature, not of substance.




(a) 1985 c.57.
(b) S.I. 1985/1151.
         ST A T U T O R Y                      INSTRUMENTS
                                                                                             ♦




                                                                                                 *
                                1987 No. 1520

   SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

The Sports Grounds and Sporting Events (Designation)
             (Amendment) Order 1987




                                           45p net
                                  ISBN 0 11 077520 1

         Printed by HMSO, Edinburgh Press and published by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
            790    WO 1382    C32    9/87    452/4    19542    PS 7944009      (247416)
\                                                                      p 3 a |o x |t> tw




    ■ 1          MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES FOR FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS                  (P.22/02/12)

     1.1       All Football League clubs have been asked by the Football League to develop and
     introduce a membership scheme for designated areas of their grounds by the beginning of the
     1987/88 football season.   These areas are to be reserved for members only and the scheme has to
     cover at least 50? of each ground's capacity.

      1.2       To meet this criteria, all five South Yorkshire Football League clubs have made the
      following areas of their grounds 'designated membership area' for the 1987/88 season:-

                 Doncaster Rovers FootbaI I Club    -           'C' Block seating main stand and 'C' Block
                 terrace standing.

                 Rotherham United Football   Club       -        All    seats and terrace     In main stand and
                 Mlllmoor Lane stand.

                 Sheffield United Football Club     -           John Street stand and terrace.        New South
                 stand.

                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club          -     North stand only.

                 Barnsley Football Club   - No scheme has yet been agreed.     Discussions are
                 continuing with the FA and details will be published when available.

      1.3         Every supporter, therefore, must be a member of the scheme In order to gain access to
      these   areas of the grounds If they wish to attend any of the next season's Football League
      matches.

      1.4        The 'Membership Scheme' In respect of all the league clubs In South Yorkshire Is being
      administered on behalf of the clubs by Coggon Computers Ltd, 145 Bel Ihouse Road, Sheffield.  The
      system has been devised Incorporating advice from the Police and a specimen card Is shown at
      Appendix 'A'. Full membership cards are only available from Coggons.

      1.5       Appropriate turnstiles will be designated by the club as access points for membership
      card holders.  The clubs are responsible for Instituting a turnstile checking system, these to be
      stewarded by the cIub and cards to be shown to gain access.

      1.6       An up-to-date 'register of members' will be       available at each club (as will    an
      up-to-date blacklist) and whilst membership cards cannot be Issued at the ground, (these are
      posted   to the applicant by Coggon Computers Ltd) any person wishing to gain access to         a
      'designated membership area' on the day of a League game should be directed to the club's offices
      where temporary 'day membership' can be made available on application for full membership.

      1.7        All the South Yorkshire clubs, with the exception of Sheffield Wednesday FC, Intend to
      Issuemembership cards to those     season ticket holders using designated areas of the ground.
      Sheffield Wednesday FC applicants for season tickets wlII not have a membership card, the season
      ticket holders documentation being recognised as a membership scheme card.    Those season ticket
      holders who are Included on a family application for, say, four season tickets will, except for
      the applicant, have a membership card as well as season ticket documentation.   The season ticket
      documents and membership scheme card will bear a club membership scheme Identification number.
      The season tickets and membership cards will, however, be In the name and address of the
      applicant, but cards should bear the signature of the Individual holder.
1        MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES FOR FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS        (C o n ti n u e d )

1.8       Police officers should NOT seize any season ticket documentation         in                    respect   of
'membership schemes' but should make a note of the full details of the season ticket.

1.9      All    members of these schemes will   be informed by letter, when they receive their card,
that it has been issued subject to the following conditions:-

          (a)    In the event    of detention by the Police resulting inejection from the
                 ground for     contravening the ground regulations,    or  arrest and court
                 proceedings    for an offence, any membership card found in possession of
                 any detained    person will be seized and returned to the club.

          (b)    Conviction for an offence associated with attendance ata football                 match
                 will result in indefinite loss of membership.

          (c)    Ejection for a breach of ground regulations will                  result   in membership
                 suspension for a period of 12 months.

          (d)    Ejection on more than one occasion will entail         loss of membership         for an
                 indefinite length of time.

          (e)    The matters appertaining to loss or suspension of membership to be at the
                 discretion of the club.

          (f)    This card must be produced at all football league matches and at other
                 fixtures as requested by the Football League and Football Association to
                 gain entry into designated areas.

1.10     Membership cards carry the statement that 'the card remains the property of the club'.
Any card seized by the Police will be    submitted with a report, as soon as practicable after
seizure, to the senior police officer in charge at the ground.Details of   such seizures should
also be included on the football match summary.

1.11       Force policy, therefore, is to   retain membership cards on arrest and ejection.    The
cards will be returned to the club and,    iff the case of an ejection, the club will be given the
reason.    Where the person(s) is to be prosecuted, the club will be informed of the arrest, the
nature of the charge and the court date.                                                    .      ...      — -—
                                                                APPENDIX




Sheffield Wednesday
football CLfopIc
Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
Telephone: (0742) 343122
                    SEASON 1 9 8 7 -8 8
 Please present this card for admission to Membership Area.




                           SIGNATURE
     This is NOT a Guarantee of admission to the Ground.
                    Produced By Coggon Computers.




                            FRONT



    MR    (




   MEMBERSHIP             NO
         This card remains the property of the Club.

          I.Tjrjr.TaT'J•!£S'I3£t1aS2'Tn
                                 SHEmBD             WW-455661

                            BACK
        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



            FILE   REFERENCE                                                     MINUTE SHEET NO


            SUBJECT     FOOTBALL CLUB MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES - DRAFT GENERAL ORDER

                                                   2

 Chief Superintendent Meadows,

 Supt Stuart has prepared a draft Order and left it pending with me for an update
 on the Barnsley scheme at todays meeting with the Club officials and Senior Officers.
 You will recall that the Barnsley scheme is far from finalised. It is suggested
 therefore that we publish the details of existing schemes in good time for the
 season and the Barnsley scheme when known. The draft is submitted herewith for
 approval.
                                   -TH VCRKS. POLMEE


     A TODTJWTTO
                                   2 7 J U L B87
 Operations
 2k 7 87                  c 1-!i i f s y P E R i r r r e n d e n t '
                        ' ^OPERATIONS & TR AFR C ~




 z




                                                                                                          B: ^ JOLrJ^              |


SOUTH                                                                                             2 8 JUS- ivS7

                                                        3 // v .                           c^ifer s .:p e r i n t e n -   en   L
                                                                       S ^   X    ^          ;   „ , | , : S ,    i ;.A r i:iC


  MA!SIAC

                                                             <^ ^ 1<Kv-v.ssv \           'S v \i~- '\>-v^K
DRAFT GENERAL ORDER



MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES FOR FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS                       f22/02/a
1.1     All Football League clubs have been asked by the Football League

to develop and introduce a membership scheme for specific designated areas

of their grounds by the beginning of the 1987/88 football season.                         These

areas are to be reserved for members only and the scheme has to cover at

least 50% of each ground's capacity.



1.2     To meet this criteria all five South Yorkshire Football League

clubs have made the following areas of their grounds 'designated membership

area' for the 1987/88 season:-


      X Barnsley Football Club ^
            ifi'iSfrvi'*   lie 1 OvJ   S/JCZP    a^cl
                                                                          *       ' /t.    AN*-
            flo X>c^eme            if*? JkxJL*                    C ort       <**>v
                    c(e      ^ f a                      / * . .
        Doncaster Rovers Football Club - 'C' Block seating main stand

        and 'C' Block terrace standing.



        Rotherham United Football Club - All seats and terrace in main stand

        and Millmoor Lane stand.



        Sheffield United Football Club - John Street stand and terrace.

        New South Stand.



        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - North stand only.

      ''W                                 X

1.3     Every supporter therefore must be a member of the scheme in order

to gain acceaef'to these areak of the grounds if they wish to attend any of
           /    fo o \^ c M  )
next season(s 'TODAY" /eaguy matches.
1.4       The 'Membership Scheme' in respect of all the league clubs in

South Yorkshire is being administered on behalf of the clubs by Coggon

Computers Ltd, 145 Bellhouse Road, Sheffield.    The system has been devised

incorporating advice from the Police and a specimen card is shown at

Appendix 'A'.    Full membership cards are only available from Coggons.



1.5       Appropriate turnstiles will be designated by the club as access

points for membership card holders.    The clubs are responsible for

instituting a turnstile checking system, these to be stewarded by the

club and cards to be shown to gain access.



1.6       An up to date 'register of members' will be available at each

club (as will an up to date blacklist) and whilst membership cards cannot

be issued at the ground, (these are posted to the applicant by Coggon

Coitputers Ltd) any person wishing to gain access to a 'designated membership

area' on the day of a 'TODAY' league game should be directed to the club's

offices where temporary 'day membership' can be made available on application

for full membership.



1.7       All the South Yorkshire clubs, with the exception of Sheffield

Wednesday FC, intend to issue membership cards to those season ticket

holders using designated areas of the ground.    Sheffield Wednesday FC

applicants for season tickets will not have a membership card, the season

ticket holders documentation being recognised as a membership scheme card.

Those season ticket holders who are included on a family application for

say four season tickets will, except for the applicant, have a membership

card as well as season ticket documentation. The season ticket documents

and membership scheme card will bear a club membership scheme identification

number.    The season tickets and membership cards will however be in the

name and address of the applicant but cards should bear the signature of

the individual holder.
1.8     Police officers should NOT seize any season ticket documentation

in respect of 'membership schemes' but should make a note of the full

details of the season ticket.



1.9     Members of these schemes will all be informed by letter when they

receive their card that it has been issued subject to the following

conditions:-


        a) In the event of detention by the Police resulting in

           ejection from the ground for contravening the ground

           regulations or arrest and court proceedings for an

           offence, any membership card found in possession of

           any detained person will be seized and returned to

           the club.


        b) Conviction for an offence associated with attendance

           at a football match will result in indefinite loss

           of membership.


        c) Ejection for a breach of ground regulations will result

           in membership suspension for a period of 12 months.


        d) Ejection on more than one occasion will entail loss

           of membership for an indefinite length of time.


        e) The matters appertaining to loss or suspension of membership

           to be at the discretion of the club.


        f) This card must be produced at all football league matches

           and at other fixtures as requested by the Football League

           and Football Association to gain extry into designated

      X    areas.
1.10    Membership cards carry the statement that 'the card remains

the property of the club'. Any cards seized by the Police will be

submitted with a report, as soon as practicable after seizure, to the

senior police officer in charge at the ground.   Details of such seizures

should also be included on the football match summary.



1.11    Force policy therefore is to retain membership cards on arrest

and ejection.   The cards will be returned to the club who in the case

of an ejection will be given the reason.   Where the person(s) is to be

prosecuted, the club should be informed of the arrest, the nature of the

charge and the court date.
         f



               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                    MINUTE SHEET



                   FIL E REFERENCE                               (Z                     MINUTE SHEET NO

                                              .                  £ cS & \   & SoJ^ e|L fasuea- ^ "Sp&Jr
                  su b je ct         VK)C                                   fr                            .,_________
                                                         -   \


       ftcc(<s«s^
                        ^                     \fcllA. fee CA-CvN/pU ( o           Q*         cudlvstK s    v«vUA4ed .Cb|*j poA&ai &
Ift.                    C.C g)MortC^                 €> S«(plr C-i^b.




                                         v > J£*         ^          < y l-


              V\aU            V.                                      \                      V v


               \v o                                                         V v_Qjs_-^ s-o                   v-i k

                                                                                 cT")   * 0 ^ ,


               jVu^r\0'v{f’^ -


                                                                                        b *7 • i i

                                                         i

                  ^c*/.              &   G   z - h   -



                   /I U ~ 1 — ,                          ■

                  A p -            / f C ~         '^ z s        7 /?

                        U m Z Z /.                       ^

             G E N /I
                                                  HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne’s Gate L o n d o n SW1H 9AT
                                                  Direct line: 01-213 “ 5212
                                               Switchboard: 01-

O u r reference:   FEP/87 6/233/1
Y our reference:                     •                                    ^ 6 JUL i9?7
      Chief Executives - County Councils                     MANAC
                         Metropolitan District Councils V----- SEB
                         London Boroughs                I    —
                         Common Council of the City of London
                         District Councils


      Clerks, Fire and Civil Defence Authorities                   POLICY FILE
      Chief Officers of Police
                                                            RtTuftN-fO AOMIN DEPT
                                                            —   1 " JULY- i y 6 7   i I


      Dear Sir

      HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 4 2 / 1 9 8 7
      FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1 9 8 7 : TIMETABLE FOR
      IMPLEMENTATION

      The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Bill received Royal
      Assent on 15 May 1987. Section 50 of the Act provides for
      commencement by order and enables different provisions to be
      brought into force on different days.  It is envisaged that
      implementation will be in a number of phases, and it is the
      purpose of this circular to give a provisional timetable for
      those phases.

      Part I : Fire safety

      2.   It is intended that the provisions of Part 1 of the Act will
      be implemented in four phases as follows:

      Phase 1
      3.   The first commencement order will bring into operation the
      sections which stand on their own, and do not require any
      supporting material other than guidance to fire authorities. At
      this stage it is expected that the provisions relating to charges
      for fire certification work, prohibition notices, definition of
      "escape", disclosure of information obtained in premises, civil
      and other liability, restriction of defence in breaches of fire
      certificate requirements, application to the Crown, and possibly
      the interim duties as regards safety pending determination of an
      application for a fire certificate, will be brought into effect,
      early in 1988. The provisions relating to removal of exemption
      for premises used for public religious worship and extension of
      powers applying the Act to places of work in the open air will
      probably be brought into effect at the same time, although there
      is no intention at present to require places of worship to have a
                                                                *     „   *            j
                                                                              N»

E.R
                                                                      •            •
      fire certificate, nor to make regulations applying the Act to
      places of work in the open air.

      4.   General guidance on the effect of these new provisions will
      be given to fire authorities in the form of a Fire Service
      Circular.

      Phase 2

      5.   The second commencement order will bring into operation the
      power to exempt premises from the requirement to have a fire
      certificate. This will enable a new designation order to be made
      in respect of factories, offices, shops and railway premises
      which will specify the description of premises which qualify for
      consideration for exemption.  (It is not proposed to make a new
      designation order in respect of hotels and boarding houses). At
      the same time, the sections of the new Act relating to the duty
      for exempted and non-certificated premises to be provided with
      adequate means of escape and means for fighting fire, and the
      special provisions for certain premises set out in Schedule 1 to
      the 1987 Act (the new Schedule 2 to the Fire Precautions Act
      1971), will be brought into operation. This will enable the Fire
      Precautions (Non-Certificated Factory, Office, Shop and Railway
      Premises) Regulations 1976 and the Fire Precautions Act 1971
      (Modifications) Regulations 1976 to be revoked.

      6.   Guidance will need to be issued to fire authorities on the
      exercise of their discretionary power to exempt certain low risk
      premises from certification, once the new designation order has
      been made. The form this might take is set out in Annex C of the
      consultative document "Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Venues".
      In addition, codes of practice to provide guidance on how to
      comply with the duty imposed in relation to exempted and non­
      certificated premises will need to be prepared and published
      before the designation order can be brought into effect. Both
      the designation order and the codes of practice have to be laid
      before Parliament and are subject to the negative resolution
      procedure.

      7.   Coupled with this phase will be a revision of the existing
      guides to fire precautions in hotels and boarding houses,
      factories, and offices, shops and railway premises. It is hoped
      that this phase will be completed later in 1988.

      Phase 3

      8.   The third phase, which will bring into operation the section
      imposing a duty on fire authorities to inspect premises, is
      dependent on the availability of resources.  It is not at present
      intended to bring this duty into force until the new designation
      order has taken effect and it has been possible to assess the
      impact on fire service resources brought about by the exemption
      provision.  In any event, in carrying out this duty, fire
      authorities are required to act in accordance with any guidance
      given by the Secretary of State.  It is intended to draw up such
      guidance on the frequency and extent of inspections for
      different uses of premises, having regard to the degree of risk
      associated with each use and the resources available for this
task.

Phase 4

9.   The fourth and final phase is likely to be the bringing into
operation of the new provision relating to automatic means for
fighting fire. However, this provision will not be brought into
effect unless and until such systems have reached the stage where
they are acceptable in a life safety context. Advice would be
incorporated in the relevant guides to the 1971 Act, about the
circumstances in which a requirement for such measures might be
appropriate.  In the meantime, consideration will be given to the
possibility of making regulations under s.12 of the 1971 Act to
require automatic means for fighting fire in certain town centre
developments.


Parts II and III; Safety of sports grounds and safety of stands
at sports grounds
10. Subject to consultation with representatives of the local
certificating authorities and sporting bodies it is intended that
the provisions of Part II, amending the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975, covering the power to designate, police presence,
prohibition notices, inspections and appeals, will be implemented
in early 1988; and to implement those of Part III, introducing a
system of safety certification for stands with covered
accommodation for 500 or more spectators (regulated stands) later
in the same year.

11. Following consultation with the local authority associations
which is now in progress, guidance will be issued to local
authorities on the inspection of designated sports grounds and
regulated stands. There will also be guidance on the use of the
power to issue a prohibition notice.  In addition, it will be
necessary to amend the existing regulations on appeal procedures
and make regulations in respect of Part III of the Act. Such
regulations have to be laid before Parliament and are subject to
the negative resolution procedure.

Part IV: Indoor Sports Licences

12. Subject to the outcome of discussions with representatives
of the licensing authorities, it is hoped that the provisions of
Part IV of the Bill will be given effect in Spring 1988.
Guidance on the effect of these provisions will be given to local
authorities in the form of a Home Office Circular.

Part V: Miscellaneous

13. It is intended that the provisions for fees for variation of
an entertainment licence and for fireman's switches on electrical
luminous tube signs should be implemented early in 1988.

Availability of the Act

14. Copies of the Act are available from HMSO, HMSO bookshops
and HMSO Accredited Agents, price £4.80 net.
E.R.

       15. The Statutory Publications Office have agreed to give early
       consideration to publishing a text of the Fire Precautions Act
       1971 as amended in the series Statutes in Force, available from
       HMSO. In the meantime, the Home Office have produced a text of
       the 1971 Act as amended, a copy of which is sent with this
       circular to those with responsibility for enforcement of the Act.
       It should be noted that this text has no statutory force. None
       of the amendments made to the 1971 Act by the 1987 Act has yet
       taken effect. An amendment will have effect only when the
       relevant provision of the 1987 Act comes into force.

       Financial and manpower implications

       16. The contents of this circular do not result in any
       significant additional financial or manpower implications.   Such
       implications arise from the implementation of certain provisions
       of the Act but this aspect will be covered, as necessary, in
       further guidance to be issued prior to any such implementation.
       Supplementary

       17. Any enquiries about the contents o
       directed to:
                                              f   this circular should be


                                                     Yours faithfully




       Copied for information to Chief Fire Officers, Clerks to Police
       Authorities, the Association of County Councils, the Association
       of Metropolitan Authorities, the Association of District
       Councils, the London Boroughs Association, the Chief and
       Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association, the Association of
       Chief Police Officers and the Sports Council.
