                     r/
.Saturday 1 5th April 1 9 89 .


 At 9.^5am I att'ndcd     t Sheffield Wednesday Football ground,Hillsborough,for
 briefing regarding the semi final football match.
 My duties thst day,as part of serial 51*niobile vehicle call-sign T6 , were public
 order patrol in the Grenoside /Outibridge areas in a marked Polic       transit van,
 under the supervision of PS 7 6 0 Cressey, paying particular attention to public houses
 in this area.


 During thr earlier part of our patrol ve did not have to attend any reports of
 fighting,or other incidents of public dis-order, even though most of the public houses
 we passed were full to overflowing.


We patrolled the outskirts of the city until about 2.30pm,when we made our way more
 towards the Wadsley Bridge area,which is only about 3 - k mins by vehicle to the Leppings
Lan*- entrance to th° ground. We parked on foxhill Road at its junction with Penistone
Road,the m=in A61. and just generally observed the passage of supporters. By this time
 it was about2.^5pm ?-nd I remember that I made a comment about the f^ct that supporters
were still only just making their way to the ground,there was a steady stream of people
making their way in the direction of the ground,and thrt it was n arly time for the
kick off.


Shortly before 3pm I heard       a request (over the personal radio issued to th^ sgt)
that a gate b~ opened,I was not aware of       he location of the gate referred to).This
request was repeated a couple of times and I remember that something was said to the
effect that there would be a serious public order situation if the gate was'nt opened,
A short time later(2-3 minutes) permission was given over the radio for the gate to be
opened,again this message was repeated a couple of times.
Only another few minutes passed before I h^ard match control       request all available
officers     attend Leppings Lane.At this time X thought it was a public order problem.
We arrived at Leppings Lan<= within about 2 /3 minutes, there were a number of officers
present,and although there were a number of supporters milling rbout just outside th^
iron g*tes th^r^ *>rr - no v~st     cro*Hs.At this time I was only just inside the iron gates.
My serial were there for only       a short time,I think about 4-5 minutes before we returned
to our van to make our way to Claywheels Lame,where we were supposed to take our
meal.

We had just walked into th*= mobile canteen when Sgt Cressey shouted that we were required
to return to Leppings Lane,egain we thought it was crowd trouble.


On arriving at Leppings Lane I entered the ground vis the iron gate,which leads to the
rear of the West stand.I saw a number of people,and thought that the crowd had increases
a great deal. Then I saw that the supporters were leaving the ground,and that they were
either very distressed or vocally angry,shouting obcenities and abuse at officers.
I went towards the large concertina gates,at the tear of th« west stand.There were
officers and menbers of the public carrying injuied people out through thisgste.I      was
still not aware of what had happened inside the ground at this time.


I saw that there were som^ officers stood in front of about 5 or 6 bodies which were
laid near the wire meshed fencing opposite the gate.It was obvious th-t they          c>'d
as th^y were cov-r d with costs,jackets etc.The inspector in chfrg^of th^se officers
instruct d my serial to stand with his men 3nd form ? shield   of sorts,inan attempt
to screen th' bodies from the supporters who were leaving the ground. The injured and
dead were continually being brought out,the dead were placed behind us '-nd the injur d
were sat or laid at the bottom of a wall, at rear of the stand,almost opposite us.
Eventually th^ number of dead at our location rose to 11.
Even at this tim    I still did not realise th' enormity of what   had happened,Ireally
did think that th   only 'ead were the ones I was stood with. It was some few minutes
lat^r when I heard someone saying that the gym was being used as a mortuary,and that
th-re were at least 5 0 -6 0 bodies in there at that time.


There was a constant stream of ambulances collecting injured   people from the ear of the
stand.
All the tim   we were stood there supporters leaving the ground were shouting abuse
at any officer they saw.
After a while I b^gan to feel faint and I had to leave the line.I moved a short distance
from the bodies,and sat by the mesh fencing until I recovered. I don't know how long
I remained there,but I eventually returned to my position in the line.


Someone then brought crowd barriers and tarpaulins,which we placed round the bodies
to m»k‘ a more effective screen.
Oncr th^se were in position I stayed in thr general vicinity,keeping the way clear
for ambulances and police tr- nsits,which by this time were being used to transport
the less serious injured to hospital.
When all th<= injured had been taken to hospital, 'nd the general area more or less
evacuated of support rs I saw that the bodies were being moved.


Thc transit used by my serial returned to our vicinity(after ferrying injured) and
my serial got back in,we were just about to leav€ the ground when we were requested
to transport sn off-duty nurse to the Northern General Hospital,as she had attended
at th' ground after hearing an appeal for nurses and m£dical staff on local radio.


After dropping her off at the hospital we went to Claywheels lane,and had a hot drink
etc. At Claywh els I saw another policewoman,a friend of mine, she was very distressed.
My serial resumed petrol in the transit but I was allowed to stay at Claywheels Lane.
                                3   -




As my serial were out on patrol somewhere I was told that I could stand down from
duty when my friends serial left to return to Barnsley.
I stood down from duty at 6.15pm.




Policp Constable 3287 Wilson.
Force Operations Room
Sheffield Heedqust^rs.
