 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised _                                         Number


 Title      J)oJc(cuu&r Mi              !sy . />Q/
                                              ffro I    Q tf'     -                                                A;
 (Include source and any document number if relevantj


 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yp^No    - w         6 / 1 eM       C -*-£Ct?z   CjqJ '   ] ) 0 ( iJ c iv < ) £
                                                                                                                                   Receiver

                                                                                                                                 %yQj=)
Document registered/iwkKiuifSs indicated                                                                                           Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions                                                                                              Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                               Indexer
                                                                           y
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                        O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                            -'Indexer '

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                       pje}U4



                       DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




          My full name is                        i live at
          Liverpool
I.        Are you employed?
          I am a student in Social Work, I am at college currently two days a
          week, and on placement at|             [Hospital three days a week.
I.        And your course is?

     1    Social Worker.    It is a C.Q.S.W. Certificate of Qualifications in Social
          Work.   A two year course.
          And that is through Liverpool University?
          Yes.
I.       Did you have a ticket for the match?
         I did.
I.       Where was this for?

         It was for the Leppings Lane terracing.      It cost     me six pounds I paid
         face value for it, I haven't got the ticket with me I wish I had, '
         I have still got it at home so that will denote exactly where in terms
         of pen, alley whatever.       That will be on there.
I.       What time did you leave Liverpool?

         It was half Past nine in the morning, how I know that is because we were
         supposed to be leaving at half eight,       I was picking up the lift at the
         Rocket, which is at the beginning of the motorway, there was a van you see
         a group of lads of about twelve in the van and they were an hour late
         so it was half past nine when we left Liverpool.
I.       What route did you taketo Sheffield?

         T0 be honest I don't know too much about     that,     Idon't   drivemyself, two
         lads shared the driving, one drove there and one drove back.          The van
         didn't have any windows in so we couldn't see outside.          All I know was
         that it was a pretty easy passage, I believe a lot of people had problems
         with the congestion on the motorway and getting to the game.         We seemed
         to get there fairly quick.
                                                  - 2 -
             Tt was suprising in fact I am sure we got into Yorkshire in about two
             hours or so.

                    you go straightto Sheffield or did you stop on the way?
             We stopped in Rotherham, we went to a pub there to stretch our legs.
 I.         How much did you have to drink there?

             At that Pub 1 had say two pints, and when    we got toSheffieldwe went
             to another pub and had three pints so I had about five altogether.
 I.          Were you delayed in      any wayduring your journey?
             No.    Other than the    stop weactually made ourselves to stretch our legs, no.
 I.          What time did you arrive in Sheffield?

             We would have Sot there about a quarter to two orten     to   two. These times
             are, sorry to be vague, but the thing is that you don't think anything
             has gone on, if you knew that something was about to happen then you would
             mark all this down in your memory.     I can only speak approximately.
I.          You were wearing a watch?
             Yes, I had a watch on I would say it wasapproximately     aquarter    to or
             ten to two.
I-          Where in Sheffield did your journey end?

_____       We Parked the van outside anewsagents about atenminute walk         fromthe    ground.
I.          Did you go straight to the ground then?
            No we went to a local pub, can't rememberthe name,there was       crowdsoutside
            the pub as well as inside.

            So there were a lot of other football supporters at the club were there?
            Yes there was.
I.          Where were they from?

            They were mostly Liverpool supports, in fact to be honest I never saw a
            Nottingham Forest fan in that pub.     I think the thingis that    they arrive
            from a different motorway and they go to the pubs at that end and we
            ended up at the other end.
I.          What was the atmosphere like?

        1   The atmosphere was very good, there was a lot of singing and high spirited.
            That is typical of any semi-final day out.     I went to the cup final last
            year and it was pretty much the same.
I.          How much did you have to drink?

             In that pub 1 had about three pints, so in total I must have had five pints.
I.          When did you leave the pub?

            I left the pub at about twenty five to three something like that.         Our aim
            was, we thought there would be a lot of forged tickets about so we thought
            get there late so they can sort them all out and then there would be easy
            access into the ground.     This was a problem that happened at Wembley in
            1986.    There were a lot of forgeries and the queues were so big because of
            that.
          And it wasn't until you got them out of the queues, they had a copper
          at each turnstile, that you had easy access into the ground.
I.       Were there other supporters in the pub when you left?
          Yes there was, but everyone was sort of drinking up and heading for the
          ground.
I.       What was the mood then?
          Again high spirited singing football songs.
I:__      Did y°u take any cans or bottles of alcholol away with you?
          No not from the pub.
5-?___    How many of you lefttogether?

          Three of us left together, I didn't actually know the others I only knew
          two of them in the van itself.    We decided to leave, some of the others
          had left before us out of the group, as I said there were twelve altogether,
          some left after us.
I.       What did you do next?
         We Just made our way to the ground really.
         Did y°u see any police officers on your way to the ground?
         No.   I actually took a route, this is something that the police officers
         from the West Midlands force did with me they showed me a map of the
         surrounding areas of the ground and they were trying to determine the
         route by which I got to the ground on foot.    Again it was a bit vague but
         I do remember going through a big park not far from the ground.     I remember
         seeing a river close by as well so we cut through the park.
         Were you able easily to find that entrance to the part of the ground you
         had a ticket for?

         No that was the Pr°blem, as I got there, in fact we lost one of my mates
         so there was just the two of us, outside the ground,     I said to this lad
         "There's going to be trouble,"     I din't mean people dying but I could see
         that it was so close to the kick-off and there was a lot of people who
         weren't in the ground.     They all had tickets as far as I could see, I had
         a ticket and I thought there was going to be trouble.     Anyway I asked the
         policeman, this is one of the things why I phoned the enquiry line, I
         asked a policeman and I showed him my ticket and asked where we should be
         standing, what queue whatever.    I couldn't actually see an orderly queue
         at all.    This policemand was actually on foot.   I saw about three or four
         on horseback, obviously it was harder to ask them.     Anyway he directed us
         to what seemed like a queue in the end it turned out that it was the wrong
         place we should have been standing, so I came out and asked another policeman
         on foot saying that we had been mis-directed so blah blah blah where are we
         exactly supposed to be.
                                      -   4   -



  So I showed him my ticket again, but he actually didn't open his mouth he
  just made a waving motion with his hand in the approximate direction of
 where the gate was so we thought let's go there.            I don't know whether he
 was treating us with contempt because you are football fans or it is just
 because you are from Liverpool, but that does happen.            A lot of away
 games I have been to policemen can obviously be a bit contemptuous of us
 just by virtue of the fact of where you come from, or whether he tought
 he'd lost control and had had enough.            Anyway we eventually found the
 gate ourselves.
 What time did you arrive at the ground?

 We got to the ground at about ten to three, something like that.           This is
 what I was so suprised at that there was this build up outside.           We had
 gone with the object of missing all of that, the problem with people
 were people had forged tickets, we knew because the Chairman of Liverpool
 Football Club had warned the F.A. that the demand for tickets from the
 Liverpool fans would be extremely high.           Therefore it was ironic that
 there was less allocation.   So we thought that there would be a lot of
 problems.

 Did you know what time it was when you got there?

At the ground, as I said I can only say roughly that it was ten to three but
I know that I got in just after the kick off because the game had already
kicked off, what with all the problems outside it was hard getting in.
At one point I remember we here herded together with a police horse just
keeping us all back and the police horse was just actually beginning to
kick a little bit with it's back legs and we were standing right by it.
We got in just after the kick off.

While you were still outside what was the scene like, what was happening?
A lot of people we I suppose they were saying to the police "Look I've
got a ticket, literally saying "I've got a ticket."           They were probably
shouting at the police really saying "I've got a ticket and I am not getting
in the ground, what's going on?"     There was no violence towards the police
from what I could see and there was no fighting amongst the fans.
Were you still with your friends?

As I said I lost one but I was still with another one, we left in a group
of three and one of them we lost outside because of the crowd but I was
still with one of them.
What were your feelings at this time?
                                           - 5 -
       I would say I was a bit worried     because we had lost my friend for one
       but not worried for any major reason just worrying about meeting up later
       to go back to the van.    As I say I was just O.K.   I had been a bit
       concerned about the build up of the crowd but didn't think anything untoward
      would happen at that stage, just thought it was a bit of a problem that would
      be sorted out.
      Was there a queue?

      Outside the ground?     There was no orderly queues that I can describe it was
      literally a mass of people congregating, there were some attempts at
      forming queues but they quickly deteriorated.
      Was it the police who were attempting to form queued
      Not really the fans were just grouping aournd turnstiles themselves.
      I saw three or four on horseback and spoke to two on foot, I didn't
      see much more of a police presence, but after saying that with being on
      ground level in a crowd there is obviously a lot that you can't see.
      Maybe there were policemen probably a hundred or fifty yards away from
      me but I wasn't aware of that.
I.
      Was it clear where the entrance to the section of ground you had a ticket
      for was? How did you find this?

      It wasn't clear I suppose because I felt as though I had to ask a copper
      firstly where we should have been and there was a lot of confusion, in
     fact there was even people saying to me "Do you know where we are supposed
           be going mate,   I said "Look I am in the same position."      To be honest
     I can't remember what the heading was over the turnstiles.        All I know was
     that it wasn't so clear or I would have looked at it and known myself
     right away, but I suppose the added confusion with the crowds       I felt I had
     to ask a policeman to be sure where I should have been.
     Did you find the correct turnstile you were to enter in the end?
     Eventually we did, we went through the correct turnstile, officially
     as well, I say officially as I presented my ticket and the counterfoil
     was ripped off.    Another reason for saying this is that the friend that
     we actually lost I know that he went through a gate that was opened he
     told me later on when we met up with him again.
     What were the police officers doing outside the ground?
     Well a couple on foot were just standing there I suppose theywere...      the
     idea was that they would be available there for     any information if you wanted
     it.    A police horse as I said was trying to pen   the fans in and hold them
                  bit at one point.   That was a single police horse attempting that.
                                            - 6 -
        That's all they could do at the match really attempt at one point to
        try and get fans into an orderly fashion.     That wasn't really happening
        they weren't succeeding anyway.    This build up of fans outside I know
        from other people, had been going on as early as two o'clock.
 I.    About how many people were there outside?

       You are talking thousands rather than hundres.     I am not really good at
       estimating crowds but to be on the safe side I would say three thousand
       at least.

       How long were you outside there before you entered the ground?
       It must have been say about ten or twelve minutes because wegot     there at
       ten to three and got in just after the kick off, so wegot intwo orthree
       minutes after the kick off.     The game was in progress for a little bit
       you see as I got in, until it was abandoned.
I.     Were all the turnstiles open?
       As far as I could see yes.
I.     Do you actually know now which one you entered by?
       No I don't to be honest.
I.     You would need your ticket still for that?
       Yes to show that.
I.     Were you searched at all?
       No not at all.
I.     But your ticket was torn off?
      Officially the counterfoil was turn off.
I.    Were there any police officers inside the ground?
      There was none on the terracing that I could see myself, there was none
      on the terracing but there were some that were a bit away from the touch
      line near the fences, I could see a few there.
I.
      But were there any just inside the turnstiles as you got through?
      No I didn't see any no.
I.    Were there any stewards inside the ground?

      No not as you immediately went through the turnstiles because I remember
      that for a fact, because how we found our way onto the terracing, I remember
      getting through and we went through a dark tunnel and you could see the
      goal which Liverpool was defending at at that stage you could see the back
      of the goal.   I though the goal was directly in front of that tunnel but
      according to the West Midlands police it is slightly off centre and to the
      left,   but anyway it was roughly it seemed to me that the goal was right
      in front and that is how people just headed for the goal.     Then when I got
      out of the tunnel on the opening where the terracing was I decided to go
      left with my friend so we went to the left of the goal again and stood
      on the terracing about mid-terracing not right at the front about mid-terracing.
 Were you directed to your section at all?
 No we found our own way.
 What was happening inside the ground?
 When I got in I noticed that a lot of people had already spilt onto the
 pitch, and I didn't think anything major was happening.     I thought there
 was a bit of a problem where there was too many in and that they would soon
 solve that.   I couldn't be sure at that stage, which is what I thought at
 that stage,that there was a hooligan element present that had    invaded the
 pitch and I was quite sorry to see that at the time.    I wasthinking   about
 the reputation of the fans.    Later on it turned out to be something quite
 different.

 Had you gone directly to the terrace you were on after getting through
 the turnstile?

 Yes we went straight through, we didn't look left or right to be honest,
we went through this dark tunnel and then straight onto the terracing,
as we got out of the tunnel we then went to the left.
How did it take you roughly to get from the turnstile?
That was the thing actually it was quite quick it too literally seconds,
twenty or thirty seconds walking through although there was a lot of people
there wasn't any major hold up.

You stood about half way up the terrace and about how many yards where on
the pitch were you to the left of the goal would you say?
I would say not very far away from the goal, if I was looking directly at
the goal to the left I would have been ten to twenty yards mid-terracing.
Would you say therefore opposite the edge of the penalty area or further
over towards the corner flag?

No, no in fact I was miles away from the corner flag, that was to the left
of me. I was within the boundaries of the penalty areas as I looked onto
the pitch.
You were in the boundary of the penalty area?
Within the penalty area.

Were you within the area of the six yard area or just the penalty area?
-it's hard to remember that I could have possibly been within the boundary
of the six yard box but if not definitely within the boundary of the
eighteen yard box.
Who were you with at this time?
At this time I was with one friend, as I said we lost the other one.
Ke is just as little lad of seventeen, actually I was particularly worried
about him, in fact I had grabbed hold of him outside the ground dragging
him around because we had already lost one and I didn't want to lose another
person and with him being small I was particularly worried about him.
 How did you feel when you reached your place on the terraces?
 At this stage you could describe my feelings as just being glad to be
 at a football game.   I noticed the problem about people getting onto
 the pitch but thought that this was going to be solved quickly.        I began
 to watch the game then really enjoying it.
 How had you decided which part of the terrace to go and stand on?
 To be honest I didn't have much choice.     As I got through the tunnel I
 was really to the extreme left anyway on the tunnel so to go to the
 right would have meant cutting across a lot of people which would cause
 a lot of hassle for them and for me also.    I really had no choice I just
 went to the left standing on mid-terracing I wanted to get a reasonable
 view.   It is normally where I stand on the terrace week-in week-out
 It is just a preferred position.
 How full was the section you were in?
 It was congested at this stage and I use the word congested because at
this stage I couldn't really say crush because at a normal football game
this is part and parcel of it, being in situation that had just been like
that but you consider that to be normal.     If you stand at the Kop at
Liverpool's ground then that is particularly bad especially at some games
especially the big ones.   So I have just described it as congested but
nothing out of the ordinary at that stage it was a bit soon.
What was happening around you as soon as you took up your place?
There was again just a lot of people swaying a little bit with the crowd
but everyone was just watching the game at this stage.     This might, sound
as though a long time is going but it must have only been literally minutes
because the game   was called off at six minutes past three, but to me
talking about it now so much happened in that short space of time.          I can
actually remember standing on the terrace and watching the game.        I
remember at some point Liverpool had come close to scoring one of the
players hit the bar and that caused a rush forward I seem to remember
and in retrospect that couldn't have helped the situation for those at
the front of the terracing.
Were you aware of any police officers in the ground?
In the ground yes, but not specifically on the terraces.        I could see
a few down by the fence, infect a few had tried to march some of those
on the pitch back onto the terraces.
There were already some people already spilling over onto the pitch?
As soon as I got into the ground yest.
How many police officers did you see approximately?




                                                       ( 347)
 About say—    . I was only looking at one specific area and this was to the
 right of the goal, there must have been at least one gate open, I know
 they weren't all open but there must have been for them few people to
get in because they weren't climbing over the fence, well a few of them
were but not all of them some of them were proceeding onto the pitch
 by other means so there must have been a gate open although it was hard
to see.     I would say that there was about three or four policemen there
at that time.

You didn't speak to any policement?        There weren't any near you?
Not on the terracing itself, no.
Were you aware of any stewards in the ground at all?
None.     No stewards, I didn't see any.
I wonder if you can describe in as much       detail as       youcan what   happened
leading up to 3.06.

Leading up to 3*06 as I said before, it was congested but we realised
that it was getting a bit too much, and at this stage         before the game
was called off a lot of people had started to be lifted into the stands
off the terracing.     Me and my friend    had noticed this and he suggested that
we did the same thing because it wasgetting too packed down          below.     I
literally did not want to climb'.into the stands with me being so big and
heavy I didn't think I would physically make it.          I suggested that I
lifted him up because he was a lot lighter but he said "No,"          he wanted
me to try it first and that if we didn't make it we would stay in the
crowd whatever.      So we tried and anyway I somehow got up, I was helped,
he was helping me up I was standing on his hand and then people dragged
me up into the stands and they did the same for him and helping a few
other people up.    When I was in the stands I noticed that a policeman
had rushed onto the pitch with the intention of going to the referee
to say abandon the game and even at this stage I thought it was just
a problem with pitch invasion or probably down to hooliganism although
I said it was getting too congested I just thought it would be something
that would not really cause major problemsl just thought that if a few
people were allowed to climb into the stands it would release it down
below and then they could sort something out.       I was very confused at
this stage wondering what the people on the pitch, were they getting
on the pitch because they were uncomfortable, but was it because there
was a hooligan element involved because you could see lads running onto
the pitch then in agitated states and of course it was hard to interpret
that on the spare of the moment, but in retrospect you know why it was.
 Obviously they had seen people in great difficulties on the terracing
 and within minutes the game was called off of course, it wasn't long
 after that when I noticed the first person who was being resuscitated
 slightly to the left of the post, having seen that it was hard to
 take that in but then I looked further to the left and noticed four or
 five others were having the same thing done to them, and quickly it just
 became mayhem.   It was a mass scene of people being resuscitated and
 panic, fans helping to take boardings down for make-shift stretchers,
 to carry people off to get help or first aid treatment.
 Did you attempt to leave the ground before any announcement had been made
 or did you stay?

 No.   In fact we stayed, one of the problems was that we had to find my
 other mate first we were obviously anxious about him.      Eventually we found
 him and westayed for a bit   really because everybody else seemed to be
 staying and a lot of people were saying "Stay it is important to stay and
 witness what is going on type of thing."   Everyone found it important
 really to   make sure... you knew then that there was no aspect of hooligani
or problems with that and the supporters wanted to witness it so that they
had an account to give really, and didn't want facts to be          can't think
of the word... but you know the way the press are they play around with
the facts,    they just wanted a true picture to be presented and as it turned
out it was    important that a lot of fans have come forward because what
was written in the press was particularly       the only words to describe
them was evil I suppose because it was so far from reality of what, actually
did go on.

So you met up with one of your friends up in the seats was this?
No what happened was the one we lost outside the ground he was on the
terracing longer than us and it was my other friend who spotted him
and we shouted to him and he came forward       when I say came forward
it wasn’t an easy process for him it was by protest by backward movements
and foreward movements and eventually he got to the top of the terracing
and we were able to lift him up into the stands.
Did you hear announcements on the   tannoy at any time?      *
At first you could hear initially   the tannoy saying     "Wouldthe .Liverpool
supporters please get back." "Will you please co-operate with the police."
Which was ironic for the fans really because once that was announced on
the tannoy there was a lot of anger a big uplift and noise from the crowd
saying "What's going'Jon type of thing there's problems.     It was really
through a lack of co-operation with the police that the situation became
so bad, as I know from my own experiences outside the ground that I wasn't
really given much help by the police asto where I should have been.
 What turnstile or what have you.     Later on the tannoy was just coming
 out with something but you couldn't distinguish what it was coming out
 with because there was so much noise, obviously there were people in
 highly emotional states and all that anger I suppose was present.
 What were your feelings at this time?
 Well I was particularly shocked really because it was the actual physical
 sight of seeing people being resuscitated that at a mundane occasion such
 as a football game it was hard to take in.     My mind was quickly working
 away and I knew that really I was saying to my mates "This has happened
 really because we should have had the other end which was the biggest
 end.   We should have had more allocation of tickets because we have
 more fans type of thing and you could see the problems were due to the
 fact that some people, when those gates were opened, had got in without
 tickets, a lot of people must have travelled without tickets although I
don't know anybody personally I presume that there must have been.
Did everyone that you travelled with have tickets to your knowledge?
Yes in fact that is an important thing I should have mentioned really that
just outside Sheffield we were stopped by the police and the police said
how they wanted us to all produce our tickets and which we did, I presume
that if we didn't all have tickets then they might have turned us back,
I don't know what would have happened.
How long did you stay in the ground?

Until the announcement came over the tannoy that the game would be abandoned
everyone knew that anyway but for some reason everyone just stayed..    I
suppose you could look at it in a macabre kind of way and say that the
initial reaction would have been to leave because it was too much to
take in, that might have been approximately four o'clock, but whenever
that message came on the tannoy that was the exact time that we left.
Was it easy to get out?

Being congested there was a lot more people in the stands than there should
have been, with them climbing up.     This was one of my worries at the time
as well with a lot of people climbing into the stands I was worried that
the stand could have collapsed.     There was a possibility that it could have
been holding twice as many people as it was built for.     But anyway it didn't
collapse and we got out.    Not everyone left at the same time as me, people
in the seats were obviously waiting for it to clear before theyleft.
At the stands there is just a narrow row of steps going up in the middle
of certain grouping of seats, so you all had to go up virtually I wouldn't
say single file but the most you could get would be one or two walking abreast.
______    Well maybe two or three abreast walking up the steps so you all had to
          leave at different times.
I.        Did you see any police officers?
          Not in the stands no.
I.       Or    on your way out?

          I saw a few on the way out.     I saw firemen, the police just outside the
          Leppings Lane turnstiles.     In fact we were going to ask them theway back
          to the van but decided not to we just made our own way back.
I.       Did you see any stewards on your way out?
          I didn't see any, no.

IJ        As soon as y°u got outside the ground what did you do then?
          Made our way back, we went the same route back we headed for the park
          we had come across and we were looking for the van which we eventually
          found.

1^       Did y°u see anyone who appeared to be drunk before the match?
         No.    When you say 'appeared to be drunk'    I would say the kind of
         drunkeness that would be manifested in high spirits, I mean singing football
         songs and waving about, you see drunk could mean a lot of things, drunk
         could mean violent people or whatever.       But ever football game there are
         people drunk the same at that match that day only in the sense that there
         was high spirits.

         Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk during the match while you
         were on the terrace?

         That would be harder to determine than outside the ground because in a
         football crowd it is an atmosphere of general shouting and singing
         and things, so what is normal behaviour for a drunken person is shouting
         and singing doesn't necessarily mean that people at a football match are
         drunk because they are singing it is just a normal thing to do again so I
         wouldn't like to say.    You know for a fact, the pub was packed that I was
         in and there were people outside it so there must have been a few people
         who were drunk.

         Did you see anyone appear to be drunk after the match?
         No in fact everyone was in a pretty bad moodI suppose, very quiet       and
         panicking to try and reach a phone obviously      tophone backhomerelatives
         and that.

         Did you see anyone arrested by the police at any time during the day?
         1 didn't see anyone arrested by them.
         Did you at any time after arriving in Sheffield witness any violent acts
         at all?
 No.    This is something that the West Midlands police actually asked me
 and I didn't see any violence at all.    In fact it was great the atmosphere
had been great, it had been such a great day up until then.     As I said
 the first pub we went to outside Sheffield we were talking to the locals
and they literally warmed to us they enjoyed talking to us and literally
having a laugh the way you do.     And in the second pub I was in it was just
singing again all the football songs, no violence whatsoever.     It would
have been strange to have seen violence anyway because there was mostly
Liverpool fans.
Did you see in Sheffield around the ground any violence between groups of
rival supporters?     Any violence against any individuals including members
of the public who were emergency services such as firemen or ambulance men?
No none at all.
Any violence against police officers?
No none at all.     This is something that is important because on the news
now despite what a lot of the press have said, on the news they actually
spoke to a few publicans from the Sheffield area and there was one that
said that there were some fans that were causing trouble but he later
retracted it saying that the paper had made it up.    Actually he was on
the television saying that they were great and there was a shopkeeper
interviewed, I think it is important that those views should be taken into
consideration for that police enquiry the shopkeepers, the publicans    who
work around the Hillsborough Ground.
Did you see any violence against any football supporters be them followers
of Liverpool or Nottingham Forest?
None at all no.
Is there anything else you would like to add to what you have already
said?

Yes there is afew things that I hoped to come out of the enquiry and one
of them is an investigation to determine whether all those policemen who
were on duty had had previous experience of the crowd itself.    Now I have
heard nothing in the press to suggest that they have had no experience or
whether they were from the Sheffield area even but I think that would have
come out quickly in the press because it is an important factor, but I am
only saying it because of my own experience whereby I was directed to the
wrong turnstile by one policeman, initially then the second policeman wasn't
too helpful.   It was possible that he wasn't too sure either where we should
have been but coming back and getting stories off friends and that there
was even confusion on the stands with the seating turnstiles where to go and
there wasn't much help there so I just wonder whether those policemen did
have experience of the crowd itself which they ought to have had.
 The other thing is I have just mentioned about the opinions of shopkeepers
had been taken into consideration about the mood and behaviour of the
 Liverpool supporters prior to the game and that is important. Having heard
a story from someone, and it is a friend of my mum's actually, this fella
didn't come away from Sheffield for two and a half days he was walking around
in shock.    Now what he had actually seen although there were no reports
of it in the press, not that I read anyway, apparently when an ambulance
came onto the pitch to aid those who were injured or who had died, an
ambulance actually ran over the head of a fella who was laid out dead on
the pitch.    Now it is a very disturbing story obviously with the ambulance
crushing his head but what is disturbing is the fact that that dead body
had not been cordoned off by stewards or police or the ambulance hadn't
been directed around.     O.K. it is a situation of confusion and mayhem as
I said but I think that this dead body was just left there.     Again as I
said that wasn't reported in the press but if that situation did happen
I wish the police would bring it to light because it suggests     a lack of
organisation on the pitch.     I would also like to say that I hope the
West Midlands, I did ask them, I think they are aware of it, a lad actually-
took a video tape of the game he obviously went with the intention of
taping the football game but when he saw the trouble that was happening
he was taping it and this will go someway to determining as to whether the
fans were, as the press say offering violent acts to the police or urinating
on the police.    Now for me I never saw any of that at all and I think it is
important to find out the truth about that.     Now this video camera, I am
sure that will be used in evidence.     The video camera actually tapes the
stadium clock as well so I saw pictures of stills from it about 2.59 it
said on the stadium clock when the players were warming up you can see that
the people have spilled onto the pitch, so the situation there where they
should have known.     Apparently there was an attempt to abandon the kick-off,
well not abandon it but to make it a bit later but that message never got
through.    Well I can understand how that happened if there were police outside
the ground and police inside they could see obviously they have got radios
why that could not have been done, so it is important that that video camera
is used as evidence.    The thing about the fans unrinating and being aggressive
that can be put down to shock.    If someone has seen somebody who has died
well they literally go to pieces and that can be interpreted as violence
if you just see it for the first time.      There is also stories....I suppose
that is important about whether there was violence offered to someone I
did see a photographer apparently he had lifted up a blanket up off a dead
person to take a photograph and a few fans had rushed at him,    but he got
away.
     The police remedied the situation I suppose kept the fans away from him.
     But you see I think that was just a normal reaction, I think myself if I
     had seen that I would have literally flown at the photographer myself,
     especially in that situation.
I.   Did you witness that yourself?
     Yes I could see that from a distance mind you.     It sort of took place
     on the right of the pitch, the far right and I was in the stand and I
     could see a few fans, but first of all I could see a photographer in and
     around people laying on the ground and I didn't know what he was doing but
     I could see him interfering with the bodies or liftingthings      up and that
     and the next thing I saw a few fans rush at him.     There was a point   as
     well, I am sorry to have left this out on the violence question, there
     was an attempt by the few Liverpool supporters to rush to the Forest end
     because they had begun to chant obviously they didn't know what was happening
     and it was just a misunderstanding.     You see when fans are in shock and
     agitated these are normal reactions.
I.   And you witnessed that yourself?
     I witnessed that myself.    Then what they did after that   they got the police
     to go right across the centre of the pitch and I don't know how many police­
     men it takes to get across that ground but it was quite a few and it seems
     ironic that they could do it then but they couldn't do it outside the
     ground when there was obviously need for it.     Again they would have had
     time, as I said to the West Midlands police, people don't just appear' from
     thin air this build up happens gradually, o.k. it can happen quickly but
     not sudden in the flick of a finger type of thing, and I heard reports
     from friends that the crowd had been gathering in substantial crowds
     outside the ground at two o'clock even,an hour before the kick-off.
I*   Did you attend the same semi-final at Hillsborough last year?
     I did yes.
I.   What was your experience?
     That was a terrible time actually finding out where we should have been.
     I was actually in the stands that time, now we walked to the wrong end
     of the ground, I was with another friend this time.     We walked to the
     wrong end and in fact we ended up walking all the way around the ground to
     get to our proper end.     Now I just seem to remember trying to go up streets
     but they were all sectioned off by the police, there were actually gates
     so you couldn't walk up never mind get a car to go up there, you weren't
     allowed to walk up.   You had to walk literally a mile or two until you got
     a street you could turn left down and then come back onto the ground going
     in an L shaped type of way to get back to the end in order to get to___
     that was hard that year.
But I didn't see the same problems with build up of crowds outside although
I've seen that that was happening because it's a football game isn't it and
you do get crowds but I couldn't see any major problems.      At the stands
though I was I can't speak for what it was like on the terraces.       I do
remember that it was hard and it was particularly... in retrospect now
again it was a particularly hard ground to understand the actual directions
the turnstiles and all that and you could put it down to our own stupidity
if you are like me I consider myself fairly intelligent even though I say
it myself.   I do remember having difficulty me and my friend getting to
the right end last year.     That game passed off without any trouble.
Is there anything else you would like to add about anything you personally
witnessed?

I am trying to think now... I mentioned the things that I would like to
be taken into consideration in the enquiry because I think it is important.
No at the moment I can't really think of anything else.      Other than I will
bring my ticket in to actually show you and determine where itwas and what
turnstile I went through, I will do that tomorrow for you. O.K.
What it is if as the police said that there was a danger of a crush outside
the ground if that was the case then is there evidence, there was a suggestion
that a wall was about to collapse but I would like to know if there was any
structural damage to the stadium outside.     I haven't seen or read anything
in the press but it will be important and go some way... if there was
a wall that had received damage then you could say well maybe there was
danger of a crush.     I think that is important because that was the. reason
apparently why the police suggested that they opened that gate but I find
it a strange decision because if there are problems with congestion and
crushing it seems non-sensical to pack the people into an even more limited
and restricted area.    That is just a point I had forgotten to add.




                       END     OF    I N T E R V I E W
