      / z3


J :
 6M

3>s
STATEMENT OF:-      David Lawrence Buckley
                    Police Constable No.1140                                  \


                    South Yorkshire Police
                    Police Headquarters
                    Legal Services Dept. (Prosecutions)



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police stationed in the
Prosecutions Office at Police Headquarters, Castle Green Annexe.


At 9.45 am Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty at the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Ground for the semi final football match between
Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.    After briefing in the North Stand at
the ground I took up patrol duty in a transit van together with other
Police Officers.    Police Sergeant No.1075 Holbrook was in command and our
serial was No.50 that day.     We were assigned to patrol the North side of
the ground in the area of Halifax Road/Parson Cross, giving attention to
public order and licensed premises.       We patrolled the area as directed
and prior to the arrival of the train carrying Liverpool fans to Wadsley
Bridge railway station, took up an observation position directly above
the Travellers Inn, Halifax Road.


Whilst the transit was parked in the observation position on Halifax Road
I saw that football fans were walking towards the direction of the
football ground in an orderly manner.       I saw several carrying cans of
beer or lager and in seme cases drinking frcm them, but I did not see any
obvious signs of drunkeness.     The football fans that passed me, I believe
were frcm Liverpool and their numbers gradually increased towards the
hour of 3.00 pm.    I noticed that the numbers of coaches carrying fans
                         *■

also increased in a similar manner; several coach drivers of whan I saw
stop to speak to foot patrol officers in Halifax Road.       In the main these
coaches were moved along towards the allotted parking area still carrying
their passengers.    However, some passengers were seen to alight in
Halifax Road between our position and Claywheels Lane before Officers
moved the driver of the coach along.


At about 3.00 pm this same date radio conmunications received from ground
control indicated that a serious public order situation was arising at
the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      Together with other Officers in
serial 50 we moved in our transit frcm Halifax Road to Leppings Lane in
anticipation of being required at that location.     However, on arrival
there I saw numerous other officers present and ambulances arriving.        To
avoid congestion our serial in the Police Transit resumed frcm Leppings
Lane back to Halifax Road travelling there via Hillsborough and Penistone
Road.   Our Police transit became stationary in heavy traffic in Halifax
Road on the into City lane below the railway bridge.    Ambulance, Fire and
Police vehicles travelling towards the ground were having difficulty
getting through because of the traffic congestion.     By this time I
realised frcm radio traffic that the situation at the ground was very
serious and steps should be taken to make a clear passage for emergency
vehicles.    With the approval of the serial sergeant I left the transit
and commenced to direct traffic on the Halifax Road away from the ground.
Police..Constables Lund, Wilkes and another Officer frcm our serial
assisted me with this operation.     Shortly after the traffic situation had
eased I resumed frcm Halifax Road together with other Officers in my
serial back to the ground following a radio conmunication "ALL OFFICERS
TO THE GROUND". On arrival at the ground in Penistone Road outside the
main enterance I alighted from the transit with the other members of the
serial.     I saw that ambulances were entering and leaving this enterance
and assistance was required.     Initially I canmenced to help in directing
the ambulances entering and leaving the main ground enterance, but within
minutes was directed by an Inspector to report to Superintendent Bates in
the gymnasium behind the North Stand.     I did so immediately and was
instructed by that Officer to take up position and remain there at the
door to the gymnasium preventing unauthorised access.     My position was at
the door on the inside of the gymnasium which at this time was being used
to bring casualties from the ground." At this time in addition to
casualties the gymnasium contained Police Officers frcm PC to high rank,
doctors, ambulance crew, first aid workers, special constable etc.
Initially the gymnasium appeared to be a casualty area but I was later
informed that there were no casualties alive and that the gymnasium was
to be considered a mortuary with Police access only, and only officers
required in the gymnasium to be admitted.    This direction came to me from
Chief Superintendent Addis who appeared to have taken ccmnand inside the
gymnasium together with Chief Superintendent Mole.     I carried out this
duty as required but found it also necessary to admit ambulance personnel
returning bodies on stretchers from the hospitals and Police employed
civilian drivers carrying equipment and refreshments etc as required at
the gymnasium mortuary.    The position at the mortuary gymnasium   door was
     a constant caning and going of bodies and personnel and of all types of
     enquiry.   This feverish activity continued late into the evening and
     early hours.   I remained at this post with the exception of using the
     telephone inside the gym until going off duty at 5.30 am Sunday 16 April
     1989, following the last of the bodies being removed from the mortuary.




     DAVID LAWRENCE BUCKLEY
     2 June 1989




••
