• ■ s"'i I ,T: ‘ ''           ■im                         13ate and time raised                      N u m be"




                              ?■■/?/;?   r;ijr'->ber i f reh;v

                                                                                              ' i
                                                                                                'r
                                                  Vp5.'r'io                  .      , t;-
                                                                       u . v i.,-      ' r'
                                                                                                                      •,
                                                                                                             -   t>
                                     :nrM:droa
                                                                                                                 i




                                                                                                                 :



       v'; :          rx.   \ j/-\




               •;r; b 'Tiisaci 0 1 f;ce Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
, *' ’2 6 APR 1989
                                         *




                                             H O M E OFFICE
                                          50 GUrift'
                                                     APR ]939
                                             Rf       ■t-:‘ViC£3
                                             cimTSPc.vr-.Mce
                                             OfSTHieu r ia 'j u n it
                                                        i




                                                                          Merseyside


                     Dear sir,
                             As a keen Liverpool supporter, I was present at the
      Hi 1 lsbourgh disaster. Although I have   strong opinions on what    happened and what
      should happen in the -future, this is not the reason I -feel moved to write to
      you.
                The reason -for my correspondence is that I strongly believe that it is
      time that the -football supporters, in the guise o-f the Football Supporters
      Association, had a stronger say in the -future direction o-f the game.
                For many years the Football authorties have often talked about the
      supporters being the most important aspect o-f the game, however their actions do
      not appear to back up these words. In the years I have been going to Football
      matches, supporters have always been the poor relations o-f the game, being
      subject to poor facillities; herded like cattle into antiauated grounds; ill
      treatment by the authorties as well as being treated as the scapgoats -for many
      o-f the games problems. While agreeing that there maybe grounds -for such

      treatment, it must be remembered that the vast majority o-f Football s pectators
      are well behaved and this should be taken into account.
                  The present public enquiry    will, no doubt, set the     course that our
      national game will take into the 21st     century and not to take      into account the
      ■fans views would be the greatest crime o-f all.
                  Once again I would implore you to involve the      F.S.A. in any
      dicussions regarding the -future o-f the game.



                                    Yours sincerely
