                                                                                                                      wf




                                  Wednesday
                                      Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
                        Telephone: (0742) 343122 Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
                              Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

Our Ref: GHM/JB/I6/0989

10th March 1987


Dr. W. Eastwood,
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
St. Andrews House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield.
Sll 9AS


Dear Bill,

Please find enclosed a copy of the Football League's proposals as to the
implementation of membership schemes for clubs within the Football
League.

I should be grateful to receive your comments in due course.

Yours sincerely,




                                                                             E astw ooi i k Partners
                                                                                    12 MAR 1987
                                                                     Rec’d



                     Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: H. Wilkinson
  Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K. T. Addy, E. Barron, G. K. Hulley.
                                                Registered in England No. 62478
t.      T         H   E      FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
 (STD   0253)


                                              REGI STEREO   OFFICE


     TELEX:
                                      LYTHAM           ST A N N E S                                     sec*,™*:
     67675                                       LANCS                                            R. H.G. KELLY. F.C.I.

              •                                  F Y 8 1JG


1/27                                                                   5th March,      1987



TO ALL CLUBS                                                                           •



Dear -Secretary ,

                                     Anti-Hooliganism Measures

    Further to the Divisional Meetings on 29th January, 1987, and a further
meeting with the Government officials on Monday, 23rd February, I can now
inform you that the Government Ministers, Mr Richard Tracey and the Hon.
Douglas Hogg have endorsed the proposals embodied in the League's comprehensive
Report of November 1986 - save that they required specific action to be taken
by the Clubs on*the subject of Membership Schemes.

    This          action is along the lines detailed to Clubs at themeetings                            on 29th
January,          and is as follows

        1)         All Clubs are asked to develop and introduce membership schemes
                    for specific designated areas of their grounds by the beginning
                    of the 1987/88 season.   These areas should be reserved for
                    members only.  Non-members would not be admitted. The schemes
                    should cover at least 50% of each ground's capacity as determined
                    by.the conditions of the ground's safety certificate. Clubs   which
                    cannot attain 50% should identify, the percentage they canmeet.
                    Advice may be obtained from Andy Williamson re points of detail.

        2)         Clubs who.feel that they are unable to meet the requirements for
                    50% Membership Schemes will be able to make representations to
                    a Special Committee consisting of representatives from the League,
                    The Football Trust and independent advisors.   If, after discussion,
                    it is agreed by the Special Committee, the club and the local
                    Police that they are unable to meet the 50% requirement, then the
                    Club will be expected to show that they are taking adequate
                    alternative measures.   Should this be the case, their position will
                    be accepted by the Government.   If the Club is not able to convince
                    the Commit-tee, they may become liable to a charge under F.A.
                    procedures for failing to implement the recommendations on
                    Membership.

                                                                                       / C o n t d .2




                              All Correspondence to be addressed to TH E SECR ETA RY
                                     -   2   -




    Whilst appreciating that the principle of membership schemes is a complex
matter, there is a requirement for all Clubs to respond quickly so that
designated areas are identified in time for sale of season tickets, etc., for
next season.

    In addition to the above, the following points were also agreed between
the League and the Government

    a)    All Clubs are required to submit detailed local p l a n s >for dealing
          with the management and control of home and away supporters as per
          the attached document. These plans must be produced as soon as
          possible and they must be drawn up in consultation with the local
          police, local British Transport Police, the   local authority and
          other relevant organisations such as local coach operators and
          recognised supporters clubs.   These plans will be available to the
          F.A. in the event of a disciplinary commission.

   b)     The League, the Football Association and the clubs, with advice
           from the local Police, will consider the need  for all ticket
          arrangements at particular matches.

   c)     The League will commission a study by independent consultants to
          report-on the scope, costs and benefits/disadvantages of a
          reciprocal membership scheme embracing all 92 League Clubs.   The
          Association of Chief Police Officers have agreed to assist with the
           advice on this study.

   d)     Football Trust grants will be made available to Division Three and
          Four Clubs for the installation of closed circuit television
           depending on the particular needs of individual clubs.  Clubs who
           have not yet applied should review their requirements.

   e)     The League and the Football Association will support and promote the
           development of family enclosures and other initiatives designed to
           establish closer links between clubs and their communities.




    The Management Committee need your urgent co-operation in order to be able
to report back to the Government at the earliest opportunity.

                               Yours sincerely,
\                                                                 LOCAL PLANS




              Each club is required to submit details                       of its own plan for dealing with

              crowd control before, during and after matches.                       This should be determined

              after due consultation with the police and local authority,                       and take

              account of the following points

         S'
    ,/        1.    Ground Plan
    v               -------------------------

                    Submit architect's plan(s) of stadium,                      indicating seats,   terraces,

                    entrances/exits , turnstiles,                    service arsas and amenities,    segregation

                    measures, membership/family areas, perimeter fencing, C.C.T.V.,

                    police control,                   etc.

                    Submit map indicating location of ground in relation to surrounding

                    areas, and showing car and coach parking facilities (home and away],

                    railway stations, etc.

                     Submit copy of Safety Certificate issued by local authority, and

                     provide details of any revised requirements.




              2.     Stadium operation

                     Determine policy for policing and stewarding, including match

                     categorisation,                  and provide appropriate details.

                     Provide details of turnstile operation in relation to ground c a p a c i t y ,

                      including counting system.

                      Determine oolicy regarding exclusion and/or banning orders, and provj.de

                      u d d r o p r i a cg      de   caiis .


               3*     Policing

                      Determine Dolicy for                     communicating with police pre-match, mciuch~da^

                      and post-match,                  and provide appropriate details.
                                  -   2   -




Consider capabilities of any C.C.T.V.         and provide appropriate details.

Determine general policy for retention of visiting supporters and

provide appropriate details.

Consider arrangements for reciprocal policing.




Stewarding

Determine instructions for stewards and how these are given,            and

provide apapropriate details.

Give details of stewards'     training.

Determine oolicy for communicating with stewards on match-day and

provide appropriate details.

Consider arrangements for reciprocal stewarding..




Segregation

Determine arrangements     for segregation of home/away fans and provide

appropriate details for both inside and outside ground.




Membership/family areas

Determine arrangements for any membership of family areas and provide

appropriate details.




Intelligence gathering

Determine procedure for estimating number of travelling fans and

 their mode of t r a n s p o r t e .g ., liaison with opponents,   police and

 British Rail Transport Police, and provide appropriate details               (also

 any contingency arrangement).

 Consider previous experience with specific opponents.
Security of players and match officials

Determine policy for the security of players, and match officials and

provide appropriate details for:-

           a)   entering and leaving   the ground

           b)   entering and leaving   the field

           c)    car and coach parking




Ground regulations

Consider whether any additional ground regulations are required to

standard list and provide appropriate details.




Alcohol

Submit details of licensing arrangements and outlets.




Admission prices

Determine scale of admission charges your club intends to operate and

provide details including prices       for seats,    terraces, season tickets,

juveniles/O.A .P .s , family areas, visitors'       areas, etc.?

Note:     Any   club who levies higher rates on visitors could          face

charges being brought by the F.A.      if this policy resulted     in

segregation procedures being undermined.




Fixtures

When submitting fixture questionnaire,       consider preferred pairings,

any special requests,     choice of midweek days, etc.,      ir. relation to

 crowd control.
                               _   4   -




After receiving notification of your fixture schedule, consider what

factors might lead to a change of dates, either at the beginning of

the season or during the season, and provide appropriate details.

Consider any departure from normal kick-off times and provide

appropriate details.




Cup matches

Consider what factors determine date and kick-off time, and provide

appropriate details, e.g.,    competition rules, neighbouring matches,

police availability,   etc.

Consider admission prices and provide appropriate details.

Bearing in mind the competition rules, determine visitors'    allocation

of tickets and provide appropriate details.




All-ticket matches

Consider whether any match should be made all-ticket and provide

appropriate details,   i.e., potential sell-out or security reasons.




Sale of tickets

In the interests of segregation, determine policy for selling tickets

and provide appropriate details of:-

          a)   how .you deal with block bookings   (personal callers and

               postal applications)

          b)   in normal circumstances, how far in advance are tickets

               made available and are bookings taken
                                     -    5   -




         c)     what     policy is       employed to identify applicants,      e.g.,

                 home fan, away          fan, ticket tout.

         d)     what     policy is       employed for selling tickets on match

                 day                                                                  •

         e)      what policy is employed when'you are the away club and

                 are any restrictions imposed,               e.g., Through travel club

                 only.

         f)     any variation in general policy for                high risk games




Transport arrangements

Provide details of local public transport ana street car parking

availability,    and whether this varies according to kick-off time.




Public relations and communications

Consider use of tannov and           programme

Consider relationship with media (local and national),                  schools, youth

organisations,    chamber of trade,               licensed victuallers association,

traffic commissioners,       etc.

Consider opportunities provided by any community initiatives,                  e.g.,

Football and the Community Programme.
                                                                                                        FILE
                                    TELEPHONE MESSAGE

JOB No.              S°\4S                 PROJECT:
                                                                    S . W         -nr     c    ,
DATE:        11-S-&1

TO:

FROM




                L«         CXaJ[/                                Xvlce        T)r       £           /C4


  fJifcsu-u^               ^                   ^                                  i4»t.
                                                    O

      ~S o tr ^ 15             > la .A j^ 4               o Jr       11 , 10 o                  T


                               ,1               wv-v«lf-


                     \| 0 0                         ftv           c^— tw*3 <UrtA                                 {Lc


       V w ^ l'.v ^ ,^ ,                   ^> 4^1           LK.                   ——          o i~ eJir




                     <2        C-^W >^ ^                                 |                      Ss s - t^p J ,   r

                                                                                                                     w


                 ^                                                           <?         \&'<U ^
                                                          WE/JAS/JAN/8945



                                                              2 9 April 1987




G. M a c k r e l l , Esq.,
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,
Hillsborough,
cri kt.




 HisFFI E L D .
 6 1SW


Dear Graham,

                          Football League Proposals for
                           Anti-Hooliganism Measures

          As requested on Tuesday 28 April, we have pleasure in enclosing
two prints of our drawing 8945/1      showing the ground layout and the
items memtioned in our letter dated 13 March 1987.
          If you require more prints, please let us know.

                                 Yours sincerely,




Encs.
