                       Chief Superintendent Duckenfield


CHARGE ONE


Between the 19th March 1989 and the 16th April 1989 being a member of the

South Yorkshire Police Force you did without good and sufficient cause

neglect or omit to carry out with due promptitude and diligence that

which it was your duty to attend to and carry out in that having accepted

the role of overall operational commander for the policing of the Football

Association Cup Semi Final at Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield you failed

to acquaint yourself with those aspects of the planning and personal

preparation which were required by your role to ensure the safety of

persons attending that event, in that you

1.   failed to take into account the advice and instructions contained

     in the three documents

     a.      the Guide to the safety at sports grounds.

     b.      the South Yorkshire Police Force standing instructions for

             the policing of football matches and

     c.      the ACFO sub-committee on hooliganism at sporting events,

             guide to policing football;

2.   failed to acquaint yourself with the layout, signings and geography

     of the Leppings Lane aspect of the ground;

3.   failed to visit the ground before approving the operational order;

4.   failed to acquaint yourself with sufficient details of the planning

     which would have led you to have foreseen and deal with the problems

     associated with the event;

5.   failed to acquaint yourself with the resources available to you

     which were to be provided by the Sheffield Wednesday Football

     Club namely its control room facilities and the distribution

     and functions of its stewards;
6.   failed to make contact with Sheffield Wednesday Football

     Club officials prior to the said semi-final;

7.   failed   to   acquaint   yourself   with   the   duties   and

     responsibilities   to be undertaken by Sheffield Wednesday

     Football Club stewards at the said s e m i -final.
CHARGE TWO

On 15th April 1989 being a member of the South Yorkshire Police Force

you    did without good and sufficient cause neglect or omit        to carry

out    with due promptitude and diligence that which it was        your duty

to attend to and carry out viz that you failed to monitor crowd density

in Pens 3 and 4 at Hillsborough football stadium, Sheffield.


CHARGE THREE

On 15th April 1989 being a member of the South Yorkshire Police Force

you    did without good and sufficient cause neglect or omit        to carry

out    with due promptitude and diligence that which it was        your duty

to attend to and carry out viz that you failed to take action to alleviate

overcrowding within Pens     3 and   4   at Hillsborough football stadium,

Sheffield.


CHARGE POUR

On 15th April 1989 being a member of the South Yorkshire Police Force

you    did without good and sufficient cause neglect or omit        to carry

out    with due promptitude and diligence that which it was        your duty

to attend to and carry out viz you failed to take action for the direction

of the movement of supporters who entered Hillsborough football stadium,

Sheffield through gate "C" in order to ensure the safety of persons

within the said stadium.


CHARGE FIVE

On 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough football stadium, Sheffield being

a member of the South Yorkshire Police Force did act in a manner which

was    reasonably likely   to bring discredit   on   the   reputation of   the

said    force or the police service by failing to disclose to persons

whom you knew might reasonably require such information that you had

authorised an order for the gates to be opened at the Leppings Lane

end of the said stadium.
                           Superintendent Murray

CHARGE SIX

On 15th April 1989 being a member of the South Yorkshire Police Force

you did without good and sufficient cause neglect or omit to carry

out with due promptitude and diligence that which it was your duty

to attend to and carry out viz you failed to take action for the directio

of the movement of supporters who entered Hillsborough football stadium

Sheffield through gate "C" in order to ensure the safety of persons

within the said stadium.
