                       Sheffield Archives Ref:          i \h§!%                                   MIR.15

                                                                                                                      I P S
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised    2 ?       *    r j                  Number
                                                                                              _________ £ J T U
Title            M ed       -6
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action —^«(§7No                        Q /^ o l
                                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                              Indexer
Document registereo/indexed as indicated

No(s) ot actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                        f J            fl/oGLAJl

                                       I
                                                                                                                              Indexer
Indexed as indicated                                                                   vCi t»SL
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                         p~-t>      L(fTT&Q,                                      O /M         SIO




                                                                                                                          iI
                                                                                                                           ff,%
                                                                                                                            -l.-
                                                                                                                              c^xen^
Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                           t is.!
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                               £f?V             Nr S A N D Y
                                                       ^EDS
                                                        TEL:|          f

 Lord Justice Taylor                                  20th APpil 1989
 c/o Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
 Hillsborough
 Sheffield.


 Dear Sir Peter,
              This is to wish you well in your present onerous
 task. I was also interested to read that,as a boy,you ’’stood among
 60,000 fans to cheer Newcastle United at St James’s Park.”
   I used to do the same in the late 1930’s at the Arsenal ground
 at Highbury. The crowds,as I recall,were at least 60,000 and even
 higher. The police,and there were not many,used to sit on their
 rolled up coats and watch the game. I used to think how lucky
 they were to have such a pleasant duty.
   After the shock of last Saturday I began to wonder what the
 difference was between those days and now. Certainly the stands
 would be condemned today as unfit. The crowds were larger.
   I concluded the difference lay in the people. There must have been
 more self control,perhaps,though I am sure it was unconcious. More
 thought for others,though again,unconscious.
   It then seemed to me that if there is less self control there has
 then to be more state control, ie by the police,by fences,and now by
 identity cards and so on. Yet the greater the reliance on state
 control it only needs an error on the part of the controllers for
 there to be a disaster in the making.
   If this is true then to put all the blame on the control mechanisms
 (which may have broken down and are always liable to break down) is
 to turn a blind eye to the real cause.
   How can a remedy be brought to the drastic change of attitude
 that will be required on the part of us all ?
   I believe a start along this road would be if,in the present case,
 whilst pointing whatever mistakes there may have been in the control
 mechanisms,the real cause is spelt out.
   It would take courage,but I believe if this were done
.then those who died would not^perhaps,have died in vain.
   Again with best wishes in your task from an old professional
 cricketer.
                 I remain,
                         Yours respectfully,
Lord Justice Taylor
 c/0 Sheffield   '        Pootball Club
           Hillsborough
               Sheffield.




                                   .
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                    FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                             Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y TEA M                       Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                      Telephone: 0 74 2 727599
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                              SM ITH D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                              Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7175
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025                 Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                         _   _ ,     JMJ/RR/5
Fowler Street                                         Our Ref:
Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                                  25 July 198S
Telephone: 021-359 3332




                  Nr Sandy
    Beds




    Dear

    I have received your letter dated 20 April 1989, concerning the tragic
    events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

    The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my Investigation
    Team.

   If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact
   my Investigation Team at Nechells Green Police Station. Alternatively,
   you may write to the Secretary cf the Inquiry as follows:

    Mr R M yhalley
    Secretary to the Inquiry
    50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT

    Yours sincerely




    J M JONES
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
