     ^        \ S C * P t IA J iff


  ftc c




U » tt       ^ U a    ([ J + 2       *


                o lo o >




         R       f    3




                           2 <- 2 S-
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:         DCC/ JEL

   From       Deputy Chief Constable                          Station I Dept: Headquarters

   To            ** see distribution list
                                                              Dale:        27 March 1991



          SUBJECT:           THE HILLSBROROUGH INQUIRY

          It is anticipated that the Inquest into the Hillsborough tragedy will
          end' soon and unless there is a need for a criminal investigation the
          West Midlands Inquiry Team will commence the handing-over of paperwork
          and equipment to South Yorkshire as soon        as possible thereafter.
          In order that the hand-over can be properly controlled, the lease
          on Furnival House will be retained until the end of April.

          Assuming that hand-over can commence as indicated above, it is proposed
          that the Assistant     Chief Constable   (Staff Services/Discipline &
          Complaints) take over responsibility for all residual inquiries for
          production of or reference to documentation or exhibits.      Initially
          Sergeant 758 Morgan and Constable 931 Greenway will be attached to
          Discipline & Complaints Department to dealwith matters under        the
          supervision of the Head of the Discipline & Complaints Department.
          It may be possible to release Sergeant Morgan from these duties at
          an early stage but in any case the situation will be monitored to
          determine the continuing need to retain either or both officers.

          Once it has been established that hand-over can take place,       Sergeant
          Morgan and Constable Greenway should liaise with the West         Midlands
          officers with a view to arranging:-

            a'.     the hand-over of the Inquiry paperwork, property and computer;
                    and,
            b.      the necessary training so that they can input the computer
                    index records.

          Arrangements have been made for five bays      to be available in the
          basement store room (Room 13) to house ’the paperwork.    The property
          will be stored in one of the empty ex-divisional Headquarters rooms
          at Hammerton Road.   A security alarm will be required to be fitted.
          The property should not be accepted from the West Midlands team unless
          and until it has all been properly documented, indexed and accounted
          for.   It is suggested that this property be retained for two years
          after which time disposal will be considered.

          The computer used by the West Midlands team is to be located in the
          Computer Room at Force Headquarters and all arrangements for this
          transfer are to be made by the Communications & Computer Department.
          The need for a computer terminal and its location should be considered
          by the Head of the Discipline & Complaints Department.

          The cancellation of all services to Furnival House (electric, cleaning
          etc.) will be the responsibility of Management Services as will be
          arrangements for the removal, storage, disposal of equipment and
          furniture (other than the computer).




          Deputy cnief Constable

GEN/2
copy to:

Chief Officers (floating folder) - for information
ACC(Staff Services/Discipline & Complaints), Mr Anderson
ACC(Management Services), Mr Davies
A/Chief Superintendent Fell, HQ Discipline & Complaints
Supt Parker, HQ Communications & Computers
Det Chief Insp Brooke (Hillsborough liaison officer)
Note for file:                                                     ACC(SS)/KIH
                                                                 15 March 1991




HILLSBOROUGH


Following our meeting on 13 March 1991, I contacted Mr Sharp, Chief Constable,
Cumbria, at 4.00 pm on Thursday 14 March 1991.    Mr Sharp was quite emphatic
that he would not be making a press statement, nor would he attend any press
conference or take part in any television programme which may cover the events
of Hillsborough.

He appreciated the fact that we had taken the trouble to communicate with him
and suggested that in any press statement that we might make we may care to
use the words:   "that the Inquiry was one of the most intricate and involved
enquiries ever undertaken in any police force in this country."     I assured
him that consideration would be given to his request.
                                                                                 te tlS S J



/                                                        DCC/JEL
                                                         13 March 1991


    NOTE FOR FILE;


    HILLSBOROUGH


    Attended meeting this date, arranged at the request of Superintendent Pratt,
    to discuss the implications of the pending       Inquest verdicts apropos the
    Hillsborough disaster.    Other persons present were ACC(Staff Services),
    Mr Anderson;    A/Chief  Superintendent   Fell(Discipline   & Complaints);
    Superintendent Pratt and Chief Inspector Bennett (HQ Community Liaison).

    Whilst, until recently, it was anticipated the Inquests would go on until
    after Easter, it ,is now likely that the HM Coroner may start his summing
    up on Friday 22 March and it is possible that his verdict may be reached
    on Monday 25 March.

    Consideration was then given to the following options:-

    1.   Unlawful Killing

    My understanding is that if such a verdict is reached, it is not personalised
    by the Jury.   This needs to be checked with our lawyers but would certainly
    result in the West Midlands Police being asked by the Director of Public
    Prosecutions to consider what, if any, new evidence had emerged at the
    Inquest and to what extent it might alter his earlier finding that criminal
    prosecutions were not appropriate against anyone.

    In media terms a sub judice situation would     prevail and whilst we might
    express our disappointment at such a verdict; something about further
    enquiries being undertaken in all probability; and a further re-consideration
    by the Director of Public Prosecutions; together with our regret at the
    impact on the victims of this issue being prolonged, there would perhaps
    be little we can say.


    2.   Misadventure

    If this verdict is reached, then there is the possibility of a judicial
    review on behalf of the victims, probably based on the submission of Roger
    Marshall's written statement.   Private prosecutions are another possibility
    but the probability is, if launched, they would be stopped by the Director.

    In terms of the response to the media     by the Chief Constable,    this will
    need to be considered carefully.

    As part of the above considerations, it would be sensible to alert Sir Jack
    Layden and advise as to any statement he may make.


    3.   Discipline

    The South Yorkshire Police, having considered the Investigating Officer's
    report, agree with his recommendations.   The likely outcome is that the
                                    - 2 -


PCA will recommend no action against any officer.     The PCA are      likely to
announce this finding about 48 hours after the Inquest verdict.

Our media reaction must take account of press statements made by         the PCA
and possibly by Mr Sharp.     Superintendent Pratt will liaise with      the PCA
as necessary and ACC(Staff Services) with Mr Sharp.

We could include in our comments that the complaint enquiry was undertaken,
over time, by two Chief Constables independent of the South Yorkshire Police
and an enquiry team comprising of West Midlands officers was used throughout.

The whole affair has been independently supervised by the PCA throughout,
making some reference to the constitution and role of that Authority.

There will undoubtedly be powerful accusations of a white-wash against the
situation where it has been held to some degree police mismanagement was
a significant factor in the 95 deaths.      The South Yorkshire Police have
paid compensation and, implicitly in so doing, agreed some degree of
liability. The Chief Constable has agreed the findings of the public inquiry
which were critical of the South Yorkshire Police.


4.   Internal

in terms of our reaction to the events      described above, we will need to
consider our communication inwards, ie,     to the Force as well as in the
opposite direction.

Regarding Chief Superintendent Duckenfield - as it is probable his suspension
will be lifted soon - consideration must be given to his position in the
Force.




Action

a.   Supt Pratt to liaise with Counsel re. unlawful killing verdict.

b.   Supt Pratt to draft suggested outline media responses to        be used   in
     the different scenarios and circumstances described and to      liaisewith
     the PCA.

c.   ACC(Staff Services) to liaise with Mr Sharp (Chief Constable, Cumbria).

d.   Consideration to be given to the inward information flow.

e.   Consideration to be given toChief Superintendent Duckenfield.




 Deputy Chief Constable
'90 11/27 15:16   ®0226-730442              S.Y.   J-S.

            Information from:

            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
            AUTHORITY
            REGENT STREET, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2PQ
            No:                           Date;




                                                              27/11/90




                   HILLSBOROUGH POLICE OFFICERS* LEGAL FEES

          South Yorkshire Police Authority is to consider again a request
       from police officers involved in the Hillsborough tragedy to meet
       their legal bills.
          Members will consider the applications afresh together with new
       information received when they meet in Barnsley on Friday,
       December 7.
          The Authority has twice refused to exercise the discretion it
       is afforded in Home Office guidelines to grant the requests of six
       officers who sought financial help to meet their legal bills.
          However, the Authority has always maintained that it was still
       prepared to reconsider should new information become available.
          The solicitors for the Superintendents’ Association and the
       Police Federation have been informed of the Authority’s decision.
         Stephen Walker, Assistant Chief Officer (Legal), of the
      Authority, said today (Nov 27) : " New information has come to
      light on this matter and members now want the opportunity to
      consider the issue again. We have stated all along that the door
      was not closed and it is only reasonable that we should take
      another look."


                                     END




            FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT                Kath Finlay
            PRESS AND PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICER:                  f030^ 781743
                                                                                  A ^C cs)

               SPECIAL POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990


Introduction

This meeting is considering an application from six officers (a chief
superintendent, three superintendents and two constables) for financial
support to provide them with legal representation at the forthcoming Inquest
Hearing into the Hillsborough tragedy.

They have all been investigated by the West Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in relation to the question of criminal
liability.   The   Director has   announced that at this      time there  is
insufficient evidence on which to bring criminal proceedings.

All the officers continue to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
consider independent legal representation absolutely essential for each
of them.

The risks arise from the following factors:-

   1.   The possibility   at   the   Inquest   of   a   verdict   of   unlawful
         killing.

   2.   Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest which
         may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions to further
         consider the question of criminal liability.

   3.   Recently in a similar case where the Director of Public
         Prosecutions    decided   against    criminal   proceedings,
         representatives of the deceased instigated a Judicial Review
         of the Director's decision.     The officers see this as
         possible in this case.

   4.   Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.

   5.   The officers face possible disciplinary proceedings where
         dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are
         all possibilities.


Relevant Considerations

All the officers thus far have provided for their own legal advice and
representation and the application today is concerned solely with costs
likely to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

To help you with your decision clear advice is provided                  in Home Office
Circular 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

This Circular refers to a central principle:   this is "that where the Police
Authority considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
(and both of these considerations are fully satisfied in this case) the
officer should have the support of the Police Authority to ensure that he
has the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of-pocket".
                                        - 2 -


I wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
pursuance of their duties" and undoubtedly "the interests of the Force as
a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
very real.

Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Representation for Individual
Officers"  particularly to occasions  when  "the Chief Officer's   legal
representative cannot reasonably be expected to represent the separate
interests of officers".

This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
the Authority and the Chief Constable in this matter. Their advice is that
independent  legal representation is appropriate for all the officers
concerned.

In the Circular reference is specifically made to the Authority "wishing
in particular to assess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
where any such finding might give rise to legal proceedings for which the
Police Authority would be liable or for which financial assistance might
be appropriate".   It will be seen therefore the advice in this Circular
relates very precisely to our situation.


Finance

The Circular makes it clear      that   expenditure   incurred   in   this   regard   is
eligible for police grant.

When this Committee last considered these applications questions were raised
about the private insurance available to the chief superintendent and three
superintendents.  I can now inform you thats-

   a.     Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill each
           officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
           VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

  b.      The policy does not specifically cover Inquest Hearings
           but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
           provide cover in this instance.

  c.      In relation to future risks the officers may need further
           legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
          have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
          private or discipline proceedings.  If the Director of Public
          Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings, in the
          first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
          they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs. Also there
          is    no  provision   for  the   Authority   to   fund  legal
          representation at discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms
          of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
          must be borne in mind.
                                       - 3 -
I


    Some information is now available as to the extent these officers have
    already incurred legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
    incurred through representation at the Inquest Hearings. I can provide
    you with the details as you wish.

    In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
    to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their application,
    as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for Police
    Authority funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
    Hearings.


    Separate Representations

    ■pjig Circular, at paragraph 14, makes clear that officers should normally
    bg given the opportunity by the Police Authority to make representations
    to them if they so wish.

    With the exception of Constable Smith, all the officers and some legal
    advisors are in close attendance.     Some of them have intimated they may
    wish to exercise their right to appear before you today and make their own
    representation as to their application for financial assistance.


    Recommendation

    South Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about their normal duties
    secure in the knowledge that provided they act in good faith and to the
    best of their ability they will always be deserving of and receive the
    support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for legal
    representation when that is appropriate.

    I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
    of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




    Deputy Chief Constable
    2 November 1990
                                                 APPENDIX




Chief Supt Duckenfield has to date expended circa £34,000.

The anticipated   costs   of   representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
are as below:-

Brief         £7,000 with refresher at £750 per day plus VAT

Solicitor     £80 per hour, say £700/£800 per day plus VAT
               together with travelling expenses

Articled Clerk £45 per hour, say £400 per day plus VAT
               together with travelling expenses




Superintendent Murray has to date expended circa £12,000.

The anticipated costs     of   representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
are £750 per day.




Superintendent Marshall has to date expended circa £9,000.

The anticipated costs of representation         at   the   Inquest   Hearings
are £1,000 per week inclusive of VAT.




Superintendent Greenwood has to date expended circa £17,500
exclusive of VAT.

The anticipated costs of       representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
are £550 per day plus VAT.




Constables Illingworth and Smith

The anticipated   costs   of   representation   at   the   Inquest   Hearings
are as follows

Junior        £3,500 plus retainer of £350 per day (the              retainer
Counsel       to increase to £400 from 14.1.91 onwards)

Also an additional fee in respect of guidance at circa £7,000.
                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                                    3U-<ob

                                            POLICE AUTHORITY
R,<\ .ItilUASKMl tt. V.. I . f M’ .A.                                                                                               P .O . Box 37
I'k:jk      I'Iil.isKM.il<,MtUVi                                                                                                   Regent Strccf
                                                                                                                            Barnsley
                                                                                                            South Yorkshire S7Q 2P O
                                                                                                    Telephone Riirnsley


                                                                       Viim                                  l.hHr;
                     SW/MR                                                                                              1 November 1990
Ihfy                      Mth h\                                                                          Tt l t p h m u ! tjti.
                                                                              Nr S Walker                                             620




                                             F A C S 1 MILE                        T R A N S M I S S I O N


                                ACC Mr Stuart Anderson
               To:




                                                                                                  *******«■■+** +*»»+»*** +


                                        Stephen WAlker
               F ro m :    ................. * .....................

                                        Solicitor to the Authority



                                     1 November 1990
                Date: . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                    3 (three)
               No of Pages                 (inc         this page)               .........
               Our Fax Number 0226/730442
                                                                                                                                     389
                In the event of bad receipt please contact 0226]                                             ext .. . . . . . . .




 1 NOU        ’ 90    13:47                                                                          0EE6       73044E              P A G E . 001
•    ■>
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                  POLICE AUTHORITY
K.C Johnston, BA., I.PJPA.                                                            Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Financial Officer                        Please reply to:                         Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                             P.O. BOX 37, Regent S tm t, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

0«f*f       \ SW/MR                                                                           1 November 1990
             V -
7Mbmanor it befog ehaM w ith by     Hr S Walker                                   T etephono exL    g£Q




       FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION

       ACC Mr S Anderson
       South Yorkshire Police
       Police Headquarters
       Sn1g Hill
       Sheffield
       South Yorkshire
       Dear Mr Anderson
       RE : HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
       I have not been able to contact you this morning because I understand you
       are at a Promotion Board. I thought you would like to see the outcome of my
       conference yesterday with Counsel as soon as possible and perhaps we can
       talk about this in more detail and decide your appropriate course of action
       after the special Police Authority Meeting at Headquarters tomorrow.
       Y w r s sincerely



      Solicitor to the Authority



      Enc




    1 NOU   ’ 90   13:47                                                          0_Z6     730442         PAGE. 0 0 2
   NOTES OF A CONFERENCE WITH MR STUART SLEEHAN AT 5 ESSEX COURT,
   TEMPLE. LONDON ON WEDNESbAY7'3ll)Ct6BER


   1      The Conference was called to discuss the requests for
          disclosure of the discover which have been made by 24 people
          for material touching upon the Hillsborough Disaster.
          Mr Sleeman first addressed the wish of the Coroner which is
          mentioned in correspondence from Mervln Jones, the Deputy
          Chief Constable of Cheshire, to let all “parties" to the
          Inquests have the documentation which has been accumulated 1n
          the various investigations for the purposes of the inquests.
          Counsel is clear that the Coroner should request all
          statements be provided and should do so in writing. If he
          does, the Police cannot object. However, whilst I did not
          discuss this with Counsel, the question has to be asked who
          actually possesses/controls the information on behalf of the
          Coroner.
          I cannot see that this is South Yorkshire since It is the
          West Midlands Force under the direction of Leslie Sharp, or
          possibly Mervyn Jones, who are acting on behalf of the
          Coroner in his investigation. Therefore on reflection I
          believe the Coroner must make up his own mind and he should
          not use South Yorkshire Police as a shield.
          Mr Sleeman advises that the information obtained in
          c o n ne c t i o n with the Investigation Into the complain ts by
          Messrs                  Leigh,                                and
                        and for that purpose atone, is protected Dy public
          interest immunity. The case of Makanjuola v Commissioner of
          Police for the Metropolis (1989) supports this view.
         Any information which was subsumed in the criminal
         investigation is not public interest immune. One must look
         at the dominant purpose for which evidence has been acquired
         - Peach v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis 19862AER.
         If this purpose is a public enquiry or criminal investigation
         there is no public interest immunity. Witnesses give such
         statements knowing they may be used at a public hearing and
         therefore made public - this situation has to be
         distinguished from a private enquiry such as disciplinary
         proceedings - and therefore there is no public Interest to
         protect.
         Having said all that, a principle underlying discovery is
         that the documents required must be relevant to proceedings.
         Disclosure is normally associated with civil litigation and
         there discovery will only be ordered if it is relevant to the
         issues, either supportive of the plaintiff’s claim or
         damaging to the case of the defendant. No-one is entitled to
         documents just for the hell of 1t - Evens v Chief Constable
         of Surrey 19883WLR. Even in civil proceedings, a party is
         only entitled to discovery after a writ has been issued and
         in none of the cases, where Information touching upon the
         Hillsborough Disaster has been requested, has a writ been
         issued with the possible exception of Spearett.



1 NOU   ’ 90   13:48                                           0226   730442   PAGE. 0 0 3
           xy j ■ \J \J   U   V£d£d|u|   I * J \ f ~*“*£j   1‘   V1                                 ‘til VV x




         of Surrey 19883WLR. Even 1n civil proceedings* a party is
         only entitled to discovery after a writ has been issued and
         in none of the cases, where information touching upon the
         Hillsborough Disaster has been requested, has a writ been
         issued with the possible exception of Spearett.
  7     Mr Sleeman was of the view that a case could possibly be made
         out to protect statements and other evidence to be used in
         the disciplinary proceedings until after they had been
         completed; the ground underlying this would be the risk of
         prejudice to those proceedings.
  8     As far as the video film evidence 1s concerned, his view is
         that the BBC should be asked whether they wish to claim
         Copyright,
  9     In summation, the only evidence which is public interest
         immune and therefore protected from disclosure is that
         acquired solely for the purposes of the six complaints
         mentioned previously. Other evidence can be protected from
         disclosure on the ground that 1t is not relevant to an Issue.
         What issues are still live. Certainly the inquests are an
         issue but the discovery of information for this purpose is a
         matter for the Coroner and not South Yorkshire Police. There
         are still civil claims which have not been resolved but what
         evidenceis relevant to the    issues in any particular case is
         a matter of conjecture and will have to be considered on its
         merits.     Set against this, one can avoid having to disclose
         information, even though it is relevant to the issues in
         civil proceedings, until after a writ has been issued.
  10    The disciplinary proceedings are a private enquiry and there
         are no issues there which can be said to be relevant to any
         particular member of the public.
  11    Counsel can see no objection to own statements being provided
         and it is noted that the vast majority of the requests that
         have so far been made are for such statements. The
        difficulty clearly is whether the provision of these
        documents will open up the flood gates.
  12    Mr Sleeman has been asked for a written opinion to confirm
        his advice in conference and it is hoped this will be
        available shortly.




1 NOU   ’ 90    13:49                                                 0226   730442   PAGE. 0 0 4
H am m ond Su d d a rd s
                                S O L I C I T O R S
ALAN I fiO nO M L L Y                   PFTER C . METCALF                    OAVIOW. K. ARMITAGE                 CONSULTANTS:                              EMPWE h o u se
U 1 1V VUH LEWIS                        C H W S T O PH E R W JO N E S        J PATRCK MITCHELL                   R O G tR W SUD O ARO S cee a .            10 PICCADILLY
M tC tlA L L L GREG SO N                ANDREW R. JORDAN                     CHRISTOPHER MARKS                   SIR O ESM O N O H EA P                    •RADFORD B01 SLR
JO H N D DE MAIN                        SIM ON ft B STELL                    MICHAEI S. H EN LtY                 IAN W W HITSON
MICHAEL L SMfrl’H tH D                  SIM ON R INMAN                       ROSAM OND J MARSHALL SMITH                                                    TELEPHONE (0374) 734700
PETER N WW RRAMAM                       RICHARD W WADE-SMITH                 p h :i im w   m a r l in g
                                                                                                                                                           IfclH X 5 1 7 2 0 1
J RiCHARD ARCHLR                        J O H N O . BfcCKtTT                 W iU IA M N DOW NS
BARfSAftA W TRANCE                                                                                                                                         D.X N O . M 7 2 0
                                        0 . N IAN GREENFIELD                 lU C C l OAMMONE
C .N O F I H U H O N                    STFPH EN GALE                        ANDREW H. M cD OU Q Al L                                                      FAX (0 2 7 4 ) 7375-17
JO H N H C HLLLLR                       MARK W HILTON
IAN R S H U 'tL tW O T T V I            r   C   hard burns




o   j k k e i-
                   BN/HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                                   1st November 1990
                                                              YC J R REF.                                                          DATF




       Dear Mr. Hayes

       Re:         HILLSBOROUGH

       Following our conversation yesterday,       Superintendent Bettison
       telephoned roe to say the statements you are sending over would take
       longer to collate than was first anticipated and would not be
       delivered to us today.

        I an therefore enclosing with this letter my note on the
        Pre-Inquest Review.

       Peter is absent from the office today due to illness, but I have
       spoken to him about the matters we discussed, and he will telephone
       you tomorrow.

        Y o u rs s in e e r e 1v


                                                                                                                                                                                 i   >■




       BELINDA NORCLIFFE




       BY PAX AND BY POST
       FAX NO. 0742 523409
*                                    *
       F.A.O. Hr. Peter Hayes
       South Yorkshire Police Headquarters
       Snig Hill
       SHEFFIELD
       South Yorkshire



O P F 1 C P S A L SO A 1:   B RITA N N IA C H A M B E R S 4 /5 O X F O R D PLA C E L E E D S LS1 3A X T E L E P H O N E < 0 5 3 2 ' 4 4 4 9 2 1 T E lE X 6 5 7 2 0 2 FAX 4 4 4 7 9 4 /4 2 1 1 0 9
                            J O S E P H S W ELL H A N O V ER WALK               L ft» iA I» - V C D * ''* *        ,‘s ^ ‘c i ~ r v ■r-~e- r « - / - v s «
               'W         W   VJ




 MOTE OF PRB-INOUE8T REVIEW - MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE SHEFFIELD 30T«
iOCTOBER 1999
i
j                                                           '
iThe Coroner outlined for the benefit of non-lawyer® present Ithat
 this   hearing was not part of the inquests.   The purpose of; the
 meeting was to meet legal representatives and to deal jwith
 procedural matters.   It was to be treated as a private meeting
 between the Coroner and Lawyers, but a meeting at which ^ther
 interested parties were free to attend. The Coroner then requested
|legal representatives to identify themselves.
j          i
 Tim King of Counsel said he represented a number of the PR's olf the
'deceased.  He was unable to give definite numbers (although h4 had
{been instructed by 26 families to date), and he hoped that within a
'week a definitive list of those families being represented by him
!could be available.   The maximum number was likely to be 42.: He
isaid that there may be individuals who had not instructed him, but
 who may at the meeting be applying for representation.
                                                                                    I
    Christopher Russell of Counsel said he had been instructed                          by
    [Barlow Lloyd and Gilbert to represent Superintendent Greenwoods

    IStuart Catchpole of Counsel said he had been instructed by Davies
    Arnold cooper (Peter Doyle of that firm also being present) to
    represent Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.                  ,

    Vincent   Hale,       Solicitor,       said    he    represented    Superintendent
    Marshall.
    Richard    Hanning,       Solicitor,    said    he   represented    Superintendent
    Murray.                                                                    j
    Paul Issacs of Counsel said he was instructed by Hepworth &
    Chadwick (Chris Coughlin of that firm also being present) to
    [represent Chief superintendent Duckenfield.             ,

    Tony Gregory of Keeble Hawsons, solicitor, said he represented the
    insurers of Sheffield City Council and was accompanied by a
    Solicitor from the council.                                   >

    At this point the Coroner established that one individual in <fOurt
    was a member of the press and he asked the person to leave on the
    basis that the meeting not a public meeting and not reportable<

    Belinda Norcliffe, Solicitor,    said she                   represented   The   (jhief
    Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.                                         j
I


 Peter Jackson,    Solicitor,   said he   represented The Football
 Supporters Association.      He stated it would be unlikely the
 Association would be unable to have a representative throughout the
 Inquest because of funding problems.   He made the comment thit if
jhe could obtain undertakings regarding comments made on Liverpool
;supporters from some parties, then attendance may not be necessary
iin any event.
!
|The Coroner then invited Mrs. O'Brien to speak who confirmed she
;was representing herself as the mother of the deceased John
;O'Brien.
i
JThe Coroner then asked all representatives to write into him'with
Ithe names of all those who would be representing or likely to
 represent during the course of the hearing, as he would be
 providing name tags to help both himself and the Transcribers
 identify representatives.
*
 Tim King indicated that on some occasions he would be lead by Ben
jHytner or indeed that Ben Hytner would be the sole representative*

|The Coroner stated this would not present any problem at all and
|that he would be as reasonable as possible regarding changes of
 representatives so long as the party they were representing did
 have locus standi.
                                                                    !

    The Coroner said the venue for the inquests would be the Sheffield
    Council Chambers, this being the same venue as for the Public
    Inquiry.   He stated the venue may change depending on the numbers
    attending.

|At this stage, Mr. Holroyd arrived      at   the   meeting   and said he
'represented the Police Federation.

 The Coroner said he had been asked whether there would be space to
 store papers and that there was a room in the Town Hall called the
 "safe” which would be made available for this purpose.     Security
 would be at the risk of the individual representatives and th# key
:would be in the custody of the City Council.    The room would be
 opened for access at reasonable hours, e.g. 9 to 10 in the morning
|and 4 to 5 in the afternoon.
i
IThe Coroner anticipated that he would sit     from 10    in the morning
|till about 12.45, would thenrecommence at     1.45 or     2 o'clock and
irise at about 4 p.m.    There would be a short break     in the moaning
 and afternoon. The reason he was not sitting longer      hours was that
 he had to consider the Jury who were not as              used to such
 proceedings as Lawyers.

Hie Coroner said if points of law were raised he would deal jwith
|them as and when necessary, but as he did not wish to waste 4jury
time" then he would try to deal with these after 4 p.m. in the
afternoon*
 With regard to the scope of the inquests, the Coroner said he had
 already dealt with three questions being who, when and where and
 the remaining question to be considered was "how". This is what he
|will be concentrating on. clearly he was dealing with 95 separate
|Inquests but it would be impossible to recount the evidence 95
!tines and the evidence would therefore be taken together on all of
jthem. He was aware there were differences, for instance there were
jtwo enclosures involved, but he did not think that would affect the
!validity of dealing with the evidence in that way.         Specific
Sevidence, for instance in relation only to enclosure 4, would be
 dealt with appropriately.

The Coroner said he wished to remind everyone that the Inquests
jwere not the Public Inquiry.     They should not expect therefore,
jbecause there had already been an Inquiry, that there would be a
|repeat of all that the Taylor Inquiry had done, although there
Iwould be some duplication and replication.

iThe Coroner    then outlined  that witnesses did have certain
privileges especially the right not to answer incriminating
 questions.   If any witnesses wished to exercise their right ithey
 would be entitled to do so.

,The Coroner said his present intention was to take evidence orally,
|but at least one witness had died and there may be others who for
'medical or other reasons would be unable to come.         There was
jhowever a huge pool of witnesses to cover relevant points.
j                                                                 j
|Tim King at this stage rose to say he had a number of submissions
'on the nature and ambit of the evidence, in particular the starting
points of events and the cut off point.

|The Coroner said he took the view that the cut off point was the
 arrival of the first ambulance on the pitch which was about 3.15
p.m.    This was a convenient marker, the time beyond this l^eing
 outside the scope of the Inquest.         The beginning was rroore
difficult.   Clearly it would cover the events of the day andialso
previous occurrences in evaluating the situation,    in principle it
would start on the day with events outside, would work into the
• ground and more and more witnesses would be called as matters! got
closer to the event itself.    As an example he might for instance
iwant a summary of traffic conditions but would not be calling a lot
|of evidence on that point.

    He said he intended calling a number of categories of witnesses,
    the first being supporters, but that he would be sympathetic if
    they refused to attend. A supporter covered relatives, friend^ and
    other contacts of the deceased and indeed anyone who could shed
    light on the events of the day.      The second category was local
    residents, the third were shopkeepers etc., the fourth were other
    independents, for example those professionally present such jas a
    media people, the fifth category were Club employees, for example
    turnstile operators and stewards and the sixth category was of
    course the Police.   With regard to these there were a few [Police]
    and at least one other person whose statements were CJA Statements
    under PACE.  It was his normal practice at the moment if there was
                                -   4-

                            Lt re*d out or P layed on an audio tape.
:He said he would do that here and we would therefore hear those
Istatements on audio tapes.

jThe Coroner then said he would not circulate a list of witnesses in
advance because:-

1) Jhis was an inquisitorial inquiry conducted by the Coroner. The
i  books available to him indicated that it was quite proper for
|  him not to circulate them and he did not intend to do it.

2>      yelation to statements he certainly did not have the
     administrative capacity to deal with the circulation of them.
                                                                i
3) He had circulated summaries at the first hearings and felt that
   this had "bounced back” on him as representatives were not happy
   that evidence actually given always coincided with what appeared
   on the summaries.                                        ^

|He was therefore not prepared to circulate statements in advance
jbut would make available names of proposed witnesses f o r : the
{following 1 to 3 days to give representatives some idea as to !what
jwas coming.   Also, witnesses would be allowed to refresh their
memories fro* statements on the day, but he would not expect
witnesses to take statements with them into the witness box.

Regarding Lord Justice Taylor's Report, he did not intend to admit
that report as part of the evidence at the Inquest.   To get it in
pa evidence he would have to read it in toto and this would not
jserve any useful purpose and would cause problems.

Similarly, the Transcripts would not be used.    He was fully aware
      all parties had and would have access to the Transcripts1 and
he would fully expect parties to look at them.    He did not mind
(questioning on them so long as that questioning was relevant.    He
would not however permit a witness who wanted to exercise the right
piot to answer questions to have quotations put to him from: the
Transcript.   He wanted representatives to use their common sense
ana they would be allowed to ask legitimate questions.    There may
be odd occasions when he would have to breach what he had said
above and the Transcript would have to be used,      but he thouaht
this would be a rarity.                                         y

With regard to exhibits, he wished to restrict the number of
aocuments put in as exhibits. He did not want hundreds of pages to
ae put before the Jury if they could not absorb them. What hei had
Ln mind was for example the Green Guide, which could be introduced
»s an exhibit but he would not expect the Jury to read it from
sover to cover.     it would however be appropriate perhaps for
representatives to make reference to certain paragraphs.
                                     -   5-


    ITim King said in relation to the "mini Inquests'* he had a growing
    !number of instructions on individual cases, particularly as to
     factual matters.  He wishes to have the liberty to rectify factual
    ■omissions and inaccuracies from the earlier hearings, and asked if
     the Coroner would consider how best to deal with these if they were
     listed for him in writing.

    The Coroner said that he did not intend re-opening all 95 on that
    basis, although he himself had received correspondence on a number
    of individual cases.    If the matters Mr. King was talking about
    could be put properly to him and if he could consider them and as a
    result felt a point was justified and legitimate and proper to deal
    with, he would consider it sympathetically,

     Tim King then said in relation to the cut off point, he wished to
    |make a submission that that should be extended to 4 p.m. as a
     number of those represented felt the Inquests should go into the
    imedical attention given to those crushed in relation to the
    ■allegation that there was an absence of proper medical care and
     facilities which may have lead to death or indeed quicken the death
     of those who had died.

     The Coroner said this was getting into legal submissions. All had
     heard what he had to say and that he could not give a ruling
     because he was going beyond procedural aspects.   At the moment he
     was not pursuaded that he would want to go down that particular
     road.

     Tim King said he was equally concerned at the decision not to
     circulate the names of those the Coroner intended to call. He said
     the great advantage to having a list was that it would give an
    iopportunity to ask for further witnesses to be called.

    ]The Coroner said he had already pre-empted this suggestion, as he
    j had written to every represented body or individual asking if they
    jhad people to be considered as witnesses and had had only two or
      three replies.   The mere fact that a list was not circulated did
      not stop anyone suggesting someone should be called as a witness.

     Tim King said there were a vast number of statements available and
     he had been looking at it from the point of looking who would be
     called and seeing if there were any '•omissions" and not visa versa.

     The Coroner said he would reconsider the point, but he did not know
     if he could oblige on it.

     Tim King said that in relation to the Taylor Report there should be
     certain paragraphs as to fact which could go before the Jury which
     would help them and save time. He outlined the underlining process
     that he understood had been done for the Contribution Hearing and
     suggested that that might be appropriate.



i
i
            7W   i i   f   i   1^ ■ 1 V




^The Coroner said one of the reasons why he was reluctant to do this
[was because putting a paragraph before the Jury did not mean that
■it was necessarily accepted by everyone.

Tim King them asked whether the Taylor Transcript could be used in
cross examination.

The Coroner said that was correct within certain limits.             His
difficulty w a s , that the Public Inquiry had taken place on slightly
different premises than his h e a r i n g and he was reluctant to u*e it
jfor that reason.
brim King then also queried whether video evidence would be used.

The Coroner said it was his intention               to use the Compilation Video
and indeed one or two other videos,                 for example the 1988 video.
He also stressed he had no facilities                for providing copies of any
videos and would not distribute them.                 If that was not acceptable
he would rather not use videos, but he              did wish to do so.

Stuart Catchpole stated that in relation to the Taylor Report, it
would be beneficial     if the Jury could see certain agreed
paragraphs.   He indicated that he would be more than willing to
participate in an attempt to agree certain paragraphs to go before
the Jury.
 The Coroner said that may be an answer to the question and he would
jleave it up to the parties.  If they could all agree on some of the
Iparagraphs going before the Jury then that would be acceptably, if
Ithey could not agree then the Taylor Report would not go before
ithem.

!Christopher Russell queried whether the categories outlined by the
 Coroner was the order in which they would be called.

 The Coroner stated he was notintending that beingthe case,                   that
|the evidence would effectively be taken chronologically.

!Christopher Russell queried whether the new matters relating to the
Iearlier hearings mentioned by Tim King would be circulated to other
'parties, as these were questions which should be made public.

The Coroner said he would consider the point.

Christopher Russell made                  the point that providing the Jury   with
selected parts of the                     Taylor Report   was not in his      view
satisfactory.

The Coroner confirmed that if it could not be agreed between the
parties then he would stick to what he had originally said.
Vincent Hale said that Mr. Jackson for The Football Supporters
Association had raised the question of undertakings and that he
would be happy to give such an undertaking but may not be able to
if other parties failed to go along with it.

The Coroner then asked for authority to circulate to all parties a
Ilist of the legal representatives and all agreed.

'Paul Isaacs then raised the following points:-

!l)     Whether the video evidence was for instance to be shown at the
I       beginning of the Inquest or to be shown to clarify certain
        points.
        The Coroner said he was   hoping that video could   be shown and
        that would be it as the   purpose was to give the   Jury an
;      overview. It was to be     used in that respect as   an aid but
|      there may be times when    the video would have to   be re-examined.
!
!2)     if the Taylor Report could not be used at all unless certain
        facts could be agreed by all parties, how far was it to be
i      used at all.
|3) Could the Taylor Transcripts be used for cross-examination
|   purposes.
 Paul Issacs specified that he wished to make legal submissions on
!this point.
     The Coroner did not answer the second question but in relation to
     question 3. he said once again he knew all parties had copies of
    Ithe Transcripts but he would not allow the Transcript to be used to
    |put witnesses in a position where they would say that they would
    'not answer a question, i.e. he would not allow anyone to pursue a
    ;point which would be oppressive.   In certain other cases it may be
     easier to use the Transcript to put points to them and that he
     wanted to be flexible and that he may indeed have to modify his
    |stance on the Transcript.
    j                                                                I
    IPaul Isaacs specifically asked the question if a witness said,a, b
    land c on giving evidence but had previously to the Taylor Inquiry
    ■said x , y and z would he be able to cross-examine on that basics.

    The Coroner said it would depend entirely on what the a, b 4nd c
    and x, y and z was.    He then stated that on the point he would
    clearly have to have a session on legal submissions.

    Paul Isflacs then raised the question of recalling witnesses after
    they had completed their evidence.

    The Coroner said he may have to do this from time to time.
           7 C   k k '   V   I   k <
                                   £• ^ ^




Belinda Norcliffe then asked whether the Coroner would permit
documentation sent to him to be placed before the Jury, the
'intention not being  for the Jury to read Bundles from cover to
 cover, but for documents to be available for the Jury to “dip
 into*.

The Coroner said he was still considering this point.

Christopher Russell then queried what the documents were and why
they had not been circulated to other parties.

{Belinda Norcliffe explained the documents were three volumes, the
 first two of which were volumes 1 and 2 of the South Yorkshire
 Police documents to the Inquiry, and that volume 3 was a selection
 of documents available at the Public Inquiry and the recent Civil
 Contribution Hearing.  There were no new documents as such.   They
'had not been sent to other parties but simply to the Coroner as it
 was his decision as to whether they were to go before the Jury or
 not.
The Coroner again said he was still considering the matter and had
not decided whether any party could put documentation in in the
form of Bundles or whether he wished representatives to produce
individual documents as and when they were referred to.      In any
event he said 20 copies of items would be in his view required.

Peter Jackson said with regard to undertakings he would be happy to
liaise with any party.

The Coroner said he foresaw problems in anybody giving undertakings
and that the matter may not be resolved.

 Peter Jackson then queried further whether the witness list would
!be available three full days in advance.

[The Coroner said he was hoping to do this showing at least those
!who had provisionally been called.

Peter Jackson then queried whether a daily transcript would be
available and the Coroner said he would refer to that point later.

Mrs. O'Brien stated she was very concerned about the cut off point.
The Coroner pointed out that she was attempting to make a legal
submission and that would have to be reserved for later.

The Coroner then established that no party had any other procedural
points to raise and stated that he did intend to have Transcripts
available on a next day basis.     He requested that any party who
wanted   daily  transcripts   should  write   to  him   before  the
commencement of the Inquests, but parties would of course be
charged. He would also happily arrange for odd days to be provided
on that basis but he would have to have sufficient notice of this
for it be possible.
              '90 1 1 0 1 12*15         ft   <e 4   ( ^   i   .* _
                                                                 >®w^




                                   -   9-

i
iwith relation to the length of the Inquests, the Coroner said he
!was unable to specify how long they would last, but that the
 hearing would end for Christinas on the 18th or 19th December.   He
 did not think the Inquests would have finished by then and the plan
'was to resume on the 7th January and to continue until they were
Ifinished.   He pointed out that illness, for instance amongst the
 Jury, may lead to adjournments.

    With regard to witnesses, he is going to try and group them
    together and further he would be surprised if there were less
    witnesses to be called than at the Taylor Inquiry (174) and there
    could possibly be more.
    On the 28th November, 6th December and 9th January it would not be
    possible to use the Council's Chamber as Council meetings were
     taking place and       in relation to the 28 th November, he was
     considering taking the Jury out for a further site visit to
    ■Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
    iThe Coroner said he did intend to call a few expert witnesses right
    iat the end of the Inquests but he wished to make it clear that
    Itheir   evidence would be restricted to what is relevant to an
    'Inquest and would not therefore be the same as evidence which would
     be given at a Civil Trial.
     He then pointed out that the press would of course be entitled to
    !be present throughout the Inquests themselves.

    !In relation to   running order, he intended to ask questions first
    |and the only other rule was that if any witness was the witness of
    ia particular party then they would question the witness last.
    1Apart from that the representatives should agree amongst themselves
    |the order for questioning witnesses.

    I The Coroner said it appeared              there would be various legal
       submissions made to him and these        would have to be dealt with, at a
    Ifurther meeting which was set for          the morning of the 19th November
     S and he would arrange for the Jury         to attend only on the afternoon
     |of that day.
    IStuart Catchpole queried whether the list for the first three days
    Iwitnesses would be available for Monday the 19th and the Coroner
    !confirmed this would be sent through to representatives.

     Tim King asked the Coroner to consider again the question of
     circulating a full witness list. The Coroner said if he decided to
     do this prior to the 19thf he would circulate it to parties, and if
     not representations should be made again on the 19th. The Coroner
     at this stage said another reason for him being reluctant to
     circulate the list was that it could be that once evidence, gets
     under way certain witnesses on the list could effectively!come
     superfluous and would be removed and he was wary of the parties
     relying on his original list as definitive.
              ’90 11'0 I u: Ik       ft   <0   (   -- -» Wf -T




j                                   -10 -

;Tim King ^aid he appreciated the point the Coroner was making but
 it would still be easier for all if a list was available.

    The Coroner said he would give serious consideration to the point.
NOTES ON MEETING AT PCA ON 18 . 10.90

Present

PCA            Brigadier Pownall
               Gerry Giliman
                Jane Hellicar
                Colin Daulby

SYP            ACC Mr Anderson
               A/Chief Supt Fell
               A/Supt Drabble



 1.   After discussing at length  it was agreed that no decision could
      properly be made until  the conclusion of the inquests as fresh
       evidence may come out.

 2.   It is intended that the decision on discipline should quickly
       follow the result unless substantial new evidence is given
       revealing possible criminal or discipline matters which have not
       already been encompassed by the investigation to date.

 3.   If that does happen the way forward will be for the investigating
       officer to consult with Noel Taylor as to whether further
       investigation is necessary in which case the decision would have
       to be delayed until any further report had been considered.

 4.   If no further investigation is required, we will do the necessary
       memos to the PCA immediately the result is known to enable them
       to swiftly reach their decision.

 5.   To this end we and the     PCA will read the file   so as to be prepared
       to react quickly as at   (4).

 6.   Consultation between us and the PCA will continue whilst the file
      is being read in the hope that the positions both adopt eventually
      are not too uncomfortable for each other.

 7.   When the PCA have reached a decision they will do a full press
      release, write to the complainants, inform us and send us a copy
      prior to the release so the officers can be informed but with
      details embargoed until their statement is made.

 8.   PCA indicate that they will not hold a press conference or take
      part in television discussion programmes.

 9.   In the event of the decision being made that disciplinary action
      would ensue we would probably go for a tribunal because of the
      outstanding public interest.

10.   In the event of discipline the PCA will say virtually nothing
      to the press until the proceedings are complete.




                                     - 1 -
11.   The Brigadier expressed concern that the Coroner may request an
      early decision to free the officers from jeopardy so that they
      could be called to give evidence.

12.   Meeting concluded that even if such a decision was made it was
      unlikely that the officers' legal advisers would allow them to
      give evidence as they would still be in jeopardy from
      (a)  a private prosecution or  (b) a verdict of unlawful killing.

13.   ACC informed meeting that the 'Jackson' file could cause problems
      if the Police Authority members, when they receive the report,
      were to disclose its contents to the media or other interested
      parties and that this could create difficulties when considering
      action against the other 6 officers.

14.   It was suggested that Mr Gillman might like to discuss this
       problem with Stephen Walker.  PCA felt they could not do so and
       ACC indicated he would.

15.   ACC emphasised that SYP wished that all our actions should
       indicate and demonstrate to the public our desire to ensure that
       a proper decision had been reached on the question of either
       criminal or disciplinary process and that we would do all in our
       power to facilitate such decision making.




Copy to:   Chief Constable
           Deputy Chief Constable




                                    -   2   -
NOTE FOR FILE                                                        DCC/AT
                                                             4 October 1990


CONTRIBUTION HEARING

Had discussion with Peter Metcalf     concerning the progress of the above
Hearing.

He informed me Richard Payne is presenting our case with considerable
expertise and vigour and whilst we have the other side somewhat 'on the
run' his concern is that the Judge appears to already have an attitudinal
set with us which is not particularly helpful towards our case.        The
decision arrived at today is not to call any SYP witnesses and rely purely
on the Taylor Report and expert evidence from David Phillips, our
consultant engineer, and others assisting these two.

Press office informed regarding the non-attendance of police witnesses.

      Action

      Superintendent Bettison    to inform the police witnesses of the
      above decision, please.




Deputy Chief Constable




To:    Chief Constable
       ACC (Staff Services)
       Superintendent Bettison
       File
                                                         24 September 1990


Note for File


Meeting re disclosure arising from Hillsborough 11 am 24.9.90.



Chaired         ACC Mr Anderson

Present         DCC Mr Jones

                Mr Stephen Walker, Secretariat

                A/Chief Supt Fell

                A/Supt Drabble


Following lengthy discussions the following were agreed:


1.   That the South Yorkshire Police in the person of Mr Anderson would only

     have that part of the investigation report already received to enable

     him to make recommendations on the disciplinary aspect to the Police

     Complaints Authority.


2.   That the West Midlands Inquiry Team would retain all other

     documentation, together with all original papers at this time.


3.   That Mr Walker would consult with an appropriate barrister   on the

     question of disclosure and public interest immunity of the file in our

     possession and of the other papers held by West Midlands.



4.   That DCC Mr Jones to enable (3) to be done properly, would provide Mr
     Walker with a categorisation of the papers in the possession of the

     West Midlands Police together with a copy of the disclosure requests

     so far m a d e .


5.   That Mr Anderson would write to Mr Jones asking him not to   discloa'e

     any material until after legal advice had been obtained.
(Discipline & Complaints)                                  Your » f    JMJ/HJ/184

                                                            CHip w f   AOC/OD/CJD

                                                              24 September 1990


Mr J Mervyn Jones MSc
Deputy Chief Constable
Cheshire Constabulary
Police Headquarters
Chester
Oil 2PP




Dear

Release of documentation collected for the Hillsborough Inquiry

With reference to your letter dated 18 September 1990 and further to our
Meeting at Pore® Headquarters on 24 September 1990 I confirm that I have asked
Mr Stephen Walker, solicitor to the South Yorkshire Police Authority to seek
independent advice from an appropriate barrister on the question of disclosure
of the various categories of documents.

1 should therefore be grateful if you would continue the policy of
non-disclosure until such time as that advice has been received.

Yours sincerely
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref.            DCC/ JEL

    From:      Deputy Chief Constable                        Station/Dept:   Headquarters

    To:                                                      Date:
               ACC(Staff Services)                                           19   September 1990


            SUBJECT:     hillsborough - director of public
                         PROSECUTIONS/COMPLAINT FILE


            Present Position

            Immediately after the Hillsborough tragedy the then Chief Constable,
            Mr Peter Wright, asked West Midlands Police to enquire into the cause
            of the tragedy and in particular the role of the South Yorkshire
            Police.   After the publication of the Interim Report he then asked
            them to consider further the question of criminal and discipline
            culpability.   About this time it was agreed that as part of their
            investigation they would act on behalf of HM Coroner.

            These various enquiries have now been completed and the core file
            comprising some 500+ statements together with photographs, videos
            and other exhibits, is now in our possession to enable us consider
            the discipline issues.

            We are now urgently preparing our submissions for the Contribution
            Hearing in October and the Inquest in November and this gives rise
            to a significant workload at this time.

            Another issue now arises, namely that of disclosure.

            Attached for information is correspondence from Mervyn Jones (now
            DCC, Cheshire) together with a number of appendices, including an
            exchange of correspondence between him and HM Coroner.


            Disclosure

            The situation would appear to be that Lord Justice Taylor during the
            Public Inquiry    told the West MidlandsPolice that matters used in
            the Inquiry - statements, videos, photographs etc. - were, as a result,
            in the public domain and available to anyone.     He directed that the
            unused material (which I believe comprises some 7,500 questionnaires
            and 8,000 statements) would not be disclosed until the Inquiry ended.
            At the conclusion he instructed that the unused material would not
            be disposed of until it had been considered by the Director of Public
            Prosecutions who was charged with considering the question of criminal
            culpability.   The Director of Public Prosecutions, having now come
            to his decision that on the evidence available no criminal culpability
            lies against anyone, has no further interest in this documentation.

            The HM Coroner    has expressed the view that none of this should be
            made available     to anyone until after  the Inquest is concluded.
            However, in view of the fact, in accordance with the requirements
            of PACE, the core file has now been returned to the Chief Constable
            of South Yorkshire, he now takes the view that as the South Yorkshire
            Police, as one party to the proceedings, has access to this material
            then it would seem equitable that all other parties should possibly
            have similar access and therefore he      has abandoned his previous
            requirement for non-disclosure.
Gen/2
                                 -   2   -




Mervyn Jones,    on  the authorities cited,has until now refused
disclosure.  He now makes the point that as the authorities no longer
exist and the file is in the possession of the South Yorkshire Police,
the question of disclosure is one for the Chief Constable of this
Force to decide.

The relevant question now is that of public interest immunity.       To
the extent the documentation is caught by this then it may be it cannot
be released to anyone.    In view of the fact the Chief Constable in
the first stage asked the West Midlands Police to enquire into the
cause of the tragedy and the relevance to this of our planning and
decisions on the day, the statements and questionnaires obtained at
that time are possibly caught by public interest immunity.     When the
Chief Constable later asked that the question of criminal/discipline
culpability by South Yorkshire Police officers be considered, the
same immunity provision may apply to all of this because of the
discipline consideration given to it.    Exceptions to this may arise
in accordance with the doctrine arrived at in R. -v- Hemsworth, Coroner
ex-parte Peach 1980 (2WLR 496 ET SEC) referred to in HM Coroner's
letter.   Also in relation to statements specifically concerned with
culpability of third parties such as the football club and the
engineers.

We will   require advice on the access     to be allowed to this
documentation by our own solicitors, Hammond Suddards.     In this
connection of interest is the case 1980 R. -v- Commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police (Hart Levington) which seems to give authority
for such access provided this is used only as background material
and not directly in evidential terms.

As you are dealing with the core file from the discipline standpoint
I would like you to deal also with the question of disclosure.

I have asked Stephen Walker (Secretariat) to advise on this and he
together with Mervyn Jones will attend Police Headquarters at 11.00 am
on Monday next, 24 September, to discuss this with you, particularly
with regard to the mechanics of copying, releasing and charging for
documentation etc.

As already stated, at this time I am currently much concerned in
liaison with our legal representatives at both solicitor and barrister
level with regard to the many evidential problems, not least concerning
jeopardy which have to be dealt with in relation to the forthcoming
Contribution and Inquest Hearings.     I will continue to concentrate
on these but liaise with you on matters of disclosure and would
appreciate it if you would adopt the converse position so that in
the absence of either one of us the other can advise the Chief
Constable, our legal advisers, the Police Authority or others, as
appropriate.




Deputy ^nief Constable

Copy to;    Chief Constable
            Chief Supt Wain
            Supt Bettison
            Stephen Walker (Secretariat)
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                          HILLSBO ROU G H   INQUIRY   TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                        NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                                   Fowler Street
Police Headquarters                                     Birmingham B7 50A
Chester CH1 2PP                                         Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3332
Telephone: 0 2 4 4 -3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2091                Fax: 02 1-35 9 6 7 3 5

 CONFIDENTIAL                                           Your Ref:

R B Wells Esq QPM                                       Our Ref:    JMJ/HJ/184
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police                                  Date:    18 September 1990
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY                                                          South Yorkshire He.
                                                                         13(1
                                                                      I 9 SEP 1990

                                                                     Chief Const
                  W\.r

RKT.RASR OF D O C U M E N T A T I O N COLLECTED FO R TH E
HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

You will no doubt recall that I mentioned on the telephone to you a difficulty
that could emerge if the Coroner chose not to require me to withhold the release
of evidence on his behalf until the conclusion of the Inquests. By now you
should have received a copy of a letter sent to me by the Coroner indicating his
policy for the future. (I have enclosed a copy of this letter for your reference
- Appendix 'A').

It would now seem that the justification for me not to release no longer exists.
As I see it the future policy to be adopted will have to be determined by
yourself, given that the investigations carried out by Mr Dear and later
concluded by Mr Sharp were on behalf of you at the express wish of your
predecessor.

I would be grateful if you would consider this matter and indicate how we are to
proceed from here. The issues to be addressed as I see it are:-

(1) The policy on disclosure as it affects

         (a)    Current requests for copy statements, photographs, etc. (See sample
                at Appendix 'B').

         (b) All previous requests for similar material which is at present on file
             and to which we have responded by saying non-disclosure until the
             investigations have been concluded when the policy will be reviewed.
             (See Appendix 'C').

(2) Who will respond to requests and make the decisions                         as   to   the
    appropriateness to disclose to a wide variety of parties.

(3) Who will process those decisions to action.

(4) The form of words to be used in response.

                                                                    /Continued

 PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT              Chester
                                      -   2   -




In m y view (1) is clearly now your responsibility and therefore (2), (3) and (4)
naturally fall to you or your legal representatives and administration. Having
said that, subsequent discussions between ourselves hopefully will produce the
most efficient and cost effective method.

As the civil proceedings (2nd October) and the Inquests (19th November) near
the requests for disclosure continue. In the meantime I have declared an interim
policy of non-release until you make your dedsion(s) known. Consequently your
early advice would be appreciated.

If you or your staff require more detailed information please do not hesitate to
mnVp contact with me personally or with the Incident Room staff at Nechells,
Birmingham, under the charge of Detective Superintendent Beechey.

Because there could be resource implications for West Midlands Police which have
not been catered or budgeted for, I have taken the liberty of copying this letter
to Mr R Hadfield.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                      JMJ/HJ/162

Dr S L Popper                                                   12 September 1990
H M Coroner
South Yorkshire (West)
Medico/Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ES




HILLSBOROUGH C O R O N A L ENQUIRY - PROGRESS REPORT

As you know, as was always intended, I have now formally resumed m y role as
your Coroner's Officer following the announcement of the the Director of Public
Prosecutions not to t^tke any further action in the criminal courts arising out of
the events at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989.

I have had a telephone discussion with Mr Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, and in addition to him agreeing m y continuing role as
defined by his predecessor, he has made it quite clear that I will act as the link
between you and him and vice versa. Mr Wells also stated that it is proper for
the West Midlands Police to continue to support your Inquests until their
completion.

1 have had discussions with Mr L Sharp, the Chief Constable of Cumbria, and
have agreed a smooth transition between criminal/disciplinary investigations and
the coronal enquiry. Mr Sharp maintains his responsibilities for these aspects
until such a time that he and Mr Wells have agreed that there is nothing further
to be considered. I do not intrude into that process or into Mr Sharp's
responsibilities, I have also re-taken charge of the evidence gathered by the
West Midlands Police team, the bulk of which was initially gathered jointly for
yourself and Lord Justice Taylor.

Strictly speaking the product of the investigation is the property of the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police who, about the same time as did the Home
Secretary, requested the Chief Constable of West Midlands Police to carry out
the investigation. After the publication of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report,
the then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire asked the Chief Constable of West
Midlands Police to investigate possible criminal and police disciplinary aspects, a
process which I started and which was ultimately completed by Mr Sharp.

                                                              /Continued . . .



                                          Chester
                                       -   2   -



Mr Sharp has now passed the Director of Public Prosecutions file and related
disciplinary papers to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police who, I
suspect, through his Deputy is considering the disciplinary aspects, if any.
Ultimately a decision will be made and later announced as to whether any police
officer should face any disciplinary charges. I am not aware of the timing of
that decision, the related announcement, or the likely outcome.

A n important point which now needs to be addressed is the policy on the release
of documents and photographs to interested parties. It will come as no surprise
that throughout the investigations we have been inundated with requests for
information from a wide variety of people including the families, Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield City Council, Eastwoods Engineers, and their
respective legal representatives. In addition, South Yorkshire Police have also
been desirous for some of the information we have obtained. The policy on
disclosure, which has been subject to constant review, has been as follows.

Lord Justice Taylor agreed that anything that had been "heard" was in the
public domain and could be released. However, that material which had not been
heard would not be released. At the conclusion of the public enquiry hearings
and the announcement by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police that
there would be a criminal/disciplinary investigation mounted by West Midlands
Police, Lord Justice Taylor stated that he had no further interest in the unheard
material and that should become the property of the criminal/coronal/disciplinary
investigations. Thereafter we continued the policy of non-release given that we
continued with those criminal and coronal investigations. Clearly it would have
been inappropriate to release anything during that process to any party,
including at that time the South Yorkshire Police, some members of which were
also being investigated. This policy of non-release was continued by Mr Sharp
on taking over the criminal/disciplinary investigations from me early in April of
this year.

The criminal and disciplinary investigations have now been completed and, as I
indicated earlier, the files passed to the South Yorkshire Police. The
protection of non-disclosure afforded by the existence of the Director of Public
Prosecutions investigation has now disappeared and it is appropriate at this
stage to consider what the future policy will be on release of documents. I
might add at this point that we are still receiving a considerable number of
requests for the disclosure of information. Consequently, the interim policy is
to sustain non-disclosure.

It occurs to me, and Mr Sharp agrees, that the policy on disclosure is initially a
matter for yourself and secondly for the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire
Police, if you do not intend to sustain the current policy.

Normally, as I know you appreciate, we would not release any material until such
a time that your Inquests have been completed. Consequently before I raise this
matter, if I have to, with the South Yorkshire Police, I would like you to
indicate whether you would wish the West Midlands Police Coronal team to sustain
a policy of non-disclosure until your Inquests have been concluded and verdicts
returned.
I have taken the liberty of copying this letter to Mr Wells and also Mr Sharp so
that they are aware of the issue.
                                    OFFICE OF KM. CONONB4 FOR             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                          WATERY STREET
                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE               SHEFFIELD
                                                 (West District)
                                                                          S3 7ET
            STEFAN L POPPER. U.B., BMHJ.Sn. 8.W. B A , M.RCOP.                                   I
                                                      CO RON ER


                                 Tefephorv. SHEFFIELD (0743 738B3I        — -14th.-Sef>t-eafeer— ^ -90-



         SLP/JT.
         JMJ/HJ/162.




         Mr. M.Jones,
         Deputy Chief Constable,
         Cheshire Constabulary,
         Police Headquarters,
         Chester♦ CHI 2PP-


         Dear Mervyn,

         HILLSBOROUGH CORONAL ENQUIRY - PROGRESS REPORT.


         Thank you for your helpful and clear letter o£ the 12th of September 1990 the
         contents of which I have noted.

         With regard to the question o£ the release of documents and statements, you
         are of course quite right that apart from those which were already in the
         public domain, it had been my view that these should remain confidential
         until after the conclusion of the D.P.P. inquiry (which has now happened)
         and the Inquests.                                           '_

         The position with regard to the release of copy statements was explored in
         R - v - Hemsworth, Coroner ex parte Peach 1980 C2VLR496 et *ec)• The
         statements in the Hillsborough Disaster were of coarse obtained by West
         Midlands Police who acted for various parties at different stages of the
         investigation.

         On the assumption that the restrictions outlined in the case of Blair Peach
         apply to these statements, 1 would have no authority to order the disclosure
         of the statements to third parties.                                     ^

         However it is my view that in respect of at least those statements which
         have been disclosed to one of the interested p a r t i e s , f a ir n e s s would require
         that the same information is made available to other interested parties by
         the people or organisation who have control and custody of the statements.

          It has been s u g g e s te d to me that the statements have been made available to
          South Yorkshire Police solely for the use in disciplinary proceedings, but
          even if this is in fact so, it does present the recipients with a very major
          problem of ensuring that information supplied for one purpose is not used for
          others. Even if they were able to achieve this, there is still a problem of
          persuading other parties that this has taken place.

          The statements which are currently held by West Midlands Police fall I think
          into three categories:-



flSGCK
LESAAF
17 0y   80       13:41:   TDT1B0U                l-UKU-NfctO                                <KIUUJL



                                    -   2   -




             I.      Those which are* contained in the D.P.P. file and which have been
                     furnished to Syu-Ui Yorkshire Police.

             2       The additional statements in the body files which have been
                     furnished to me but have not, as I understand it, been released to
                     South Yorkshire,

             3       The large number of statements which have not been released to
                     anybody. The reason for this category being that it is considered
                     that the contents of these statements add nothing material to
                     the information which is already available.

             On the assumption that Category 3 statements referred to above are as
             described, I think it would be difficult to argue that they should be
             kept confidential if the relevant statements in the D.P.P. file are in
             fact released.

                 This only then leaves the statements in the body file and it seems to me
                 that there really is not very much point in trying to keep just these
                 statements confidential until after the conclusion of the Inquest if
                 everything else is going to be available for release.

                 In the circumstances, whatever my authority might be with regard to ordering
                 release I feel that it would be improper for me to maintain ray request that
                 the copy statements should not be released to interested parties and in the
                 circumstances as far as I am concerned, I have no further objection to tneir
                 release.

                 Whether or not you or indeed anybody else have the capacity to make copy
                 statements available, bearing in mind the vast numbers, and whether or
                 not these have to be supplied on a free of charge or chargeable basis is
                 not a problem I can help you with but obviously one that will have to be
                 addressed.

                 The difficulty of supplying copies of course is compounded if one
                 applies this to photographic and/or the video evidence-

                 Whilst I entirely agree with you that it is sensible that you should act
                 as a link between me and Mr. Richard Wells, for the sake of convenience
                 I am copying this letter to him and to Mr. Leslie Sharp,


                 Yours sincerely,




             A
         y       H.M.Ob^ftner.


                 c.c. Mr. Richard Wells, Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police.
                      Mr. Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable, Cumbria Police.
                                                                                                                       4ppwdix ' k
H am m ond Su d d a r d s
                             S O L I C I T O R S
    ALAN I. BOnOMlXV              PETFR C. METCALF          DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE  CONSULTANTS:                     EMPIRB HOUSE
    0 TREVOR LEWIS                CHRISTOPHER W. JONES      J PATRICK MITCHELL    ROGER W SUDDAROS cut jl          10 PICCADILLY
    MICHAFI E. QREQSON            ANDREW R. JORDAN          CHRISTOPHER MARKS     SIR DESMOND HEAP                 tBAOfOftO B01 3Lft
    JOHN D DEMAIN                 SIMON R. B. STELL         MICHAELS, HENLEY      IAN W WHITSON
                                                            ROSAMONO J. MARSHALL SMITH
                                                                                                                   TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
    MICHAEL L SHEPHERD            SIMON R. INMAN
    PETER N. W1LBRAHAM            RICHARD W. WADE SMITH     PHIUP W. HARUNO                                        TELEX 5 1 7 8 0 1
    J. RlCHARO ARCHER             JOHN 0 BECKETT            WILUAM N. DOWNS
                                                                                                                   O .X N O . 1 1 7 2 0
    BARBARA W. FRANCE             G. N. IAN GREENFIELD      LUCCI DAMMONE
    C. NOEL HUTTON                STEPHEN GALC              ANDREW H. McDOUGALL                                    FAX (0 2 7 4 ) 7 3 7 5 4 7

    JOHN H. G. HELLER             MARK W. HILTON
    IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH           RlCHARO BURNS


    OUR REF.                                     YDURREfi                                         °*R:h September 1990


               Dear Sirs

               Res        HILLSBQRQWB PTO-BX
               We refer to our recent request for copies of photographs and
               enclose a copy of your response thereto of 22nd August.

               We do have in our possession a copy of West Midlands Police
               Composite Album 2, and a member of the South Yorkshire Police on
               the 6th September did contact a member of your office to obtain
               confirmation that it was in order for the South Yorkshire Police
               to reproduce further sets for us by way of prints from prints,
               which copies are of course required for the Contribution Trial
               to be heard at the beginning of October. We understand that the
               South Yorkshire Police were advised copies by them could only be
               authorised if we obtained official consent from you and we would
               ask you to take this letter as that request.

               We await hearing from you,

               Your                tfully
               HAMM                >DARDS


                                                                          U                                                                     J*
                                                                 j>
                                                                e)

                Chief Superintendent M.J. Foster
                Nechells Green Police Station
                Fowler Street
                BIRMINGHAM    B7 5DA


.                                                                     *
    if f d r   OFFICES:    BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421196
                           JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426866

                                     THIS HAM IS RECUATED By THE LAW SOCIETY W THE CONDUCT OF #NEStVFNT BUS#>FSS
                                     ILL*                                                    i.W •^ i. INU.WWi. I


                                                                                              E•A •D
                                                                                              E D W A R D S

                                                                                              A B R A M S

                                                                                              D O H E R T Y
       * The Detcctive Chief Superintendent                                                   S O L I C I T O R S
         West Midlands Police HQ
         P.O. Box 52
         Lloyd House                                                                          I25''I27PICT0N*0AI>
         Colmore Circus                                                                       IIvt-KKX); II54hG
         Queensway                                                                            TCLCniIONEOT.I7WS3H!i
         BIRMINGHAM                                                                           FAX 0 5 1 734 4339
         B4 6NQ                                                                               UX 10910ALLERTON


C WW       AD.JW.CARR              YOU*KEF Nil 360                                pleaseas-
                                                                                          k Fon   Andrew Davies

                                                                                        3rd September 1990



           D ear Sir

           Hillsborough Disaster - Our client -

           We refer to your letter of 8th August 1990. Now that the
           Director of Public Prosccuitlons has made a decision in this
           matter we should be grateful if you would release
           statement.

           We look forward to hearing from you.


           Yours faithfully




                  ■)




       PARTNERS-JONATHANEnWAROS GARRYADRAMG THOMASDOHFRIY IAN(SEE CMARLC9DOULTON GARYLCSINDAVI9 STtVI-NCAMPfiFII
                        CONSULTANT:BRIANMORRIS ASSOCIATES:DIANEROGK1N PAMELASMAIIFY CHAhMhWMFSON
                                                PARTNERS!IIP«CC»«-TARY:HUCHKENNY
                          FINANCIALSERVICESMANAOH.UANNYCRYER.PROPERTYSCRVICKMANAGFB-JtJIIANnt-1IS
                           Of-nCtfSAT.WAVERTREE?OLDSWAN:KFNWNCTtJN,WALTONANDLIVERPOOLCITYCTNTHE
                           THISFIRMISREGULATEDBYTHEIAW BOttll-1YINTMECONDUCTOTINVESTMENTBUSINFKS
                  Silverman* Livermore
                  S '7 o ’7 L 7 T                     r C                     O                   ”• R       : s
                                  11/13 Victoria Strc«, (.Jvtrpool 1,2 5QQ
                   Telephone: 051 227 1871.        DX: 14190.          Fax; 051 255 0216

                                                                                Our ref:               DRF. JW.SPEARETT

                                                                                Your ref:
D.C.S. Poster,                                                                  When catling please ask for:
Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
West Midlands FOlice,                                                                                  HR FRASER
Nechels Green Police Station,
Pcwler Street.
Birmingham B7 5DA.



12th September 1990.


Dear Hr Easter,

B*L_ Adam Sbeanett Deceased

Many thanks for your letters of 10th and 22nd August which 1 have Just seen
following ay return from holiday.

In view of the recent decision by the D.P.P. is the position relating to the
statement from P,C. 287 Harrapp any different?

1




    A     A<X             C a&            ~ ^                                       S'VfvNpvo ^
    2 )                   Siyvvtfi/                   ai        j s j




          /


          A.F. FARRAND I.I.H , C.P SrF.DDlNO LI-.B. E M. SHf.I.VEY I I ..* .. R.R. FRASFR. I.I.. WAt.KTR 1.1 .R.
                Alto *1 Rutland IlflUM M ail, S to p p h it City, R»w’nm WAT 2FA Tel: 092* 714121. Fa*: M2* 7UI1S
                          137 I n l l w n L am , W att*.**!. LW 0TS. T«t: 05 M M 0 1 JI/J Fa* 05M W 27M
                  A nd In A M O fiatlw »H h   f.AMRr.RTd   A S K K IF K K - l t N   U   Avenue   Dtfr*1* 8ni>s*l«   R rltiu .ii,
                          Ttiii     u aufhurlscd by th* T *w         In the coiutuci of lav«t(n«,<ir Bm lnfw
                                                     V a T R «|. N o 1*4 4312 HI
                                                                                     A ffiM D iX 'C 1
 HILLSBORO UGH INQUIRY TEAM                           FURNIVAL HOUSE
                                                      Furnival Gate
W EST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                              Sheffield S I 4QN
PO Box       Uoyd House                               Telephone: 0 7 4 2
Colmorb ,.ficus O uccnsw ay                           Fax:        0 7 4 2 7 314 83
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                      M edico Legal Centre
Telephone: 021-             extn. 2 0 2 5              Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                       Fax:       0 7 4 2 7 26247
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 50A                                      Your Ref:
Telephone: 021-!_________ extn. 691 2                                 BN/PAB
                                                       Our Ref:
                                                                     M JP /S A
                                                       Date:
                                                                      22 August 1990
                                                □

   Hammonct Suadards
   Solicitors
   Empire House
   Piccadilly
   Bradford
   BD1 3LR



   Dear S ^ t

    HILLSBOROUGH IHQPIRY

    I"refer to your letter of 20 August 1990 requesting copies of VestMidlands
    Police composite Album .1 and 2.

   Although these photographs and other documents and statements were available
   for the Public Inquiry of Lord Justice Taylor the situation changed at the
   commencement of the criminal investigation.

   That investigation, supervised by Captain E N Taylor of the Police Complaint*
   Authority is still on going and all relevant material is subject to that
   investigation.

   I am not therefore in a position to release tncse photographs at this             time.
   However, if the situation changes I will ofcourse contact you.

   Yourb faithfully




                           *

   M J POSTER
   DETECTIVE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT




                                            \


   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                        Dooley and Co
                                                           SOLICITORS

                                               COMMISSIONERS FOR OATHS

                           P.O. Box No. 5, 122 Cherryfkld Drive, Kirkby, Merseyside 1-32 8AA.
                   Telephone: 051           Fax: 051 -549 1061   Emergency Telephone No. 0831 311693


                                                                                                                   p,die 10th September 1990
       Your ref.                                              Our ref.

FIRST CLASS
Inspector Perkins
Necbells Police Station
Fowler Rond
Uminghan
B7 5CA
Dear Sir,
Re:                                                         KIKKBK
We act cn bdialf of the aforancntioned in connection with 8 claim for            personal injury and
consequential loss arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster crt 15th April, 1969. air client states
that he provided you with a statement following the disaster and we lock fcrvard to receiving a copy
of Ms statement as soon as ever possible.

Yours faithfully,                                                                                                                ktiC   C a c d
DOCm&CD.,
                                                                                                                         z)             Swiwv£j a &
                                                                                                                             '   fiaS



                              Kevin A ll-x'IfY. D.md J-'

                            Aim * . t4« Queen. T W , U v^   hh.I . M cr»r*lv   l.l 1 0AL. T d OS1-2S67722 Fax- 05U 7(U 09<
                                                           DCC/JEL
                                                           18 September 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH - LEGAL/INQUEST PROCEEDINGS - PROGRESS REPORT


Spoke with Mr Leslie Sharp (Chief Constable, Cumbria Constabulary) regarding
the above. He made the following points:-


   1.   All the documentation used in connection with both the criminal
         and discipline enquiries is now with the South Yorkshire Police.

   2.   The general view - certainly that of himself, the Director of Public
         Prosecutions and the Coroner - is that the ownership of the
         documentation is with South Yorkshire Police and if they are pressed
         to make available extracts they will refer the enquiry to us.

   3.   Mr Sharp and Captain Noel Taylor are willing to attend South
         Yorkshire Police Headquarters to expedite the consideration process.

   4.   Both the Coroner and the Police Complaints Authority are of the
         view that no discipline decisions should be arrived at in advance
         of the Inquest findings.    Decisions in this instance would appear
         to mean final recommendations as to discipline action or not as
         distinct from the formal hearings. The Coroner in coming to this
         decision is aware of the questions of jeopardy.     We can expect a
         call from Mervyn Jones who, with the Coroner, is trying to determine
         how they can have essential evidence admitted without calling the
         "at risk" officers.

   5.   Regarding production, the documentation already in the public domain
         for example, the Taylor Report, transcripts, and, those videos and
         photographs used as part of the Public Inquiry proceedings, could
         be made available.    The residual documentation in total has been
         considered both in relation to the criminal and discipline process.
         In the opinion of the Police Complaints Authority and the Coroner
         is is understood none of this should be released on the grounds
         of public interest immunity.      This includes using it from our
         standpoint in connection with the Inquest proceedings and the Coroner
         is going to be extremely watchful in this regard.


        Action:

        a.   ACC(Staff  Services)    to   consider   the    question of   disclosure
             in terms of:-

                   i.   the principles to be used,
                  ii.   how specific requests will be authorised,
                 iii.   what mechanism will be used in liaison with the West
                          Midlands Police,
                  iv.   thequestion of charging third parties seeking   this
                          information.
                                      - 2 -

       b.      ACC(Staff Services) to arrange consideration of the reports
               together with Mr Sharp and Captain Taylor as appropriate.

        c.     DCC to inform Peter Metcalf of the above.




Deputy Chief Constable




Copy to:     Chief Constable
             ACC(Staff Services)
             Chief Supt Wain
             Supt Bettison
        P olice                                         10 Great George Street, London SW1P 3AE

C "OMPLAINTS                                                             Telephone: 071
      AUTHORITY

      S Walker                                         Your reference   SW/MR
      Solicitor to the Authority
      South Yorkshire Police Authority                 O ur reference   INV 89/131/79
      PO Box 37
      Regent Street                                    Date             September 1990
      BARNSLEY
      South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ




     jx & .O 'i" l/i/i r   v J c t lK t f"
      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - COMPLAINTS AGAINST ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE,
      MR WALTER JACKSON

      Thank you for your letter of 14 September.

      I am meeting Mr Anderson, Assistant Chief Constable South Yorkshire Police, on 18
      October and hope to be In a position to give you the Police Complaints Authority's
      final view on this matter once the meeting has been held. I will do my best to let
      you know as soon as possible after the 18 October what decision we have taken on
      the timing of our consideration of the Investigation reports.



L.


      GERRY GILLMAN
      Member of the Authority
                 (a/i/                 f

                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                 POLICE AUTHORITY
DP   Tnhnsfnn B A IP FA.                                                                 Telephone Barnsley (0226)_____
Clerk and Finandal Officer                              Pleasereplyto:                        Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                               P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ


^              SW/MR                         n*"'M                                              14 September 1990
This matter is being dealt with by         s,Walker                                  Telephone ext   ^

       Mr G Gilman
       Police Complaints Authority
       10 Great George Street                                                   -
       LONDON                                                                    :
       SW1P 3AE
                                                                                     v

       Dear Mr Gilman
       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - COMPLAINTS AGAINST ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE,
       MR WALTER JACKSON
       As you will be aware, the Police Complaints Authority have supervised an
       investigation into two complaints against ACC Mr Walter Jackson of t h e Smith
       Yo r k s h i r e Police Force made by Mr Trevor Hicks of
                           Middlesex.
       The complaints are that during the Hillsborough Disaster he:-
       1      Failed to take control as Deputy Chief Constable and
      2       Colluded with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of the same Force to
              make a false statement in connection with the disaster.
      The Police Authority has received the Investigating Officer’s report but is
      aware that the Coroner has corresponded with the Investigating Officer
      objecting to any decision as to disciplinary action against any police
      officer being taken before the conclusion of the Coroner’s inquest. Clearly
      this is an issue which concerns you in respect of the other officers who
      will have been complained against and investigated by the Chief Constable of
      Cumbria in just the same way as it concerns the Police Authority in
      connection with the complaints against Mr Jackson.
      The Authority this morning, at its regular meeting, decided to defer
      consideration of the Investigating Officer’s report until after consultation
      with the Police Complaints Authority. The decision went further to say that
      after this has taken place a report should be prepared for the next meeting
      of the Authority which is to take place on the 19 October, alternatively if
      the timescale does not permit, to a special meeting of the Authority.
I am aware that it is the Police Complaint Authority’s provisional view that
decisions on_the disciplinary issues relating to other officers should be
deferred until after the inquest on the ground that new evidence may come to
light during the inquest which it would be proper to take into account in
connection with resolution of the complaints.
The Police Authority would wish to know the intention of the Police
Complaints Authority regarding the disciplinary timetable for the other
officers. I believe it is anticipated a decision will he taken hv the
.      wump.a.Muo nuL.uui-1 ujr wiLMiri tne nexx six weeKs and 1 should be
pleased if you will inform me whetheryou are prepared to inform the Police
Authority of your intention once it is known.
Y mi rc   cinroyal




S Walker
Solicitor to the Authority
                                                    DCC/JEL
                                                    14 September 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH - CONTRIBUTION HEARING


This 'Note for File' should be read in conjunction with my earlier      'Note'
dated 12 September 1990.

Spoke with Peter Metcalf this date regarding those officers who may be called
as police witnesses at the Contribution Hearing.    Set out below is a list,
which has been categorised into priority, identifying the officers involved


        Very Likely to be Called

        Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
        Chief Superintendent Mole
        Superintendent Greenwood
        Superintendent Marshall
        Superintendent Murray
        Inspector Bullas
        Constable Finnegan


        Not Very Likely to be Called

        Chief Superintendent Nesbit
        Sergeant Gutcher
        Sergeant Morgan
        Sergeant Morton


        Unlikely to be Called

        Chief Inspector McRobbie
        Chief Inspector Purdy
        Chief Inspector Bennett
        Chief Inspector Waring
        Chief Inspector Creaser
        Inspector Millett
        Inspector Ellis
        Inspector Selwood
        Inspector Woodward
        Inspector Darling
        Inspector Sykes
        Inspector Delaney
        Inspector Purdy
        Inspector Hand-Davis
        Inspector Harvey
        ex-Inspector White
The question of documentation being made available to officers in advance
of the Contribution Hearing was then discussed and the following was agreed

   1.    The officers very likely to be called will receive personal copies
         of s-

                 a.     the list of issues
                 b.    the expanded list of issues
                 c.    Chief Superintendent Mole's additional statement
                 d.     David Phillips' report (subject to approval being   given
                          by Mr Phillips)

         Note - Messrs Duckenfield, Mole, Greenwood, Marshall and Murray
         are already in receipt of items a. and c.       Inspector Bullas and
         Constable Finnegan have not as yet received any of the documents.

         Additionally, consideration will be given to these officers receiving
         a copy of their original transcripts.


   2.    The officers not very likely to be called will not receive personal
         copies of documentation but a room at PHQ will be made available
         whereby the officers in this category may spend time perusing the
         following

                  a.   the expanded list of issues
                  b.   the core bundle of documents
                  c.   the three main videos (TV/video equipment to be provided)
                  d.   photographs to be used in evidence
                  e.   Chief Superintendent Mole's additional statement
                  f.   David Phillips' report (subject to approval being given
                        by Mr Phillips)

         Additionally, consideration will be given to these officers receiving
         a copy of their original transcripts.


    3.    Once it has been determined that those officers categorised unlikely
          to be called as correct, obviously there will be no need to provide
          them with any documentation.




 Deputy Chief Constable




 Copy to:        Chief Constable
                 ACC(Staff Services)
                 Chief Supt Wain
                 Supt Bettison
                                                     DCC/JEL
                                                     12 September 1990


NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH - CONTRIBUTION/INQUEST/
DISCIPLINE HEARINGS


Arranged meeting this date at Police Headquarters when Peter Metcalf (Hammond
Suddards) had a discussion with the seven "at risk" officers (less Constable
Smith who declined the invitation to attend) concerning earlier questions
raised by that group on the day the Director of Public Prosecutions' decision
was announced.  Action — DCC to speak with PC Smith*

The "list of issues" to be used at the Contribution Hearing, and agreed
by all parties,     together with Chief Superintendent Mole's additional
statement of evidence to be used at the same hearing, was circulated.

Reference was made to the report of Mr David Phillips (Deputy Chief
Constable, Devon & Cornwall) and it was agreed, subject to Mr Phillips'
consent, that report will also be made available. Action - DCC to circulate.

Mr Metcalf explained in some detail the intended police response to the
list of issues.   He made specific reference to the lack of certified crowd
capacity numbers for the individual Leppings Lane pens; the ineffective
escape routes; the radial fences; the ineffective barriers; incompetent
signing; the failure to close the tunnel; non-ticket holders; the recognition
of overcrowding; and, other matters.

The list of police witnesses for the Contribution Hearing will probably
be Chief Superintendents Duckenfield, Mole and Nesbit;       Superintendents
Greenwood, Marshall and Murray;  Inspector Bullas; Sergeants Gutcher, Morgan
and Morton; and Constable Finnegan.

Once this list is finalised there is a need to inform those officers likely
to be called of that fact and also to write to those officers previously
communicated with (down to inspector level) informing them the probability
is they will not be called.   Hopefully this information will be available
soon but if there are problems between the parties regarding the witness
list it is likely that the Judge will insist on a final decision by Tuesday
25 September. Action - DCC to write letters as above.


Evidence

Mr Metcalf explained that the Taylor Report, less those parts objected to
by the parties, is to be admitted as evidence of what occurred on the day.

The police witnesses will be called to identify their transcripts which
will then be in evidence.      In terms of their behaviour thereafter, ie,
whether they will receive the leave of the Court not to give further evidence
on the grounds of self-incrimination, will be a matter for the Judge to
decide on the day.    The Judge, of course, may instruct that the police
witnesses will answer all questions put to them.
I




    The offer was made to the officers present to submit any further statement
    within 24 hours if they wanted to go beyond their transcript.     No such
    statements have been received.


    Inquest

    The forthcoming Inquest Hearing (the likely start date being 19 November)
    was discussed.   I confirmed that the Chief Constable will be asking the
    same lawyers to represent him at the Inquest as have done so to date.

    Mr Metcalf explained that whereas at the Contribution Hearing separate
    representation would not be possible in that individual officers are not
    a party to the proceedings having the status of witnesses,       separate
    representation would be possible at the Inquest.

    In terms of police evidence that is a matter for HM Coroner to decide.
    We can of course try and influence his decision but have no further powers.


    Logistics

    Another matter still to be determined are the logistics in respect of the
    police witnesses at the Contribution Hearing.     It would seem sensible in
    view of the number attending to arrange transport centrally.

    The question of wearing uniform or civilian clothing was discussed and the
    majority favoured civilian clothing at the Contribution Hearing and uniform
    at the Inquest. Action - DCC to consider this further.




    Deputy Chief Constable




    Copy to:    Chief Constable
                ACC(Staff Services)
                Chief Supt Wain
                Supt Bettison
                                                                          DCC/JEL
                                                                          3 September 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH - DISCIPLINE ENQUIRIES


Introduction

On Thursday 30 August 1990, the Director of Public Prosecutions announced
his decision that no criminal proceedings will be taken against any South
Yorkshire Police officer in relation to the Hillsborough tragedy.

Mr Leslie Sharp (Chief Constable, Cumbria Constabulary) contacted me this
same date to say that his discipline files have been completed and now that
the Director's decision is known he would like to deliver the correspondence
to South Yorkshire Police Headquarters as soon as possible and then discuss
the reports with Mr Anderson, ACC(Staff Services).   He also suggested that
a member of the PCA might then attend SYP Headquarters          for further
discussions so that the finalisation of the discipline process can be
expedited. This was agreed.


The Problem

On Friday 31 August, Mr Sharp again made contact to say that the Sheffield
Coroner,  Dr Popper,   had advised    him against returning the     files to
SYP Headquarters on the grounds that to do so would (a) impede his Inquest
enquiry; and (b) give the South Yorkshire Police an unfair advantage.

I t i s u n d e r s t o o d that t h e Director cf P u b l i c P r o s e c u t i o n s has also a d v i s e d
Mr Sharp to think carefully about the ramifications of returning the files
to the South Yorkshire Police at this time.                    Mr Sharp is anxious to return
the files and conclude these issues as quickly as possible.                              He is liaising
further with the Coroner and the Director of Public Prosecutions and will
contact us regarding the outcome as soon as possible.


Our Stance

Having considered the relevant parts of the Police & Criminal Evidence Act
and the Home Office Guidelines, our stance currently is as below:-

    Notwithstanding the fact civil process and the Inquests are still
    to be concluded in relation       to the events    at Hillsborough on
    15 April 1989 we believe we are now, after the Director's decision
    not to take criminal action, entitled to possession of the files.

    The enouiries are completed, the Director of Public Prosecutions has
    had access to the files and, the PCA have issued an Interim Statement.
    All that remains to be done is for the South Yorkshire Police to
    consider the Investigating Officer's recommendations and then make
    their decision as to appropriate discipline action after which the
    PCA will make a final decision.
                                          - 2 -


     The seven accused officers have suffered enormous strain because of
     the uncertainty caused by the criminal and discipline enquiries.
     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield has been suspended for 13 months
                                       The morale and mental well being of
     these officers is of paramount importance to ourselves.    Furthermore,
     some if not all of these officers are required as witnesses at the
     Contribution Hearing at the High Court which will commence on 2 October
     and at the Inquests.   If the discipline proceedings are still pending
     then all or some of them, on legal advice, may refuse to give evidence
     on the grounds of self-incrimination.


Action

It was decided at the Senior Command Meeting this date to await Mr Sharp's
conclusions and if these involve him keeping the files from us at this time
taking urgent legal advice with a view to obtaining the files.

Mr Peter Metcalf has been informed of the above and is writing to HM Coroner
pointing out that if he opens the Inquests during the period of the Civil
Trial commencing on 2 October there may well be significant problems not
least in the availability of witnesses at both Hearings.




Deputy unief Constable


A D D E N D U M :

ACC(Staff Services) this date received a letter from Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield's solicitors stating that Mr Duckenfield may now consider making
a statement in relation to the discipline enquiry.  Mr Sharp notified.

This will delay completion of the discipline file a little in that the
statement, if offered, will have to be recorded and the Investigating Officer
may need to amend his report accordingly.




Deputy Chief Constable
4.9.90




Copy to;            Chief Constable
                    ACC(Staff Services)
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
CHIEF CONSTABLE: L. Sharp Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO “THE CHIEF CONSTABLE*1

My Reference:     CC/BMT                                                              POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                            CARLETON HALL
Your Reference:                                                                                     PENRITH
                     PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL                                             CUMBRIA CA10 2AU
                                                                                       TELEPHONE: 0768 -I
           RB Wells Esq QPH                                                                     TELEX: 64240
           Chief Constable                                                                    FAX: 0768 66106
           South Yorkshire Police
                                                                    i
           Snig Hill
           SHEFFIELD                                 121G
           S3 SLY                                4 S E ?    1390

                                         I
                                         L                                       3 September 1990




           Dear Sir

           HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

            I have this day received a letter from Dr Stefan L POPPER, H M Coroner for
            South Yorkshire West District in which he sets out a number of objections
            to the submission of my reports, the statements, and documentary evidence,
            in respect of the complaints lodged against a number of your officers.

            I am in urgent consultation with the Police Complaints Authority but it is
            unlikely that process will be completed before 10 September 1990.   I will
            be in contact with you again as soon as possible but for now, in view of
            the Coroner’s objections, I shall not be forwarding the relevant papers to
            you. As soon as the matter is resolved I shall be in touch by telephone.

            I have written a similar letter to your Police Authority in respect of the
            complaints against Mr Walter JACKSON, your Assistant Chief Constable.

            I hope you will agree with me that there               is no need   for   the Coroner’s
            objections to be made public at this stage.

            Yo^irs faithfully




            Chief Constable
            Investigating Officer
Note for file:                                                  ACC(D&C)/KIH
                                                                21 March 1990




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

At 4.50 pm on Monday 19 March 1990, I was contacted by ACC Mervyn Jones, West
Midlands, who wished to update me on the progress of the Inquiry.

He told me that they intended to start interviews with the ten officers who had
been served with a Notice shortly after Easter, and also include the Directors
of the Sheffield Wednesday Club and members of the City Council; who that would
be would depend upon the advice of the DPP.  It is their intention to start with
PC's first, probably Constables Illingworth and Smith, and end with Chief Super­
intendent Duckenfield.

The question of the interview of ACC (MS) was raised. Mr Jones indicated that
three officers were to be interviewed for the post of Chief Constable of the
West Midlands Police on Friday 23 March, when it was expected an announcement
would be made, and the Chief Constable Mr Wright would no doubt make a further
request that that person be substituted for Mr Dear as Investigating Officer,
whereupon an interview of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and ACC (MS) could
be conducted by that officer irrespective of his having taken up the post of
Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police.

The inquests were scheduled to be opened between 18 April and 4 May 1990. The
DPP had written-off a QC from 1 April to Easter to do nothing but read the files.

All the proposals that he had indicated were, of course, subject to what the
DPP says. His own appointment at the College had been delayed for 5 weeks to
enable him to conclude the bulk of the Inquiry.




            .yki Constable
            and Complaints)



Chief Constable to see
Copy to DCC
Note for file:                                                  ACC(D&C)/KIH
                                                                21 March 1990




HILLSBOROPGH INQUIRY

At 4.50 pmonMonday19 March1990, I wascontactedbyACCMervynJones, W
                                                                est
Midlands, whowishedtoupdatemeonthe progress of the Inquiry.
He told me that they intended to start interviews with the ten officers who had
been served with a Notice shortly after Easter, and also include the Directors
of the Sheffield Wednesday Club and members of the City Council; who that would
be would depend upon the advice of the DPP.  It is their intention to start with
PC's first, probably Constables Illingworth and Smith, and end with Chief Super­
intendent Duckenfield.

The question of the interview of ACC (MS) was raised. Mr Jones indicated that
three officers were to be interviewed for the post of Chief Constable of the
West Midlands Police on Friday 23 March, when it was expected an announcement
would be made, and the Chief Constable Mr Wright would no doubt make a further
request that that person be substituted for Mr Dear as Investigating Officer,
whereupon an interview of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and ACC (MS) could
be conducted by that officer irrespective of his having taken up the post of
Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police.

The inquests were scheduled to be opened between 18 April and 4 May 1990. The
DPP had written-off a QC from 1 April to Easter to do nothing but read the files.

All the proposals that he had indicated were, of course, subject to what the
DPP says. His own appointment at the College had been delayed for 5 weeks to
enable him to conclude the bulk of the Inquiry.




Assistant   .ykf.   Constable
(Disci^l^   and Complaints)



Chief Constable to see
Copy to DCC
BRIEFING NOTE
FOR CHIEF CONSTABLE                                      19 February 1990



YORKSHIRE TELEVISION - FIRST TUESDAY PROGRAMME 6.2.90

DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH

The question posed at the outset of this programme was, "How large a
catastrophe must there be before THEY make football safe."  'THEY' was never
defined but it was never suggested as a statement that it should be the
police .

However it went on to deal with the central issue of this whole affair -
"what claimed the lives?"

It was a programme of parts, the West Midlands Enquiry, Lord Justice Taylor
(only briefly mentioned), the build-up to the game, the disaster itself and
reflections.  The linking theme between all of these parts was police action
on the day and the conclusion was drawn that the police were generally
responsible.

The two most pertinent statements made

               i)     Failure to close the tunnel was a mistake of
                      the first magnitude.
and
               ii)    Referring to Gate   ’C' - once open disaster was
                      inevitable.


This brings into focus three areas of importance for South Yorkshire Police
at the Coroners Inquest.

               i)     The planning for the event.

               ii)    The planning for a major emergency at the event.

               i ii) The action of individual officers prior to and during.



All these areas will have to be addressed but it is an issue of pre-match
planning that is central to our position and one on which the legal
responsibility is likely to fall.  Were we negligent in carrying out this
duty?, or did we behave in a way which was reasonable and can be seen to be
as such by a reasonable man.  These are basically civil requirements but
will have relevance in the Coroners Court and any criminal proceedings
should they follow.  Our efforts should be to ensure the Coroner has
significant supporting evidence on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police to
avoid bringing in an open verdict.
                                    - 2 -


It was the behaviour outside the ground that caused the gates to be opened;
thecrushing  and deaths were the horrific consequences.  The following
points which arise directly from criticisms in the film are some areas
worthy of examination


               1.   From our previous experience did we have reason
                     to anticipate the number of ticketless fans and the
                     scale of bad behaviour exhibited?

               2.   Was Leppings Lane an excessively vunerable
                     entrance?

               3.    What account did the plan take of these basic issues?

               4.    What in 1989 had changed from the previous year?

               5.   Did we do more than the previous year?

               6.   The co-related nature of preventing disorder and
                     ensuring public safety.

               7.   The limitation on our ability to be excessive in our
                    direction of people in these circumstances.
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:            ACC(SS)/KIH

    From:   Assistant Chief Constable (Staff Services)        Station/Dept:   Headquarters

    To:     The Chief Constable                               Date:           20 December 1989



            SUBJECT:
                                  COUNSELLING OF OFFICERS AT HILLSBOROUGH

             You will recall that you requested me to examine the number of cases of
             officers, particularly from Barnsley Division, who have received counselling
             following the Hillsborough disaster.  This was as a result of comments made
             to you by Inspector Gray at his retirement interview.  In particular, you
             referred to officers on duty at the Leppings Lane end.

             There were Serials both outside and inside Leppings Lane.

             Outside policing was performed principally by   'F' Division officers:

                   34 in total, of which 9 have received counselling at some time
                   since the disaster.

                   This gives a ratio of 1:3.8

             'B' Division officers were confined to duty on the inside of the ground:

                   18 officers performed duty, 4 of which have sought counselling.

                   A ratio of 1:4.5



             It is interesting to note that 11 'E' Division officers performed similar
             duties to those from 'B' Division, and no officers have been seen by the
             Welfare Department.

             As far as I am aware, no comment has been made about the officers from
             'F' Division, and there is so little difference between the ratios that I
             feel there is no cause for concern; however, I have a sk e d P         to
             monitor the situation and should there be any further developments I will
             update y o u .




             Assistant Chiaf Constable
             (StaffS^erviges)




Gen/2
                                                                ACC(SS)/KIH

Assistant Chief Constable (Staff Services)                      Headquarters
The Chief Constable                                             20 December 1989



                      COUNSELLING OF OFFICERS AT HILLSBOROUGH

You will recall that you requested me to examine the number of cases of
officers, particularly from Barnsley Division, who have received counselling
following the Hillsborough disaster. This was as a result of coaments made
to you by Inspector Gray at his retirement Interview. In particular, you
referred to officers on duty at the Leppings Lane end.

There were Serials both outside and Inside Leppings Lane.

Outside policing was performed principally by *F' Division officerss

      34 in total, of which 9 have received counselling at some time
      since the disaster.

      This gives a ratio of 1:3.8

’B' Division officers were confined to duty on the inside of the ground!

       18 officers performed duty, 4 of which have sought counselling.

      A ratio of 1:4.5


It is interesting to note that 11 'E' Division officers performed similar
duties to those from 'B' Division, and no officers have been seen by the
Welfare Department.

As far as I am aware, no comment has been made about the officers from
'F* Division, and there is so little difference between the ratios that I
feel there is no cause for concern; however, I have a s k e d | t o
monitor the situation and should there be any further developments I will
update you.




Assist^rrrtr'Chief Constable
(Staff Services)
MESSAGE FROM MERVYN JONES, ACC WEST MIDLANDS POLICE




Mr Jones has written to you today regarding a further complaint by Mr Hicks
in respect of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Jackson.

Mr Jones wants to speak with you about this.  He is not happy and wants
you to know privately that the nature of the complaint and the words used
are Mr Hicks' and not theirs.

He didn't want   you to receive the letter   'cold'.

He will not be   in the office this afternoon,   but will contact   you next
week.
                                            ACC<D*C)/KIH
Discipline and Complaints                   18 October 1989


 J M Jones Esq MSc
A s s i s t a n t Chief Constable
W e n t M i d l a n d s Police
Headquarters
P O B o x 5 2
L l o y d House
Colraore Circus Queensway
Birmingham
B4 6NQ




 Dear

 SERVICE OF REGULATION 7 NOTICES

Thank you for your letter of 17 October 1989.

I agree that the procedure can be put into practice
immediately and have passed a copy of your letter to
Captain Taylor to Chief Superintendent Denton.

Yours




    Chief Supt Denton

     uupt stuart
                                    i ita
     PC Middup
J MERVYN JONES MSc                              f         MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                  Watery Street
 HILLSBOROUGH        INQUIRY TEAM               W B       Sheffield S 3 7ET
                                                           Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                           Fax: 0 7 4 2 72 6 2 4 7
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                    KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay                                Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                         Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021             extn. 2 0 2 5                  Telephone: 051 - \
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                 Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                             Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                          Our Ref:                    JMJ/DH
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 332
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5
                                                          Date:                       17 October 1989




          K S Anderson Esq
          Assistant Chief Constable
          (Staff Services)
          South Yorkshire Police
          Snigg Hill
          Sheffield
          S3 8LY




          SERVICE OF REGULATION 7 NOTICES

          I forward herewith a letter that I have written to Captain Taylor following
          a telephone discussion I had with him yesterday.  The contents, which
          follow on our discussion of Friday of last week, are self-explanatory.

          I would be grateful if you could acknowledge this letter and enclosure as
          the agreed procedure which, so far as I am concerned, can be put into
          practice immediately.  We will, of course, continue to liaise through Chief
          Superintendent Don Denton.




                                             Birmingham
  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
J MERVYN J O N E S M S c                                M E D IC O LEGAL CE N T RE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                               Watery Street
 H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUIRY T E A M                Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                        Telephone: 0 7 4 2
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                 Fax: 0 7 4 2 72 6 2 4 7
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                  KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensw ay                               Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                       Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021-           extn. 2025                    Telephone: 051-]
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                               Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2976
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                        Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3332                            Our Ref:             JMJ/DH
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5
                                                        Date:                17 October 1989



          Captain N Taylor
          Member of the
          Police Complaints Authority
          10 Great George Street
          London
          SW10 3AB




          SERVICE OF REGULATION 7 NOTICES

          On Friday of last week I spoke to Stuart Anderson in South Yorkshire who
          described to me that some officers were 'suffering' as a result of the
          after effects of the Hillsborough disaster.  In particular, the service of
          Regulation 7 Notices on some officers could exacerbate the situation.   In
          order to avoid aggravating the situation with those individuals I have
          agreed to continue the policy of making arrangements to see officers
          through South Yorkshire Police's liaison officer, Chief Superintendent Don
          Denton.  It is Mr Denton's responsibility to liaise with their own Force
          Welfare Officer to ensure that any individual problems are not worsened.

          Mr Anderson has said that in exceptional circumstances there may be some
          individuals where it would be thought appropriate that a South Yorkshire
          Police Officer could serve the Regulation 7 Notice on behalf of the
          Investigating Officer and without a West Midlands Police Officer being
          present.  I understand that you have had a discussion with Mr Anderson and
          you have agreed that this is acceptable.

          I also agree in principle that this could occur in those cases where South
          Yorkshire Police reasonably believe that this would prevent further
          complications.  However, I would not like this procedure to be routine for
          all officers regardless of their state of health.  Mr Anderson agrees.
          I feel that it is appropriate that the South Yorkshire Police Officer
          serving the Notice must not be an officer engaged on any duty on the day




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T ...............
                                    - 2 -




in connection with Hillsborough.  Secondly, that should the officer being
served with the Notice make any reply then this should be duly noted in
accordance with the Police Discipline Regulations and the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act. Thirdly, that the officer who serves the Notice
should complete a short statement to that effect and forward it to me so
that I can take the appropriate action, which includes, of course, sending
you a copy of the Notice and details of its service.  Following our
telephone conversation of yesterday which agreed this procedure, I have
taken the liberty of forwarding a copy of this letter to Mr Anderson.




   T
NOTE FOR FILE

MEETING HELD AT 2.00 PM ON WEDNESDAY 18 OCTOBER 1989
AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD



Pr esent: P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable
          K S Anderson Esq, ACC (Staff Services)
          P C Metcalf - Hammond Suddards
          S Walker - South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
          Chief Superintendent D Denton
          Superintendent N Bettison


 1.    Legal representation for individual officers?

 Mr .Denton reand* from a letter from MMI regarding legal representation for
 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

 It was concluded that MMI have not closed the door on individual
 representation but are concerned that conflict might arise between the
 Police Authority and individual officers.

 Mr Metcalf said that MMI would be unlikely to accept^t-fr£''1funding of legal
 representation for mope^'than a handful of offjjz-erfs\ His personal view was
 that MMI may h e h a t f p y to support one o r ^ w S i n d i v i d u a l s . Mr Denton said
*no prior indj^cftion of conflict cjpv-'Be obtained before the individuals are
 q ue st i o n g ^ a b o u t these m a t t e r X ^ a l t h o u g h Duckenfield and Greenwood have
 alread'y Intimated that ttieymay allege conflict between their individual
 d ^ ^ n c e and the posijii^n of other members of the South Yorkshire Po li c e .

 After discussion it was agreed that in the first instance all individual
 parties were protected by their staff associations for legal cover up to
 £50,000.   That sum is sufficient to enable representation up to and
 including any criminal charges being laid, thereafter MMI and the Police
 Authority might be approached and asked for their decision on the
 availability of funds to retain defence lawyers throughout a criminal
 tr i a l .

Mr Walker referred to claims he had received from federated members
seeking Police Authority financial support in their claims for damages,
for psychological distress alleged against the club etc.  He had responded
that such actions were not covered by the relevant Circular and therefore
could not be supported by the Police Authority.  He pointed out to the
meeting that claims of this nature if put before the Police Authority
might adversely affect the chances of individual officers subsequently
being supported at criminal trial.

 2.    'Barrier De f e n c e '/Expert Evidence

Mr Hayes said that he had spoken to Professor Usher about evidence he may
be able to give - e.g. concerning injuries sustained by the deceased - to
connect the failure of the barrier with the deaths in pen 3.  Professor
Usher has information about injuries but has no information as to location
of death. ACC Mr Jones has been asked for this information and had
verbally refused.

After discussion it was agreed that Peter Metcalf on behalf of Hammond
Suddards will write to the Coroner, Dr Popper, to ask for information about
                                   - 2 -

where deaths occurred.  (A copy of the letter will be sent for the
Information of ACC Mr Jones).

Mr Metcalf said he was in touch with Mr David Phillips, Deputy Chief
Constable of Devon and Cornwall, who is being supplied with considerable
information about police planning and actions on the day and who has
agreed to give an opinion as an 'expert'.  If his comments are favourable
then he may be called as a witness on our behalf.  Mr Phillips is co­
operating fully with this and this is greatly appreciated.

3.   South Yorkshire Police submission to pre-trial hearing on
     26 October 1989

Mr Metcalf reminded the meeting that Counsel, Mr Payne, had reviewed the
case and suggested that the South Yorkshire Police would, perhaps, attract
25% or more of liability in any civil case.   Mr Payne's view therefore was
that we should admit those aspects of the claims to which we have no
defence on the basis that doing otherwise might be seen as weak,
indecisive, and flying in the face of Taylor.   Mr Metcalf's view is that
it would not be as bad as Mr Payne suggests and by refusing to admit that
liability we have time to discuss with other parties with a view to a
negotiated settlement.

We could instead submit that we do not at this stage admit liability but
cannot be precise about which aspects are admitted/denied because of
difficulties as follows

     1.   difficulties with people being under criminal investigation
          who we may want to call as witnesses;

     2.   aforementioned- difficulties of getting evidence for our case
          that is presently held by the West Midlands investigation
          team;

     3.   in any case we are required, officially,   only to admit or
          deny the Taylor report into evidence.

There followed a discussion about deferring the civil case until after
completion of all criminal matters.

Mr Anderson pointed out that the morale of the Force depends upon non-
acceptance of liability.

The conclusion reached was that we cannot ask for a stay on Thursday week
but can raise at that stage the problem of a decided case, viz. R v. D P R
Futures Ltd., which found that a civil trial must not be progressed ahead
of any criminal proceedings, albeit preparatory matters may be progressed.

After some discussion about our position before the pre-trial review on
26 October it was agreed that we would put to Counsel, Mr Woodward, the
brief that he makes the best of a policy of non-admission of liability and
non-admission of the Taylor Report.  If, however, it is his view that this
is inadvisable then he may admit the document but reserve the right to
challenge certain parts of it.

Mr Hayes also called for Mr Woodward to take account of the fact that the
Chief Constable had on 4 August 1989 accepted the Taylor Report and its
findings.  Mr Woodward must therefore find a form of words that do not
                                  - 3 -

contradict the Chief Constable's standpoint.  (It may be that the findings
were accepted without complete agreement on every item of the report).

At some stage, it was agreed, those aspects of our liability which are
thought indefensible must be admitted.  Our preferred option is that the
insurers can work in the background to secure a negotiated settlement
without us having to face the question of precise liabilities.

Even if we reached the stage of unilateral admission   of liability which is
an option it is not necessary to admit which aspects    of the claim are
admitted.  Mr Hayes said that before this stage was    reached the parties
would all meet again with Counsel to decide a course   of action.

4•   Possible adverse publicity in the light of South Yorkshire Police
     refusal to admit liability on 26 October

The meeting took note of Mr Payne's view that failure on 26 October to
admit some liability would lead to critical comment and possibly adverse
press publicity.  Whilst this meeting considered that to be a possibility
it was thought Mr Payne's view was exaggerated.

Mr Hayes asked Mr Metcalf for his advice on the response of the Force to
such adverse publicity if it came to pass.  Mr Metcalf suggested a form of
words along the following lines:

     "The South Yorkshire Police are, in line with previous undertakings,
     working towards assisting in the early settlement of the claims
     arising from the Hillsborough disaster.  In so doing they have
     complied with all necessary directions in the case to date."

Mr Metcalf offered to be available on Friday 27 October, the day after the
hearing, to advise further if necessary.




Deputy Chief Constable
                          ADDENDUM TO 'NOTE FOR FILE'
         FOLLOWING MEETING HELD AT 2.00 PM ON WEDNESDAY 18 OCTOBER 1989
                       AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD




Third paragraph,   page one, should read as follows




     'Mr Metcalf said that MMI would be unlikely to accept the funding
     of legal representation for more than a handful of officers.   His
     p ersonal view was that MMI may be happy to support one or two
     individuals.   Mr Denton said no prior indication of conflict can be
     obtained before the individuals are questioned about these matters,
     although Duckenfield and Greenwood have raised the matter of
     potential conflict with their personal solicitors who agree with
     the view of Metcalf, ie, that there would be the possibility of
     conflict of interest between the individual officers and the
     position of the Police Authority should MMI (ie, Metcalf) represent
     all parties'.




Deputy Chief Constable
26.10.89       DCC/JEL




Copy t o :

      K S Anderson Esq, ACC(Staff Services)
      P C Metcalf - Hammond Suddards
      S Walker - South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
      Chief Superintendent D Denton
      Superintendent N Bettison
•0HQ-PURCHRSING/FIDMIN                    TEL No .0 2 1 - 2 3 3 - 3 2 5 6                                                 17 Uct 89 16:16 No .00? P .01/02

                                                                                                                                                                    we
                                                                                                                                                                         (S'   B & )




       STAPLE                                   M g s                                            West Midlands Police
       ATTACHMENTS                          A
       HERE                                 ^   B F                                      F A X                       M E S S A G E


       FOR THE ATTENTION OF:                                     C .3>
                                                  ^     C    C
                                                 S o w ^ r >               ° V o c V - ^ > r .        '•.*       "-*? \ c s \ -

                                                      Fax No:                          Ly.               2 L ?:> -<L                  ^


       FROM:                                          West Midlands Police                                                        Date;         Y " \ \ \ 0 \   ^   *A
      V v c e                                         Department:

       V     \   f T   o   n   «    s                 Telephone No:                                                               Extension.

                                                      Fax No;        O      2. \                                          ^ - Z _ S       V o


                                                                                   |         »--- )          \
       Total     number of pages including this page                               j                         j


           Remarks/Action required:             ........................




                                                      \ V. ..                                                       ..^ \ C C




                                                                                  , % r \ C . C . S
                                                                                                      \\\f-




       Authorised by:
                                   Sergeant/Inspector/Head ot Department
                                                                           «*«’W«kUmi
                                                                                    l
                                                                                    »HUjr.
J&INU J - ' U K L M H b l N b / H U n i N   ItL   NO . UZ1~ Z 0 0 ~ Z !Db                       i (   uct   yy   i b : 11>   no .   uur   k.U z/U z




                                                        Claim on
                                                        disaster
                                                      :police
                                                      | dismissed
                                                      |      Claims       th a t senior
                                                          police officers w ill lu c e
                                                          criminal charges over the
                                                          H ills b o r o u g h s o c c e r
                                                          d is a s te r were d ism isse d
                                                          today as speculation
                                                            The man leading the West
                                                          Midlands Police probe in to 'W t
                                                          April s tragedy feaid it waagtoo
                                                          early to say whether changes
                                                          will be made against South
                                                          Yorkshire officers.       ' f
                                                            Assistant Chief Constable Mr
                                                          Mervyn Jones added: T h p i wili
                                                          be a m atter for the D irtctor of
                                                          Public Prosecutions.’* f
                                                            It was suggested in a SuadAy
                                                          newspaper that five aenior
                                                          South Yorkshire officer* could
                                                          be charge* as a result O f their
                                                          actions at Hillsborough whfli W
                                                          Liverpool fans died,
                                                            Legal aourccs were aaid to
                                                          believe the charges of nigooe-
                                                          duct by a public officer « n n d be
                                                          made.
                                                            This charge ha* been 'UMft
                                                          only twice in recent le*(3 fei*-
                                                          tory.
                                                           The charge accuses affim n at
                                                         negligence over public duttjfr.
                                                           But Mr Jones said; HThe
                                                         comments in the m adia tan
                                                         fundamentally apecuiation. It it
                                                         too aoon in the inquiry to ftt
                                                       | specific.'’
                                                           Sheffield Wednesday fooUrfU
                                                       1club officials may also face legal
                                                         action,
,/
  to face criminal charges
  FIVE senior South Yorkshire                                            Hillsborough ground.
  police officers are expected to        by David Lappard                   Representatives of Sheffield
  bee criminal chaises as a re­                                          Wednesday football club,
 sult of their actions during the      It was last used against one      which owns the Hillsborough
  Hillsborough football stadium     of a group of Metropolitan           ground, could also face legal
 disaster in which 95 Liverpool     police officers who were con­        action because of their respon­
 fans died.                         victed at the Central Criminal       sibility for the layout of the
    A team of 60 detectives         Court after beating up a group       ground.
 from the West Midlands, who        of schoolboys in Holloway,              Sheffield city council, which
 have been investigating the        north London, in 1983.               granted the club its safety
 possible criminal aspects of          It can be brought against         certificate, could also be pros­
 the disaster, believe the offi­    any “public officer who wil­         ecuted. So far, insufficient evi­
 cers could be prosecuted, se­      fully and without reasonable         dence has emerged to charge
 nior legal sources confirmed       excuse or justification neglects     any fans for their role in the
 last week.                         to perform a duty he was             tragedy.
    They are expected to be         bound to perform”.                     In a separate investigation,
 charged with 'misconduct by          Detectives believe some           the Police Complaints Au­
 a public officcr” — a charge       Hillsborough officers foiled in     thority is considering whether
 that has been us^d only twice      their public duty to protect        any officers should be disci-
 in recent legal history.           members of the public at the                   Continued on page 2


                                     ing director from Pinner,            FA cup semi-final between
       Police                        north-west London, who lost
                                     two daughters, Sarah, 19, and
                                     Victoria, IS, in the tragedy. At
                                                                          Liverpool and Nottingham
                                                                          Forest, was a failurt of police
                                                                         control.
 Continuedfrom page 1               least three junior officers will       Hundreds of fans were cru­
                                    1>e interviewed about the           shed against perimeter fences
plined for breaking police          allegations.                        in pens on the Leppings Lane
rates. Last week, the authority        TTie disciplinary inquire is      terraces, after exit gates were
said it had received three com­     separate from the criminal in­      opened by officers trying to
plaints about the actions of        vestigation which was ordered       avoid a dangerous crowd
officers on the day of the          last August by Allan Green,         build-up at the turnstiles.
disaster, April 15. They are ac­    the director of public prosecu­
cused of fitiling to act quickly                                           The five officers who could
                                    tions, after he had studied a       face prosecution will be
enough to stop the crush by         report of a public inquiry by
opemnp emergency gates in                                               named in a report by the West
                                    Lord Justice Taylor into the        Midlands police, which is ex­
the perimeter fence that led on     disaster.
to the pitch.                                                           pected to be completed in
                                       Taylor concluded that the        January. A final decisioa on
  One ®f the complaints is          main cause of the tragedy,          charges will be made
from Trevor Hicks, a manag­         which happened during the           Green.
                                                                                                     i n
                                          West Midlands Police
                                                                                                                              \
                                   FORCE CONTROL ROOM                                                                   N      )


                                   NEWS RELEASE                                                                         'i- l-v-x

                                                                                                                        n> c
Edited by:

  AfcLfcASED TO                                         BY                                   AT             ON




                                                                                             / shjti                          1

                                                                                               ^sjL   alajLu     ^cA-*x*4-t
   nEb-SACL    S W IT C H      fcENLfc'AL C 1 * C U L A :    1 ON
      FRuM      'JRa           IS? 1 « 1 i 33
      TO         VR£j                                                                                                   4ct^-
      ME' o S a GE s
                                                                             l / s & s c nlio
                                                                                                                            n \*.
                       Pkhbo    RELEASE       Ft-    O F F IC E R S   CHARGED     RE    ni
                                  FrtUM A C C J O K E * : . . . " T H E C O M M E N T S I N T H £ M E l I A
                                  C O N C E R N IN 9 T H E C R IM IN A L    I N U E i - f I G A T I 014 I N T O t h £
                                H I 1 I S B O R C U G H E N Q U I R Y A R E F U N D A?'*r*.NT<-il.i V
                                S PE iJU L A T i u g , I T  I S T O S O O N I N ( 0 T H E Bn QU I ft           TQ Bk
                                Sr'ECI    F I C A B O U T A N Y T H I N G , T H £ Q U E S T I ON OF , C H / j     ?
                                 A 6a I   N S T A N Y O F F I C E k S 1-, 11 1 E M E N I U A L L ’r B*- a
                                M A T I L R F U r T H E 0 . P . P . i]



                                 4 o a /         2                       OtJ'-l
NOTE FOR FILE

13 October 1989

I raised the question of the   service of   Notices on officers and pointed
out that the first constable   to receive   such a Notice was so badly
affected that he was now off   duty sick.

I agreed with Captain Taylor that we would serve Notices if it was felt
that it was appropriate in certain cases.  Mr Jones agreed with this
action but said that basically he would prefer to do so in order to avoid
any suggestion of malpractice.

In the first instance he will contact Chief Superintendent Denton who will
in turn consult with               who will be happy to advise in terms of
who should serve a Notice, ourselves or West Midlands.  Chief Supt Denton
will also inform the officer's Divisional Commander who may have knowledge
about the officer not known to




Assisfl^nt       Constable
(Staff Services)




cc Chief Superintendent Denton

   Supt Stuart
   PC Middup
NOTE FOR FILE

13 October 1989




At 11 00 am this date I met with ACC Mervyn Jones, West Midlands at his
request.  He indicated that he felt it important to keep me up to date
with events as they were developing and was anxious that the Chief
Constable should be aware of the planned time s c a l e s , and the fact that
nothing had been lost by the delay in their acceptance of the enquiry due
to the rangle over the financing of the investigation.        He wanted to
conclude the enquiry as soon as possible.

In the interim the Coroners enquiries had continued and statements had
been obtained from police witnesses and the positions of 88 of the 95
persons killed at Hillsborough had now been identified either inside the
pens or the ground itself.

He was conscious of the moral of the force and had written personal
letters to each officer thanking them for going through the ordeal of
viewing video tapes yet again.

His enquiry team were now in the process of putting all statements onto
the Holmes Computer and he expected this to be completed by the end of
November/early December.  20/30 criticisms had already been highlighted
and it was intended that a Superintendent would see each person who had
made a criticism and obtain a statement.  This would be referred to me as
the Disciplinary Authority and I would then decide whether to record it as
a complaint. (This is with the full understanding of Captain Noel Taylor -
Police Complaints Authority).  He indicated that the DPP has appointed a
QC to advise the enquiry team, a Mr Gareth Williams a lead on the Welsh
Circuit.  They were furnishing him with information as it happened and in
this way it was hoped to conclude the enquiry more r a p i d l y .

They hoped to commence interviews in January at Furnival House.  The
provision of office accommodation is being arranged by the South Yorkshire
Joint Secretariat.  It is intended that all interviews will be tape
recorded and videos will be available to be shown to persons interviewed,
and it is felt that officers themselves may wish to point to video
recordings to clarify certain actions.  He did also point out that there
was a possibility of'the interview itself being videod.  I expressed some
concern as this was quite outside normal practice and considering the
moral of the force this was a procedure which could cause reaction.   His
team hope to submit a full report by the end of February/March following
the interviews.

On the question of Mr Jackson, he said that he had s e e n __
was writing a full explanation as to whyl
with a Notice.  Additionally she had told him that he had


                                      rt                   r
                                •       that the civil action should commence on the

£     i : l l T l A \ : T o r T laS tie e S tey n ^ H e ^                             S Z .£ r
^         “        ^ t in       p r S   -   ^     S i S l ;   - »   a member or MS team
present in Liverpool on the 26th.


luTTt %             ^ T o n l b f e " » r . i j I ^ T k S i 0"
affected that hewasnowoff dutysiek.
I agreedwith        Taylor that »ewouldservejotices^if
                     C a p t a i n



        “ .SSXi'S.S.ll, hewouldprefer todosoin order toavoid
 any suggestion of malpractice.

    X„the first inistancehewill eontaWho
                                     ct^hief  SuperintendentRentonwho^ill
    •  4-imv-k / - » eill f W T t.h
                                         will DS iidt't'J' ^ - - - - -
                                                               _ _ •-   /~ii ? _ r» O        r> T \
    in turn consult w i t h ^ _________ ^                   Midlands.   Chief       Supt Denton
    wil^also'inform^off^er's Divisional Colander,whom
                                                    ayhaveKnowledge
    about the officer not known to
    At the conclusion^of^hejneetinghhe^did^saytj-hatrhe^beiieved^a ^


    Sunday
    OUilU.Cl^ Times
              J-    but
                    - — did not elaborate further.
    I got the impression that Hr Jones was attempting to build bridges.




    Assistant Chief Constable
    (Staff^Secvdces)




     cc       The Chief Constable
              The Deputy Chief Constable
NOTE FOR FILE

13 October 1989




At 11 00 am this date I met with ACC Mervyn Jones, West Midlands at his
request.  He indicated that he felt it important to keep me up to date
with events as they were developing and was anxious that the Chief
Constable should be aware of the planned time scales , and the fact that
nothing had been lost by the delay in their acceptance of the enquiry due
to the rangle over the financing of the investigation.   He wanted to
conclude the enquiry as soon as possible.

In the interim the Coroners enquiries had continued and statements had
been obtained from police witnesses and the positions of 88 of the 95
persons killed at Hillsborough had now been identified either inside the
pens or the ground itself.

He was conscious of the moral of the force and had written personal
letters to each officer thanking them for going through the ordeal of
viewing video tapes yet again.

His enquiry team were now in the process of putting all statements onto
the Holmes Computer and he expected this to be completed by the end of
November/early December.  20/30 criticisms had already been highlighted
and it was intended that a Superintendent would see each person who had
made a criticism and obtain a statement.  This would be referred to me as
the Disciplinary Authority and I would then decide whether to record it as
a complaint. (This is with the full understanding of Captain Noel Taylor -
Police Complaints Authority).  He indicated that the DPP has appointed a
QC to advise the enquiry team, a Mr Gareth Williams a lead on the Welsh
Circuit.  They were furnishing him with information as it happened and in
this way it was hoped to conclude the enquiry more rapidly.

They hoped to commence interviews in January at Furnival House.  The
provision of office accommodation is being arranged by the South Yorkshire
Joint Secretariat.  It is intended that all interviews will be tape
recorded and videos will be available to be shown to persons interviewed,
and it is felt that officers themselves may wish to point to video
recordings to clarify certain actions.  He did also point out that there
was a possibility of the interview itself being videod.  I expressed some
concern as this was quite outside normal practice and considering the
moral of the force this was a procedure which could cause reaction.   His
team hope to submit a full report by the end of February/March following
the interviews.

On the question of Mr Jackson, he said that he had s e e n _
was writing a full explanation I
with a Notice.  Additionally she had told him that he had
He said that it was intended that the   civil action should commence on the
26 October and before Justice Steyn.    He had received letters asking for
certain material but nothing is being   released.  He does not know whether
the civil side will proceed, but does   intend to have a member of his team
present in Liverpool on the 26th.

I raised the question of the service of Notices on officers and pointed
out that the first constable to receive such a Notice was so badly
affected that he was now off duty sick.

I agreed with Captain Taylor that we would serve Notices if it was felt
that it was appropriate in certain cases.  Mr Jones agreed with this
action but said that basically he would prefer to do so in order to avoid
any suggestion of malpractice.

In the first instance he will contact Chief Superintendent Denton who will
in turn consult with               /tfho will be happy to advise in terms of
who should serve a Notice, ourselves or West Midlands.    Chief Supt Denton
will also inform the officer's Divisional Commander who may have knowledge
about the officer not known to

At the conclusion of the meeting he did say that he believed a reporter a
Mr _______________ ^ould be publishing a lengthy article in this weeks
Sunday Times but did not elaborate further.

I got the impression that Mr Jones was attempting to build bridges.




Assistant Chief Constable
(Stafr^Secvices)




cc   The Chief Constable                  „
     The Deputy Chief Constable         /srf <0
Liverpool Echo
                                                                                                                                                                  Oj
                                                                                                                                                                  co
                                                                                                                                                                  tri


                                                                                                                                                                  CJ>

                                                                                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                                ko/io'/g^

                                                                                                                                                                          the rap
                                                                                                                                                                         by Richard Elias
 .•Vi.
     ■vvvi>
           V\3t
                                                                                                                                                                          DISCIPLINARY papers are
                                                                                                                                                                          to be served on some o f the
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Anger at
                                                    Front tine          jmattwrfreiStiiM.        As a ;
                                                                                                                                                                          officers on duty during the.
                                                                                                                                                                          Hillsborough disaster, it was
                                                                                                                                                                          confirmed last n ig h t
                                                                                                                                                                                                               discipline
                                                    PCsToiled ■“ may
                                                                  M       ’S T i S S ? j g
                                                                       .face a dfedtfiaacy
                                                                                                                                                                             The action, taken by th e
                                                                                                                                                                          West Midlands Police team
                                                                                                                                                                          investigating the policing of
                                                                                                                                                                                                               papers
                                                                                              bearing, so that they                                                       the FA Cup semi-final tie,             Party, said: " It seems y et
                                                                  have, time. to' prepace
                                                    to opengntes’ their cases.
                                                                                               I t 1* probable th a t
                                                                                             som e of th e « f f i« r s
                                                                                                                                                                          h as prom pted claims th a t
                                                                                                                                                                          th e w rong people could be
                                                                                                                                                                          punished.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 again th a t the ones who con-,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 trolled the disastrous polic­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ing operation are evading-
                                                                                             served with the papers as                                                       The serving o f th e papers         responsibility.
                                                                                             a precaution will mot, in                                                    does not necessarily mean                 “It was the senior officers
                                                                                             the end, face m jr form of                                                   any action wilt be taken               who issued th e instruction,
                                                                                             act/oo.                                                                      against -the individuals con­          th a t stressed no-one w a s:
                                                                                              '" " "      Report        ‘                                                cerned, senior police sources          allowed onto the pitch -and
                                                                                                                                                                         said last night.                       th a t th e gates should not be
                                                                                          ^ t « h * d e v e lo p m e n t                                                     However, the move has ted          opened.”
                                                                                           1J follows the publication of
                                                                                            t; the interim report of the                                                 to policemen in South York­             . It is thought th a t a t least
                                                                                             | guM»c inquiry m to the                                                    shire claiming they a re being         one policewoman is among
                                                                                           ■J disaster, chaired by Lord                                                  m ade sc ap e g o a ts in th e         th ose who has received disci­
                                                                                           | Justice Taylor,                                                             attem pt to apportion blame            plinary papers.
                                                                                                  The inquiry heard th a t                                               fo r the tragedy.                         f t is believed to be being
                                                                                               f a n s w e re c r u s h e d                                                 ft has not been reveated            alleged th a t officers tacked'
                                                                feac?Sa h *>w*n*e*er '                                                                                   exactly how m any officers           . initiative when the scale of
                                                                                                                                                                         h a v e b e en s e rv e d w ith        th e disaster                 and
                    DISCIPLINARY papers have been ser-f                               j                                                                                 papers but last nig h t a police        th a t they failed to open
                    ved on some of the South Yorkshire                              *j                                                                                  spokesman confirmed th a t it           em ergency exit??
                    police officers ‘in the front line’ a t the! Nobody at the Police I                                                                                 was a normal procedure.                    Coun Chase                “No
                    Hillsborough.' disaster,,vit was „revealed; Federation m South                                                                                          “ 11 allows th e officers in- ;    instructions re-             jver-
                    »«m!» v •■••.. «<*"* '                   -----*•• • •       ............ Yorkshire wastodav
                                                                                                            available                                                   volved time to prepare their           crowding were               ;n. Jn
                         /* '                                                         . .. for  comment           buf                                                   own defence in the event of            fact, senior off           id the
                      Officers on duty at the perimiter fence, one experienced officer                                                                                  an io n being taken against            Taylor inquiry            tacking
                    against which hundreds o f fans were .s a id : r,Some o f th e                                                                                      them ,” he said.                       fa n s closcly           -geilier
                    crushed, face allegations that-they , lacked* officers on the scene will                                                                               Coun H arry Chase, chair­          assisted in crow       ..trol and '
                    initiative. ••      ... ^                     2 £ i£ L *et'•« * « “ thi®                                                                            man of I.iverpool City Coun­          reduced the cliaaces for mis­
                         But one experienced South Yorkshire officer said                              .,???£■ . > , .                                                  cil’s Hillsborough Working            behaviour.”
                     today:-.‘'T h e y : feel BS’ 'if' they are being- made „ N o w tn w fe d as j t
                    trsM tfnafe n‘                                -        .. — . i->. • • • . » . . «ney «r? oeinjt made
                      ■. A woman politt-officer*                                                    scapegoats for what hap-
                    is believed to be ■among                     By   AMtrawEdwardt^
                                                                                               ■I
                                                                                               . i demoralised.    '
                    those involved. ■
                      ’The papers have been                      •   otoe      reporterh«J1                ^ ^ f f i s.»amne<!
                  . served by the West Mid.
                                                                       lacked in itia tiv e ? s / o & % T f l r ^ u t h
                                                                                                                                            TccfsfcAPH 'a.io-V\
                    disciplinary
                    disanhnary inquiry'
                                      inauiry<' into ropen.An .« *the_ emergency exit, f e ^ u i ^ i i , ^ :                                                                P o ijc % in q u iry
                    the disaster. ;                  .)&'
                       .Those who received th e “if?Btes              in the Le^ : "- doubtedly result in some                   Police complaint                                                                    • The Police Complaints Authority is to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     investigate three complaints agamst
                                                                                                                                                                                     [iffc- Complaints ‘ Au-
                    papers*
                  , w i ( w »*ere9 « Uaiso'm
                                        3 M -,,»ct th
                                                   luee !i l -a n e. . e n d „ a t„                o ffic e rs being served      The Police Complaints Author­                                                       officers involved in the disaster. The
                    heart of th e -desperate w ° u g n . ~                         .-     - . with _ --- disciplinary papers     ity is to investigate three com­                                                    West Midlands Chief Constable, fM r
                  i iiffe-uvinir oMrattoo. tin                  It is a l » alleged u iat *ud senior officers will
                                                                     lack of initiative endeav our to provide
                    s e a l? 6f the - d is a s te r was a 'contributory fac- them wjth maximum sup-
                                                                                                                                 plaints against officers Involved
                                                                                                                                 in th e H illsborough?soccer
                                                                                                                                                                                   4 fe * W
                                                                                                                                                                            cers involved in the Hil­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Geoffrey Bear, has been^apgtiPlM .as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     investigating officer. ..    4 \J fX k .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       An authority spokeswoman would not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                »-
                  '■££Jrw-d                                  to r’in the tragic deaths port through what m il                    d isaster. Mr Geoffrey Dear,               lsborough football disaster                                                         i-
                                                                                                                                                                            which killed 95 people last              say how many South Yorkshire officers
                    ^ J ti r a lle g e d that/ the ■ a t^ M sb o ro u g h jm April be a^re»sful.period.”.                        West Midlands Chief Consta­                                                         were involved or outline the complaints    *
                                                                                                                                 b le, has been appointed as                April.
                                                                                                                                  investigating officer.
                                               Law and order debate                                            THETIMK3




There-was a standing ovation for     year there will be a further 1,100   Parole for serious offenders           to destroy and kill. That is a
M r Douglas Hunt, Home Sec­          uniformed police officers — a        should be restricted and super-        clear test Those who continue to
retary, yesterday at the end of      record on top of a record”           vison on release should be             deny the police and the courts
the law and order debate, in         (applause).                          tightened and extended. >              the power they need to stop the
which he announced new mea­             There was renewed applause           The less serious offender           IRA are not fit to govern our
sures to combat crime. He            when he added: “Nor is that the      should also receive his just           country.”
promised more uniformed police       end. There will be further in­       deserts. That might mean scrub­        • The debate motion called for
officers, an intensified fight       creases in police manpower after     bing graffiti off walls, cleaning      no let-up against, crime and
against drags and new proposals      1990.”                               up litter, or keeping his job but      commended the Government’s
on sentencing.                                                            with deductions to pay com­            triple approach of punishment
                                        Enforcement work against
   He also called for a truce on     drug trafficking continued to        pensation to his victim. There         policing and prevention. It
the question of capital punish­      grow and Britain was setting the     might also be curfew orders.           wanted further effective mea­
ment and promised that can­          lead in Europe. But the message         Courts would be required to         sures against crime.
nabis, cocaine and heroin would      from across the Atlantic was         order parents to attend courts            M r Edward Hess, Society of
never be legalized under a           that enforcement was not             when their children were tried        Conservative Lawyers, moving
Conservative government              enough. Even more important          and parents’ means would be            i t said that the message from
   Opening his speech by refer*      was to choke off the demand for      taken into account in fines and        the conference was simple: “We
ring to the decision taken on        heroin and cocaine, and that         compensation orders. V y               must stay tough on crime”.
capital punishment at last year’s    meant “education, education and         “VVe intend to toughen up our
conference, Mr Hurd said that        education again” (applause).                                                   Prevention was essential. He
there were strong views both for                                          policies to bind-over parents to       shuddered to think what would
                                        “I can tell you today: of a                                              happen if they did not keep out
and against its return.              further strengthening of our
                                                                           6 Choking o ff the                    the drug, crack. “Let’s not miss
   “Let us on this matter respect    efforts against drug misuse.                                                that chance.”
as I do, each other’s opinion and    Based on our successful crime-        demand for heroin                        M r Kevin McKenna, Man-/
get on with the action which         prevention campaigns, the
unites us.”                          Home Office will put support          and cocaine means                     Chester, opposed the motion
                                     teams into neighbourhoods            education, education                   because, he said, it was un­
   Total recorded crime was                                                                                      balanced. They should reflect
down and that was no accident        which we judge are particularly         and education                       upon the failure of the punish­
More and more people had been        at risk from cocaine and crack,                                             ment and deterrence argument
working with the police to           and we are starting with nine              again 9
prevent crime and bring down         such neighbourhoods.”                                                          M rs Teresa Rook, Rochdale,
burglary and car thefts. But the        He was applauded when he          prevent their children from            was loudly applauded when she
figures were still far too high.     urged no one to listen to those      offending and hit them in the         said th a t like her, most repre­
   The police had tougher pow­       who advocated the legalizing of      pocket if they do not”                sentatives would vote for the
ers and judges had been giving       illegal drugs. They might “write        He did not enjoy signing           return of the death penalty.
stiffer sentences for serious,       in the quality papers”, but they     orders under the Prevention of            The chance of the Commons
violent crime. The average sen­      had not thought it through.          Terrorism Act to exclude sus­         ever reinstating capital punish­
tence for armed robbery was up          “I am sure we need now to         pected terrorists, but the powers     ment was shallow (cries of
by 17 per cent and for rape it had   make better sense of sentencing.     did save lives.                       “Shame”).
increased by 60 per cent The         I shall be publishing detailed         There had been a time when              M r Dominie Grieve, Fulham,
new power to appeal against too      proposals soon and the guiding       Labour recognized th a t but in       said th a t so far as he knew,
lenient sentences had also been      principle is plain. Every con­       the spring had again voted            there had been no hanging or
seen in action for the first time.   victed criminal should receive       against the Act                       flogging in Brixton over the past
Convictions for under-age drink­     his just deserts in the severity       “They feel, 1 suppose, they         three months, but the crime
ing were up sharply.                 and length of the sentence. Just     have to humour the friends of         figures there, which had been
 ■ “This time last year 1 prom­      deserts in the strictness of the     Sinn Feinn in their ranks. It will    among London’s highest had
ised further, substantial in­        terms under which he may be\         not do. Today there are 122           been cut to the very lowest A
creases in police manpower. The      released.”                           suspected terrorists excluded         huge community r involvement
number of police officers is now        Sentencing policy should re­      under the Act                         dilring the summer months had
just on 126,000 —well up on last     flect the fact that crimes of           “Put Labour in power and           played a big part in achieving
year.                                violence were more repugnant         these people will be able to range    that. The other factor had been ,
   “I can tell you today Oat next    than crimes against property.        freely. Some of them doubtless        effective police resourcing.      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                          W W Hft'U U/\O.


                                                                                                                             Police
                                                                                                                             to keep
                                                                                                                             veterans
                                                                                                                             on the beat
                                                                                                                        VETERAN policemen, too valuable to lose, may be
                                                                                                                        encouraged to stay on beyond normal retirement.
                                                                                                                          They would still pick u p th e ir lum p sum retirem en t n est egg and
                                                                                                                        th e n be re-engaged — w orking on to boost th e ir pensions. All would
                                                                                                                        keep th e ir ra n k , an d experienced officers would n o t necessarily be
                                                                                                                        deskbound. M any would ca rry on
                                                                                                                        in th e ir old jobs.                          By AUBREY CHALMERS
                                                                                                                           Police officers a re e n title d to a pension
                                                                                                                        of tw o -th ird s of th e ir p a y a f te r 30 years'   yesterday t h a t i t would also be necessary
                                                                                                                        service. B u t th ey u su a lly ta k e th e option      fo r re-engaged officers to u nd erg o a
                                                                                                                        of a lu m p su m p a y m e n t w ith a reduced          m edical e x am in atio n .
                                                                                                                        pension. T h e one-off n e s t egg varies from
                                                                                                                        £37,800 for a co nstable to £69.585 tor a                 M ost of th e 80 p e r c e n t w ho q u it a fte r
                                                                                                                        s u p e rin te n d e n t.                               30 years' service a re aged a b o u t 50 —
                                                                                                                                                                                considered f a r too y o u n g in view of th e
                                                                                                                           Today. W est M idlan d s Police A u th o rity        police m an po w er sh ortag e.
                                                                                                                        will be u rg e d to a d o p t a sch em e allowing         'M an y tak e u p work w ith o th e r
                                                                                                                        officers to re ta in th e ir lu m p su m a n d          em ployers. T h e ir skills a n d expertise a re
                                                                                                                        work on.                                                th ere fo re lost to th e force,' said M r Dear.
                                                                                                                           T h e pension, o r p a r t of it, would he             ‘W ays m u s t be s o u g h t to r e ta in th e
                                                                                                                        h eld back u n til th e officer fin ally retired.       services of tho se officers beyond w h a t
                                                                                                                        Ill th e m eantim e, he w ould e a r n ad di­           lias become recognised a s th e n o rm al
                                                                                                                        tio n al pension rig h ts. T h e idea will              re tire m e n t tim e.’
                                                                                                                        req u ire Hom e Office approval.                          T h e 6,754-strong W est M idlands force
                                                                                                                                                                                gets 70 per c e n t of its re c ru its from th e
                                                                                                                           C hief C onstable Geoffrey D e a r said              19-25 age group. Like o th e r forces, it h a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                    been ra isin g th e re c ru itin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                    age to overcom e th e m a n ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                    power shortage.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      L a s t April th e ceiling
                                                                                                                                                                                                    was raised fro m 30 to 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                    w ith special a rra n g e m e n ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                    fo r skilled people who are
                                                                                                                                                                                                    older.

                                                                                                                                                                                                            P re p a re
                                                                                                                                                                                                      By 19!)5 th e n u m b e r of
                                                                                                                                                                                                   people aged 19-25 will drop
                                                                                                                                                                                                   by 23 p e r cent, m ak in g
                                                                                                                                                                                                   p o lic e r e c r u i t i n g e v e n
                                                                                                                                                                                                  m ore difficult.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘We a re try in g to g et
                                                                                                                                                                                                  older people in to positions
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a t a n early stag e to pre­
                                                                                                                                                                                                  p a re fo r it,' said a police
                                                                                                                                                                                                  spokesm an.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     By p e rsu a d in g re tirin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                  officers to rem ain- fo r an
                                                                                                                                                                                                  add itio n al five^yes^s, th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                  cost of trainiijgetirld w ast­
                                                                                                                                                                                                  age would be.rechg.ced a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t h e f o r c e - k e p feV u p to
                                                                                                                                                                                                  stre n p fh         '•■■fr
                                                                                                                      YORKSHIRE POST THURSDAY OCTOBER 12 1989                        3




  A FOOTBALL club last ftWMggave              Yorkshire’s chief fire officer, Mr Harry
                                                                                                  'new                                    and now they warjt       io j^ u c e it even
                                                                                            thousands locked outside who will then
| warning that proposed safefy-Mmoves         Wright, says it should be further reduced     become a police problem.
  could this weekend bring the sam6 crowd     to 11,040 so exit gates can cope if a quick     “The question is what will happen to          “The council has1^$*!&thority to
  problems which led to the Hillsborough      evacuation is needed.                         these people. Will the police open the        impose the reduction^# ijUs but it seems
  disaster.                                     This season United, who are heading         gates and allow them in or try and move       wrong to do this th#jiay before a big
    Councillors meeting tomorrow are          the Second Division and remain un­            them to another area of the ground,           match, giving us so little time for
  almost certain to drastically reduce the    beaten, have averaged around 9,000 on         although all our s ^ ^ n g is for members     preparation. If it is imposed, we are likely
                                              the kop. But thousands more are ex­                                                         to appeal.
             By MIKE WOODCOCK         4       pected on Saturday for the visit of                                                           “All our home matches this season
                                              promotion rivals West Ham United.                The Hillsborough disaster, in which 95     have been against teams who have not
  kop capacity of Sheffield United Football     United’s managing director, Mr Derek        fans were killed, dc'cured when thou­         been that attractive and the kop attend­
r Club —just 24 hours before their biggest    Dooley, said: “Tne new limit, which is        sands of supporters arrived late causing a    ance has been around the 9,000 mark.
| match so far this season.                   almost certain to be approved by council­     bottleneck outside the ound, which
    The club fears that thousands of          lors on Friday when they meet, means we       police eased by opei        he exit gates,
  spectators could be left milling outside    can allow just over ,1,000 more into the      allowing fans to rush] n and, crush
  the locked kop entrance, causing the sort   kop on Saturday • than we’ve been             those alre^dyf^n ^he        nd. ?>
  of bottleneck that led police to open the   averaging all season. ,<V         & •, ■ $       Mr DodLef 1**1'           mple of years
  exit gates at Hillsborough with such          "Yet West Ham is'our most attractive        ago we coiild have iw than 20,000 on
  disastrous consequences.                    fixture so far this season and we are         our kop and now we’ve ljeen told it must
    The capacity on the United kop was        expecting our biggest crowd. If we get        be 11,040. We cannot understand why so
  reduced from 18,600 to 14,500 at; the       14,000 wanting to stand on the kop, which     many different figures keep cropping up.
  beginning of this Season, but South         is perfectly possible, there will be          First it was reduced to 18,600, then 14,500
/ tf
                                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Note of Conference held at Counsel's chambers, 24 The Rope Walk

Nottingham on 11th October 1989.


Present:          S   Walker             - SW            )
                  J   Mead                - JM
                  K   G Holmes            - KH           ) MMI
                  J   A Crookes           - JAC          )

                  S Walker               - SW (P)        ) Solicitor to Police
                                                           Authority

                  P Hayes                - PH                Deputy Chief Constable
                                                             South Yorkshire Police

                  W C Woodward QC - )
                  Richard Payne  - )                         Counsel
                  Patrick Limb   - )

                  P C Metcalf    - PCM )                 Hammond Suddards
                  B M Norcliffe - BMN )


1.   Query     was raisedas to number of notified claims                           to date

      JAC    reported            there     were about 650 (there are no claims

      yet    from          60    confirmed        injured and the relatives of 12

      deceased).                There is no further information with regard

      to the brain damage cases.



2.   PCM     pointed            out    that       Eastwoods solicitors           have   not

      admitted         that Chapman died in Pen 3 also, no defence has

      been     received           from     the     3rd Defendants in the two lead

      actions          Chapman and Rimmer.               SW (MMI) stated these were

      awaiting the M M I 1s comments following this meeting.



3.   Item     1       of    the       Agenda      was then discussed i.e. who was

      giving          the       instructions        as   to the        conduct     of   the

      Defence.
SW     (MMI)     stated         there     could be a conflict between the

Insured        they       represented          and     different solicitors had

therefore        been          instructed       to represent the SYP and the

City     Council.              SW      (MMI) confirmed the MMI's indemnity

was for £8.5 million plus costs.



SW     (MMI) confirmed that instructions to Hammond Suddards

in     this matter are to act solely in the interests of the

South       Yorkshire Police.                If the interests of MMI and SYP

should       conflict SW (MMI) was emphatic that the interests

of     the SYP were paramount.                       Counsel's instructionswould

derive from Hammond Suddards                         who would beresponsible for

ensuring            that        these         reflected     the   interests     and

instructions of SYP.



WCW     asked PH what were the feelings of the SYP after the

publication              of the Taylor Report.            PH said that although

the     Chief           Constable       had publicly stated his acceptance

of     the     report, that was not an acceptance of everything

in     it     and       that     as     far     as    the police were concerned

liability               remained        to      be      determined    in      civil

proceedings.

                    ✓

SYP     were     particularly concerned because the enquiry was

supposed to

1.           find out what happened, and

2.          make recommendations

the     concern          was     that there had been, at least to their

perception,             no     rules    of procedure or evidence and that
      the public interest in the urgency of the matter had been

      allowed to override every other consideration.



8.    WCW    asked           what     specific           findings were challenged.           PH

      said that he was concerned about the more general aspects

      in particular:



      1.       the           extent        of the liability apparently placed at

               the door of SYP, and



      2.       the           legal        implications        of    the finding that SYP

               were in "control" of the crowd.



9.    RP    pointed out that there were two separate issues to be

      looked           at,      the            situation     as     between      the     present

      Plaintiffs             and the present Defendant and the question of

      apportionment                 as         between      the      SYP   and     the     other

      Defendants.               The        first point therefore to be looked at

      was    whether           there           was any realistic chance of avoiding

      any civil liability.                      Section 2 of the Agenda (items A to

      E)    were        looked           at.        PR confirmed that all the points

      listed       A     to     E     pre-supposed           that     the police did have

      "control" in one form or another.



10.   PCM    pointed           out       that with regard to control the report

      says that there was de facto acceptance of responsibility

      for    Crowd           Control           by   SYP.     A civil trial would very

      likely       come to the same findings.                       PH was much concerned




                                               3
      that an admission of de facto control would equal de jure

      acceptance               for the        future. WCW said that this      did not

      follow        and       that     the     responsibility       for control would

      depend        on         the time and the place.        He stressed that an

      acceptance of responsibility for control on 15 April 1989

      would        not        amount     to    acceptance of a liability for all

      time and all football matches.



11.   PH     pointed           out     that    one of the recommendations of the

      report        was        to    have a written agreement with the clubs,

      and this had now been done with all five clubs in the SYP

      area.         The agreements are not in contractual form, being

      by     way     of        a written record of the allocation of duties

      between Club and Police.                   He pointed out and it was noted

      with         interest            that    all   the   duties     for   monitoring

      overcrowding              etc     are    now   placed quite firmly with the

      club.          PH's           concern is that any admission in the civil

      litigation              would allow the Club to argue that SYP had to

      exercise           control        in     future, although he accepted there

      was     no point in defending the claim in general if it was

      "futile".                 He specifically requested confirmation that

      all     the        findings in relation to the matter would relate

      solely        to        the     events    on the 15th April 1989.        Counsel

      present        and        PCM     indicated     their   view     that   nothing

      admitted           or    decided in the present action could bear on

      the     future          position.         WCW added that if the action was

      compromised             then     no judge would have the opportunity of

      commenting on the law.
12 .   Discussion        as to responsibility for "control" continued.

       RP pointed out that to defend the matter at a trial would

       be     difficult        in    view      of the Harris-v-Sheffield United

       case where the SYP asked for money and were awarded money

       for     crowd control.             This case was two years prior to the

       events at Hillsborough.



13 .   With     regard       to      items A to E, PH stated that even if it

       was     accepted       by      all parties (as it was) that there had

       been     control on the day, he could not accept, he did not

       think,        an admission of a duty under items B and D.                       This

       to him seemed to go too far.



14.    RP     said we required expert evidence from the independant

       police        authority        with     regard to the planning and other

       matters        i.e.     would       another      police      force have handled

       Hillsborough the way SYP did.                    He stated that it was very

       late     in     the     day to be trying to get this but we should

       try     and     put     this in hand by the PTR. PCM said that was

       noted     but     the        PTR    dated      the   2 6th     October   was     not

       necessarily a deadline.                 PH mentioned that D Phillips had

       been     contacted           with ^regard        to this.      RP did point out

       that     whoever        did this needed to be fully briefed and to

       accept     the        fact     that     they    would     be     strongly      cross

       examined in a witness box if it came to that.                        WCW stated

       that     any     expert        evidence is not going to put us in the

       clear    however good it may be with regard to the planning

       point; it will just go towards the contribution element.




                                          S'
15.   Returning          to     the control point PH stated that as             far as

      he     understood            it    he   was     being    told there would be a

      finding        of       some      assumption of crowd control by the SYP

      and     therefore some of the the matters under A to E would

      have     to        be accepted by the SYP.              WCW did point out that

      the     ones mentioned A to E are the ones which present the

      most     problems.                There   was     then some discussion as to

      whether        the        individual points A to E related to the SYP

      as a whole or to individual officers ie. D Duckenfield.



16.   The     form       of     an admission was discussed and PCM queried

      whether .an             admission did have to include any details at

      all.          He queried whether he could not simply state that

      in     the     light         of    the report the SYP feel there is some

      liability           and      the      claims    will    therefore be met.    PCM

      suggested           that       only     possibly in replies to third party

      notices would we actually have to admit facts.                       RP stated

      that     at        some      point      in the proceeding we would have to

      make a positive case of the matters we accepted.



17.   PH at this point accepted there was some liability                        on the

      SYP     and it was nonsensical to dispute that there was any

      liability; he stated that all Counsel present and PCM had

      given        the     same advice on-this point and he accepted it.

      It was the amount of liability that was in issue.



18.   SW     (P)     said       PH      may   wish    to     refer the matter   to the

      committee of the Police Authority as there were of course

      councillors             to     answer to and it was not something (i.e.
an     acceptance                 of    liability) that could really be dealt

with        as     far as the SYP were concerned today.                           A meeting

is     to        be held in the near future and PH agreed it would

be     discussed             at that meeting as of course the authority

have a great financial interest in this.



SW     (MMI) pointed out that at a previous meeting with the

authority,              it had been agreed that MMI had the authority

to     make        a        decision on liability. SW (MMI) specifically

asked        PH        to     give           no    indication to the committee that

liability may be accepted.



Item 3 on the Agenda i.e. Hill was then discussed.



WCW     said           that        he        did    not think it would work and PCM

stated that the differences between the present situation

and     Hill           could           possibly          be    1.   the    private property

element           and        2.        the        Compensation for Criminal Injuries

Compensation Board Scheme.



WCW     made           the        further          point       that although Hill may be

successful              with           regard       to     planning in relation to the

match,'          he /did not think it would succeed with regard to

the actual actions taken on the day- itself.



SW (MMI) stated that he would have liked to have run Hill

but     also           thought              it    would       not   be    successful.   WCW

reiterated              that           it    may     be       possible    to use Hill with
regard       to     the       situation      outside        the     turnstiles i.e.

police horses and planning etc.



SW     (P) also pointed out that the SYP were actually being

paid        for our services that day and questioned whether it

was     therefore justifiable to plead public policy.



WCW confirmed that in his opinion the Hill case would not

succeed with regard to the pen injuries, and PH therefore

stated that if all the lawyers agreed that Hill would not

work successfully it should.be dropped.



It     was agreed that the Hill case might still be relevant

to a test case on injuries outside the pens.



Next        to be discussed was when and how liability would be

dealt       with.         RP said we could openly continue to defend

the     action          or could admit liability in a formal manner,

allowing          judgment        to   be    entered        with     damages     to be

assessed.               The    Plaintiffs         would     then drop out and we

would       continue          claiming      contribution against the other

Defendants.               RP favoured the second option; PCM pointed

out     that       only        cash flow was against the second option

although the big claims in any event would not be settled

for     a    long       time.     It   was        pointed     out     that     all the

Plaintiff's             costs     would      be     saved     if     liability    was

admitted          and     costs    would be recovered in any necessary

contribution proceedings.
28.   SW     (MMI)      said that        a third way would be to come to an

      agreement with the other Defendants as to the appropriate

      proportions.          No contribution proceedings would then be

      required.



29.   With    regard     to accepting liability, RP pointed out that

      the     Plaintiff     would       accept the Taylor report, the club

      would     accept     it     as    would      the   other parties.        Did we

      accept     the     report?         We     possibly        could   say   that we

      acceptedit        subject         to Hill.     PCM pointed out the terms

      of the previous          orderwith regard to the report.                PCM and

      RP     pointed     out    that it would be difficult to deal with

      the     Taylor     report as we could not comment on individual

      officers.           PH said        a schedule        of     acceptance or non

      acceptance worried him.



30.   There was a discussion as to the disciplinary proceedings

      which     had been served on certain officers. SW (P) stated

      there     would     in    his opinion be no conflict if the Chief

      Constable        admitted        civil liability. At all events these

      hearings would be taken by a different Chief Constable.



31.   In    discussing     the     Taylor       report again both WCW and RP

      would     like decisions making on the Taylor report as soon

      as     possible     and feel it may be a line by line exercise.

      SW (MMI) does not want the report to be admitted until he

      has had an opportunity to negotiate.



32.   The    form of admission was then discussed and RP provided

      a draft admission admitting some liability on grounds B C
      and     D        in section 2 of the Agenda.                      This in any event is

      to be discussed between PH andT PCM prior to the pre-trial

      review.



33.   The     Taylor           report      was         discussed            further   and    it was

      decided           that       we     will not           be    necessarily in a worse

      position           than      the     other Defendants.                   PCM stressed that

      the     club        will      not         want     to admit Taylor as that would

      equal        an        admission          of     liability        and      Sheffield       City

      Council           will       certainly           not     give a blanket acceptance.

      Tactics of how to deal with the Taylor report at the pre­

      trial        review          were discussed at length; WCW was prepared

      to     take        a stance with the judge that we cannot agree it

      and     the        trial       will have to take its normal course.                          RP

      thought that this course would show the SYP as being weak

      and     indecisive.                 PCM pointed out that even if the judge

      required           a     schedule          or     list      of        acceptance      or   non-

      acceptance              of    the     points          within it, he would at worse

      give        us     two       weeks        to     do    that.          SW (MMI) stated that

      within           two     weeks      of         the PTR he would very likely know

      whether           there       is    any        prospect          of     agreement with the

      club1s insurers.



34.   After very lengthy discussions it was agreed that:- •



      1.          There         would      be        no admission of liability at the

                  PTR.

      2.          If this led to criticism of SYP this would have to

                  be accepted.             The general view (RP dissenting) was

                  that there was not likely to be severe criticism.


                                           io
      3.       If        within           the     next       month       or so (no fixed time

                   limit being set) it became clear                         that a negotiated

                   settlement             was     not going to be concluded then an

                admission                of      liability         (in a form to be agreed)

                would be made.



35.   Items        5     on       the     Agenda (criminal proceedings)were then

      discussed).                  PH pointed out that interviews with police

      officers          were        due to begin in December or January and a

      report was expected to go to the DPP before April.                                    There

      was     no        intimation             from       West Midlands or the DPP as to

      what     the        decision            would        be.     The     senior officers are

      obviously              fearful,          and Mervyn Jones the Assistant Chief

      Constable              of    West       Midlands           had     been     on   TV and made

      mention           of        the     common       law offence of neglect of duty,

      which        has        caused          worry       among        some of the more junior

      officers.              SW (P) stated that there has been a great deal

      of     activity             within         the      Federation with regard to this

      matter.                It     has been agreed with West Midlands that no

      police officer will be interviewed without a lawyer being

      present.



36.   PH     pointed^             out     that there was a feeling within the SYP

      that at the enquiry officers were encouraged to speculate

      and     say        things           they      may      not have otherwise said, not

      having           been told of the risk of this.                           He stated that on

      the     24th           or     25th      May      the       police     specifically asked

      Counsel           about           criminal       liability          and the response was

      that there was nothing to worry about. Apparently certain

      officers now think that they had bad advice at the time.


                                               *c,
37.   A discussion followed of Mr Duckenfield's evidence at the

      enquiries.                It was concluded that his evidence could be

      brought in to any civil proceeding or criminal proceeding

      even     if        it was required for the transcriber to stand up

      and     to     say        that    they         had        heard and recorded in good

      faith        the        things outlined in the transcript. This would

      be     the     case        even     if       Mr      Duckenfield       was involved in

      criminal proceedings and refused to answer any questions.

      RP     concluded           that the SYP are seriously hampered in the

      conduct            of      their        case      by       the   threatened       criminal

      proceedings.



38.   PCM pointed out that we as the SYP could apply for a stay

      on     the     grounds           that     we      were       being     hampered     by the

      possible criminal proceedings in the conduct of the civil

      matter.            We     could     not        however apply on anyone else's

      behalf.            The recent AMEX case was discussed with regard

      to     stays        and     criminal           and civil proceedings.              RP said

      that     he thought the situation is reasonably open as each

      case depends upon its own facts.



39.   PCM suggested              that     individual              officers and the Police

      Federation               could      make          their          own   applications     as

      interveners for the actions to be stayed.



40.   WCW pointed              out     that        it was necessary to know from PH

      what     was        "in     the     wind" with regard to this particular

      point.        PH        responded        that        as     the enquiries were being

      conducted          by West Midlands Police for the DPP it was not

      possible to obtain information as to progress.



                                         • ~L- .
41.    The     question of whether a summons should be taken out to

       stay     the       proceedings or whether our difficulties should

       simply       be        flagged     at the PTR was discussed.            Also, WCW

       was     to     speak       to     Edwin     Glasgow because with regard to

       criminal          proceedings Mackrell is also in the firing line

       for a prosecution.



42 .   PH     was     very       concerned       that     an application for a stay

       might        prejudice            criminal        proceedings      against        the

       individual             officer     PCM and SW (MMI) said this would not

       in     itself          prejudice       individual      officers.        SW      (MMI)

       confirmed          once again that we did not wish to do anything

       which would prejudice individual officers.



43 .   With     regard to these criminal proceedings it was decided

       that     PCM       would        send a fax to the solicitors acting for

       the     individual            officers      stating     that we would like to

       take     a     statement          from them etc.        Presumably a negative

       reply        would be received which is of course in support of

       our application for a stay if needs be.



44.    In     conclusion          it     was decided that the problem with the

       criminal          proceedings          would     effectively     help     us    with

       regard       to        Tavlor as we could on the 26th October at the

       pre-trial          review advise the judge that we were unable to

       make     a decision on Tavlor because of our difficulties in

       speaking          to    key      witnesses.       The problems could then be

       flagged,       without           an actual application to stay.                It was

       agreed by everybody present that this was the best wav to

       deal         with        the       matter        for   the      present        time.



                                          .
45.   Item 7 on the Agenda was discussed and it was agreed that

      this was not applicable at present.



46.   Item 8 on the Agenda was discussed and                                   itwas   agreed that

      this was        not applicable at present.



47.   Item     10         on the Agenda was discussedand itdecided                             that

      this was        not applicable at present.



48.   It     was    decided            that the contribution notices should be

      served.



49.   The Hawley action was discussed.                                  PCM pointed out that if

      a     list     of        documents              was        delivered on this action, he

      would apply for stay persuant to the order of 2 6th July.



50.   The     RIBA        report           was        discussed and RP pointed out that

      their        conclusion              is        that        the    trap   element     (ie. the

      perimeter           fence        and small gates) led to effectively the

      overcrowding              as     opposed              to     the overcrowding being the

      main     cause       with            a        trap        following.      The emphasis was

      therefore           on     the           opposite direction from that found by

      Taylor.             ,It        was       decided           that    we    required     further

      information              from        RIBA        i.e.       was this point made solely

      with     hindsight              or       was         it    a valid point we could make

      something of.



51.   With     regard to the collapse of barrier 124A, WCW and PCM

      thought       the        point           was     well worth pursuing.               RP stated

      that the report needed clarifying and that the expert had



                                           ‘    .
          to     show        firstly effectively that Eastwood was negligent

          in     tests of 1988 (not up to the ordinary standard skill)

          and        secondly          that the barrier did fail at substantially

          less       than        the        test      pressure. There was some confusion

          because          the        Taylor          report seems to indicate that tests

          were       done        on the barrier, the results of which were not

          disclosed             to     the        enquiry.            The causative effect of the

          barrier was discussed and all agreed it was still a point

          which        should          be        pursued         only of course in relation to

          contribution.                PCM        is to try and obtain details of these

          tests (if any) that the HSE appear to have done.



52.       SW         (MMI)        asked whether any agreement with co-defendants

          in         negotiations should                    be cleared with the committee or

          not.        PH and SW (P) confirmed that only people who needed

          to agree to this with him were themselves.



53.      RP     then        gave        out       a    hand-out          of   the things     which he

          considered required to be done prior to the PTR.



54.      Finally           it     was       decided              that at the pre-trial review a

          stance        would          be        takenon         the    Taylor      report and the

          criminal          proceedings                as    outlined         above.       If however

          negotations                 do    not       work        between     the      co-defendants,

          liability             will        be     accepted            in a form to be discussed;

          RP         has        already drawn               up    a     directions      order for the

          assessment             of        damages - everyone agreed the form of the

          categories             was       most       helpful.          Also a summons for third

          party       direction would be sought. These have already been

          drafted by RP.

                                                                                             PCM/BMN

LFNCB04017/BMN (M)                                ^
NOTE FOR FILE                                           ACC(SS)/EMP

                                                        4 October 1989

COMPLAINT AGAINST MR W W JACKSON



Following the receipt of the Deputy Chief Constable's note for file
dated 3 October 1989. I contacted ACC Mr Jones West Midlands PoliceJ




I gave Mr Jones points of contact for him to get in touch
                                                     At the same time i
told Nr Jones that  Because or t m s advice tne force had not directed
the letter from the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat to Mr Jackson, but
that we felt it would be wise to let him have sight of such a letter
before the service of a Regulation 6 Notice.   Consequently I asked him
to keep in touch with me in order that the letter could be passed to
Mr Jackson                                                    Mr Jones
was in full agreement and indicated tnat ne would Keep r u n y in touch
with ourselves.




Assistant Chief Constable
(Staff ^ e r v i ^ s )


cc   Deputy Chief Constable




                                                            7/«f f t
                                                               DCC/JEL
                                                               3 October 1989


NOTE FOR FILE:


COMPLAINT AGAINST MR W W JACKSON


On 2 October 1989, correspondence was received at Police Headquarters from the
Secretariat addressed to Mr Jackson notifying him of a formal complaint
concerning his actions at Hillsborough by Mr Trevor Hicks.




This date (3.10.89) I spoke with                                   and asked
aboutj                    k r Jackson receiving information as above.




     Action:

          ACC(SS) will keep the correspondence from the Secretariat on file
          under confidential cover for the time being and inform Mr Jones of
         _____________________ as above together with her address etc. so that
          if he wishes he may make contact direct with her.

          The letter addressed to Mr Jackson will only be released to him
                                                       In this connection we need
          togetner witn nr J o n e s to worK. out some mechanism so that we Xnow
          when Mr Jackson is                                           ensure the
          letter from the Secretariat is received oy m m in advance of the
          service of the formal Notice.       ACC(SS) will arrange this.


For information full details of                             are as follows:'




                  only -                  Sheffield
                           telephone

                                                Sheffield
                           telephone

     ** this was the number at which I spoke with              m 3.10.89




Deputy Chief Constable
NOTE FOR FILE                                            ACC(SS)/EMP

                                                         4 October 1989

COMPLAINT AGAINST MR W W JACKSON



At 10 00 am on Tuesday 3 October 1989, I had a telephone conversation
with Mr Noel Taylor - Police Complaints Authority.  He indicated that he
has now formalized the change of Investigating Officer from Mr Cooper to
the Chief Constable of West Midlands, Mr Dear, in respect of the
complaints made by Mr Trevor Hicks, which involve both Mr Jackson and
other senior officers on duty at Hillsborough on the 15 April.

He intimated that he had spoken with Mr Dear and urged the early service
of Regulation 6 Notice on Mr Jackson

        ne understood m a t a letter nad oeen sent rrom tne boutn
Yorkshire Joint Secretariat to Mr Jackson informing him of Mr Hick's
complaint, and that Mr Dear had been appointed Investigating Officer.
Therefore as far as he was concerned Mr Jackson was aware of the
complaint itself.

He went on to say that early service of Regulation 6 Notice may be
impeded by Mr Dear's absence for 4 weeks on holiday.___________________




Whilst in conversation I referred to a file involving persons by the
name of|_______ p.nd 2 questionnaires which had been forwarded to
Superintendent Carlisle of the Greater Manchester P o l i c e , who is
presently conducting an enquiry.     I notified Mr Taylor that
Superintendent Carlisle will be interviewing the 2 persons who have
answered the questionnaire and if their description of the policeman
involved does not fit that of the officer they are investigating they
will take a statement from the           and refer them back to West
Midlands for their attention.




Assistant Chief Constable
(StafrsServj^ies)
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                                                                                                   MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                                                                            W atery Street
 BILLSBORCJUGI+ IN Q U IR Y TEA M                                                                                                                    Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                                                                                                     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                                                                                              Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 2 4 7
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                                                                               KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay                                                                                                                           Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                                                                                                    Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 000, extn. 2 0 2 5                                                                                                         Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                                                                                                            Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                                                                                                     Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                                                                                                                            J M J / V S C
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                                                                                                       Our Ref:
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5
                                                                                                                                                      Date:              3     O c t o b e r     1 9 8 9




              P        W   r    i g h t            E   s   q C B E 0 S t J                          C B I M
             C    h    i   e    f C o n            s   t   a b l e
             S    o    u   t    h Y o r            k   s   h i r e P o l i c e
              P    o   l   i    c e H e            a   d   q u a r t e r s                                                                                                                                     bcV-
             S    n    i   g      H i l l
             S    h    e   f    f i e l d
             S    3         8   L Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ijto.




             O    n         b    e h    a    l   f o       f m y         C h i   e     f       C o n     s      t a b l e , G e o f f r   e y D e a r ,      I w i s h t o a d v i s e y o u
             t    h    a   t       w    i    t   h e        f f e c   t f r       o     m      W e d     n      e s d a y 2 7 S e p t     e m b e r 1 9 8   9 w e f o r m a l l y t o o k
             r    e    s    p    o n    s    i   b i l     i t y       f o r       t    h e       f u    l     l c r i m i n a l a n      d d i s c i p l   i n e i n v e s t i g a t i o n a s
             p    r    e   v    i o     u    s   l y       d i s c    u s s e    d         i   n y        o     u r l e t t e r d a t     e d 1 6 A u g     u s t 1 9 8 9 a n d M r D e a r ' s
             r    e    p   l    y       d    a   t e d        1 7     A u g u    s     t        1 9 8   9     .

             C o n t a c t h a s a l r e a d y b e e n m a d e w i t T r C a p t a i n T a y l o r o f t h e P o l i c e
             C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y , w h o i s s u p e r v i s i n g t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n a n d h e i s
             f u l l y a w a r e o f t h e p r e s e n t s i t u a t i o n .        I h a v e c o p i e d t h i s l e t t e r t o h i m .

            M     a y I                  a    l s o t a        k e t h i s o p p o r t u n i t y t o r e a s s u r e y o u t h a t w h i l s t t h e
            f     i n a n c            i     a l c o n         s i d e r a t i o n s w e r e b e i n g r e s o l v e d n o t h i n g w a s l o s t i n                                          t h e
            m     o m e n t            u     m o f t           h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n s g i v e n t h a t w o r k c o n t i n u e d f o r t h e                                         C o r o n e r
             i    n S h e              f     f i e l d .         '




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T . . . W-PY?1. House* Birm ingham
                                      Mr P W r i g h t
SOUTH
YORKSHIRE
JOINT                                                    .   ^
SECRETARIAT                                     A            ^




              With the Compliments c
          THE CLERK TO THE SECRETARIAT


This matter is being dealt with by:
P.O. Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire                             Telephone No. Barnsley^
S70 2PQ                                                    Ext. 62U
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B .A., I.P.F.A.                                                       P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                        Regent Street
                                                                                        Barnsley
                                                                       South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                Telephone Barnsley (0226)

Our Ref:      P0LET30/SW/MR               Your Ref:                   Date.2 9   September 1989
This matter is being dealt with by    Mr S Walker                     Telephone ext.QZ0




           PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
           Dear Mr Jackson
           COMPLAINT BY MR TREVOR HICKS
           Further to my letter of 1 September 1989, the Police Authority considered the
           complaint against you by Mr Trevor Hicks at its meeting today and decided to
           investigate the complaint.
           The investigation will be undertaken by Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of
           West Midlands and is to be supervised by the Police Complaints Authority.
           Yours sincerely



  ff       R C Johnston
           Clerk and Financial Officer




   P       ACC Mr W Jackson
           South Yorkshire Police
           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
           SHEFFIELD South Yorkshire
  L                                                    J
     P olice                                                         10 Great George Street, London SW1P 3AE

C   o m p l a in t s
                                                                                            Telephone: 01-2736440
    ^ jt h o r it y

    K S Anderson Esq                                                              ACC(C&D)/GD/KIH
                                                                     Your reference
    A ssista n t Chief C o nstab le                                               277/F33/89
    South Y orkshire Police                                          Ourreference D C C /G D /N JP
    Snig Hill
    SHEFFIELD                                                         Date            INV/89 131/79,89,92,100 ENT
    S3 8Ly
                                                                                      29 S ep te m b er 1989




    I und erstan d a g r e e m e n t has been reac h ed b e tw e e n th e South Yorkshire and West
    Midlands Police A u th o rities and t h a t Mr D ear is now in a position to a c c e p t th e role of
    In v e stig a tin g O f f i c e r ^ n th e above c o m p la in ts. I w rite to o ffic ia lly co n firm th e
    A u th o rity 's approval o f^ ap p o intm en t of Mr Dear as Investigating O fficer.

    I have b een in touch w ith ACC Ken Cooper to bring him up to d a te on th e situ ation and
    have asked him to pass his p ap ers over to Mr D ear.

    I shall be writing to Messrs Leigh and S p e a r r itt advising th e m th a t the A uthority will be
    supervising th e in v estig atio n of th e ir co m p lain ts and to Mr Hicks regarding th e change
    of Investigating O fficer.




    E N TAYbfcfflU____
    A u th o rity M ember
                                                                                      P.l

                                                       Suftt£Kfci*AL
                   NOT FOR PUBLICATION as it
                   contains exempt information                   N3o.
                   within para       I * . ...... of          HOME OFFICE
                   Sch.l2A to the Local Government     Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                   Act 1972 as amended._ _ _ _ _ _ _          Direct line:01-273
                                                             Switchboard: OH

                                                                                A
Our reference:    POL/89 850/4/30
Your reference:   POLET 43/SW/KR




  R c Johnston Esq BA i p p a
  Clerk and Financial Officer
    to tha south Yorkshire
    Pollea Authority
  PO Box 37
  Regent Straat
  B a m s lay
  South Yorkshire
  S7 0 2P Q                                                 12 Sapteabar 1989



                    (A— t   CTe>lnv\S ,i f w \


  HILLSBOROUGH t COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

  I               to tha talaphona convarsation between Mr Waghorn of this
                        MrcW?i£?r °n 7 s®Pteml5er  which Mr Walker informed
                          Smith's letter of 31 August will be discussed at
                   on lS !h                                           9*n#raX       PurP ° * «

  4 ofdlS*B^vt               °ould b®, ®ome c o n c e r n over paragraphs 3 and
              s ® i t h a latter, which c o v e r the costa of the criminal
 investigation announced recently, it may b e heloful if I eiarl**v
 our position slightly prior to F r i d a y - s h e e t i n g ? it was not o S
               I        ^   impression that we would not agree to the
 U?      pay*#nt op these costs, a l t h o u g h wa did consider that some
 nlJP 4      already undertaken by t h e West Midlands Police could b e
 oSst.    connection with the c r i m i n a l investigation at no extra

 As Mr Boye Smith said,   the criminal investigation coats were                             not
                                       special payaant.
 therefore is further information on t h e likely acale of the                              new
 criminal investigation including a n estimate of the number                                 of
          involv#d*       possible l e n g t h o f time required and                        tha
           «nOSt‘   Mr " alker * id mention that it could be in                             the
 3 £ ? h £ f !.° » ? ! J io n vArunad .f * rlo d o£ up to 6 * onthB a t a c o ,,t o f
'8 9 - 0 9 - 1 2   11=27                                                P. 2




          that tha proposed coats are rtft«onabl«( th»n th« special
 payment   would  extend   to   them  as part    of  the   nwii«a!v
 investigations by Heat Midlands arising from Hillsborough.

 payrolft?* tot ^ « W                      £ ° P<5 that y°Ur authorlty   commence
                      J?.      West Midlands in respect of the coats of Lord
           ?«. T*ylor • Inquiry itself which the Weat Midlands Police
 W « » t ° M i d L ^ - <1w * ^ r ady^ VOif ed for* zt a##mfl un^air to leave the
 of fu?Jhir                    S 9     reimbursement of theae items,   on receipt
 Se i i U !et v o u ^ l i ° n C°nvfe/ nin,g the criminal investigation costs
 poaaible                      aubatantive reply on thia point as soon as




                                                  M J ADDISON
                                                          DCC/JEL
                                                          7 September 1989


NOTE FOR FILE:


Spoke with Sir Richard Barratt a.m. this date about an apparent contradiction
between his understanding that West Midlands Police are pursuing both the
criminal and discipline matters without reservation and the apparent reality
that they are not pursuing the discipline matter at all and only pursuing the
criminal investigation on a limited basis in confining their effort to those
enquiries which are co-terminus in this regard with the Inquest inquiry.

Sir Richard was surprised and assured me that he had a personal assurance - as
had Sir John Woodcock - from Mr Dear that the position accords with his belief
as outlined above.

I faxed to Sir Richard a copy of Mr Dear's letter to the Chief Constable dated
5 September 1989 together with Mr Wright's response of 6 September.



Was contacted p.m. this date by Mr Geoffrey Dear who referred to the Chief
Constable's letter of 6 September.  He said there appeared to be some
misunderstanding and the position is as below:-

(a) Mr Wright had agreed, during the interregnum concerning the continuing
debate of the financial problem, that the necessary Regulation 7 Notices would
be served by Mr Cooper as an expedient.  Mr Dear is fully aware of the
absolute need for West Midlands Police to progress this enquiry in due course
but as nothing now can be started until the criminal enquiry is concluded this
is not an immediate problem.

(b) With regard to the criminal enquiry this is actively currently subsumed
within the Inquest investigation which is active and this situation will
continue it is estimated for a further six/eight weeks.  Thereafter the
criminal enquiry will continue notwithstanding the financial position.

Mr Dear emphasised that in extremis he will undertake both the above even
in the face of disapproval of his Authority.  However rather than enter into
such a confrontation situation with his Authority now, he hopes that
the financial difficulties will be overcome within the six/eight week period
referred to and his difficulties with his Committee end and asks our
understanding of this.

In short Mr Dear is making it clear that we need have no fears in that the
West Midlands Police will carry out to conclusion both the criminal and
disciplinary enquiries notwithstanding the financial arrangements eventually
a greed.

(c) Had a further discussion with Sir Richard Barratt (p.m.).   He said that
having discussed the situation with Sir John Woodcock he is now firmly of the
belief that the criminal and discipline matters are being and will continue to
be progressed without reservation.  Sir John is meeting with Mr Dear tomorrow
(8.9.89) and will discuss this with him.




Deputy Chief Constable
From: G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                                                                                                                                                              WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
      CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                                                                                                                                  HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Telephone: 021-




      P         W    r    i g h t          E   s    q C B E 0 S t J                            C B I M                                                                                                 G J D / A M S
      C    h    i    e    f C o n          s   t    a b l e
      S    o    u    t    h Y o r          k   s    h i r e P o l i c e
      P     o    l   i    c e H e          a   d    q u a r t e r s
      S     n    i   g       H i l l
      S    h     e   f    f i e l d
      S    3          8    L Y                                        7         S e p t e m b e r                    1 9 8 9




       PERSONAL




       I s p o k e t                        o P e t e             r H a y e s                t o d a y c                 o n c e        r n i n g y o u r l e t t e r t o m e o f 6 S e p t e m b e r
       1 9 8 9 -   I                        h o p e t              h a t h e w              i l l h a v                 e t h           e c h a n c e t o d i s c u s s o u r c o n v e r s a t i o n
      w i t h y o u                         a s s o o             n a s p o s               s i b l e ,                  i n w          h i c h c a s e I f e e l s u r e t h a t h e      w i l l b e
       a b l e t o p                        u t y o u             r m i n d a               t      r e s t                 o n         t h e d o u b t s t h a t y o u r a i s e d .

      T    h e a l l i m                        p   o r t a       n t f a c t o r     t o e m p h a s i s e i s c o n t a i n e d i n t h e t h i r d l i n e o f
      M    e r v y n J o n                     e    s p e         n u l t i m a t e   p a r a g r a p h , w h e n h e w r o t e t o S t u a r t A n d e r s o n o n
      m    y b e h a l f                       o    n 5           S e p t e m b e r 1 9 8 9 .      H e s a i d " n o t h i n g i s b e i n g l o s t a t t h i s
       t    i m e i n i m                      p    e t u s      " a n d t h a t r e m a i n s t h e c a s e .

       Y   o    u w          i l l          k n o       w       t h a t I h a v                e   b e e             n       i    s    s u e d       w i t h a       d i r e            c t    i v e b y m                         y P o l i     c e
       A    u    t h o       r i t       y ( r           e i     n f o r c e d a s               r e c e             n t    l    y        a s t       h i s m o r n i n g )               n   o t t o e                            n g a g e     i n " n e w
      w    o    r k "           -         h o w e       v e    r t h a t m i g                h t b e                   d   e    f    i n e d .            I a m     u n w i            l l    i n g t o b                         r i n g i     n t o p l a y
      m    y        s t       a t u      t o r y           p    o w e r s a n d                f o r r                e a   s    o    n s t h        a t m a y b e o b                 v i    o u s t o                             y o u w o     u l d
      w    i    s h           t o        b e s          e e    n t o c o m p l                y w i t                h       t    h   i s d i        r e c t i v e .

      A    t        t h e            m    o m e n t              t h e r   e       i   s n o           p   r    o    b l e       m .           T h   e w      o r k t h          a t w e           a    r e                d o i n g i s v i t a l
       t   o        t h e            c    r i m i n          a l i n       q    u i    r y a       s       e     s    s e n       t i a     l p      r e p    a r a t o r       y w o r       k ,          b        u     t i s
       c    o    i n c i d          e     n t a l l          y a l s       o       e    s s e n    t i     a    l        t o          t h    e i      n q u   i r y f o         r H M          C o     r o         n     e r .        T h e r e i s
       t   h    u s , d             e       f a c t         o , a          d    u a    l i t y        w    h    i    c h           a l l    o w s       m e      t o o p         e r a t e        w    i t         h      o u t l o s s o f
      m    o    m e n t u           m       w h i l          s t s t       i    l l       s a t     i s     f    y    i n g          p o     i n t   s m      a d e b y            m y A       u t     h o         r     i t y .        T h e y ,
      i    n    c i d e n          t     a l l y ,              a r e      a    b o    u t t       o        p    u   t m          o r e        p r    e s s   u r e o n             t h e      H o      m e                O f f i c e f r o m
       t   h     e i r e            n     d t o               s e e k       a      r    e s o l    u t     i    o    n o          f t        h e      f i n   a n c i a l          p r o b     l e     m s                  t h a t e x i s t .

      I          t    h    o u   g h t t            h   a t , a f t              e    r o u r t e                 l e p h o n e                c o n v e r s a t      i    o    n    o n 4              S    e     p     t    e    m b e r ,     y o u
      w    e    r    e       i   n a g r            e   e m e n t w              i    t h t h e R                 e g u l a t i o             n 7 N o t i c           e    s       f o r d i           s     c     i     p    l     i n e p u    r p o s e s
      b    e    i    n    g       s e r v e         d      b y K e n             n    e t h C o o p             e r , s i n c                 e h e i s s             t    i    l l a p p o            i     n     t     e    d        a s
       I    n    v    e    s t   i g a t i          n    g O f f i c            e    r .        I m m e           d i a t e l y                a f t e r w e           s    p   o k e , I                t     e     l    e    p     h o n e d   C a p t a i n
      T    a    y    l    o r       a t t           h   e P o l i c              e       C o m p l a i           n t s A u t h                o r i t y a n d               h   e w a s i              n            f    u    l    l a g r e     e m e n t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c o n t
                                  - 2 -

with this course of action.  We appreciate that there are     legal
requirements concerning speed of service and these would best be
discharged by the Notices being served by Kenneth Cooper.  We both
recognised that any disciplinary inquiry would, thereafter, have to be
left in abeyance until after the criminal matters had been resolved.
By that device, therefore, the requirements of the Discipline
Regulations could be discharged without delay and my position with my
Police Authority would not be compromised.  It is, I suggest, a neat
solution in all the circumstances.

One of the over-riding considerations must be the necessity to be fair
and even-handed with your officers in both disciplinary and criminal
inquiry matters.  I know that you have this already at the forefront of
your mind.  I am absolutely satisfied that their position is not being
prejudiced at the present time, neither do I envisage that occurring in
the future.  On the contrary, I would not allow such a situation to
develop.

Of course, I would be pleased to discuss any of the details on the
telephone, if you wish.  I shall be at the office or on the car
telephone all next week.
      BY:                                                                                           ; 8 - 9 -S 9                            8 : 21AM ;                                          021 233 3256-s                                                                                0742523409; 8 2
8HQ PUR CHASING/flD NIM                                                               TEL N o .021-233-3256                                                                                                      8 Sep                            89                 8:16 No .001 P .02




    From: G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                                                                                                                                                                            WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
          CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                                                                                                                                                HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Telephone: 021-!




            P                 W     r     i g h t              E   s   q C B E 0 S t J                              C B I M                                                                                               GJD/AMS
            C           h     i     e     f C o n              s   t   a b l e
            S           o     u     t     h Y o r              k   s   h i r e P o l i c e                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _
             P           o     l     i     c e H e             a   d   q u a r t e r s                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8- 9 ' * * .
             S           n      i    g        H i l l
             S           h      e     f    f i e l d
              S          3            8     L Y                                                                                                                                                                             7          S e p t e m b e r                            1 9 8 9




              PERSONAL




                  I s p o k e t                                    o P e t e       r H a y e s                  t o d a         y c o n c e r n i n g y o u r l                                 e         t t e r t o m                     e o f 6 S e p t e m b e r
                   1 9 8 9 .   I                                   h o p e t        h a t h e w                i l l             h a v e t h e c h a n c e t o                                  d         i s c u s s o u                    r c o n v e r s a t i o n
                  w i t h y o u                                     a s s o o      n a s p o s                 s i b l         e , i n w h i c h c a s e I                                      f         e e l s u r e                       t h a t h e w i l l b e
                   a b l e t o p                                   u t y o u       r m i n d a                 t r e             s t o n t h e d o u b t s t h                                  a         t y o u r a i                     s e d .

                  T          h e a l l i m p o r                              t a n t         f    a c t o r t o e                         m p h a s i s e i s c                     o n t a i n e d i n t h e t h i r d l i n e o f
                  M          e r v y n J o n e s                              p e n u l      t     i m a t e p a r a                      g r a p h , w h e n h                      e w r o t e t o S t u a r t A n d e r s o n o n
                  m          y b e h a l f o n                                5 S e p        t     e m b e r 1 9 8 9                     •       H e s a i d " n                     o t h i n g i s b e i n g l o s t a t t h i s
                    t         i m e i n i m p e t                             u s " a        n     d t h a t r e m                         a i n s t h e c a s e                 .

                  Y          o      u w          i l l            k n o   w        t h a t I       h             a v e       b e e n i s               s u e d           w i t h a d i r e c                      t i    v e b y m y P o l i                                  c     e
                   A          u      t h o       r i t         y ( r        e i    n f o r c e d a              s    r    e c e n t l y               a s t h           i s m o r n i n g )                         n   o t t o e n g a g e                                   i     n " n e w
                  w          o      r k "            -          h o w e   v e     r t h a t        m             i g h     t b e d e f                i n e d .               I a m u n w i l                     l i    n g t o b r i n g i                                  n     t o p l a y
                  m          y         s t        a t u        t o r y        p    o w e r s a n d                 f o    r r e a s o n              s t h a            t m a y b e o b                          v i    o u s t o y o u w o                                     u     l d
                  w           i      s h           t o          b e s      e e    n t o c o m p                 l y       w i t h t h i              s d i r            e c t i v e .

                   A         t          t h e            m     o m e n t           t h e r   e         i    s n o          p   r    o    b l e m .            T h     e w       o r k t h                  a t w e a            r e                 d o i      n g     i s           v i t a l
                   t         o          t h e             c     r i m i n     a l i n        q     u i     r y a        s      e    s    s e n t i   a l         p     r e p    a r a t o r               y w o r k ,              b         u     t i         s
                   c          o      i n c i d            e     n t a l l      y a l s       o        e     s s e n     t i    a    l        t o t     h e        i    n q u    i r y f o                  r H M C o            r o         n     e r .               T h e     r e           i s
                   t         h      u s , d              e         f a c t    o , a          d     u a     l i t y         w   h    i    c h a l      l o     w s         m e      t o o p                 e r a t e w          i t         h      o u t            l o s s         o    f
                   m         o       m e n t u            m       w h i l       s t s t       i    l l         s a t     i s    f    y    i n g p      o i    n t     s m       a d e b y                    m y A u t          h o         r     i t y        .        T h     e y     ,
                    i         n      c i d e n           t     a l l y ,           a r e      a     b o     u t t        o      p    u    t m o r     e        p r     e s s    u r e o n                     t h e H o         m e                 O f f        i c e f         r o      m
                     t         h      e i r e              n    d t o            s e e k       a       r     e s o l     u t    i    o    n o f         t h    e        f i n    a n c i a l                  p r o b l e       m s                  t h a       t e x i        s t     .

                    I               t     h    o u g      h t t h a t , a                 f t      e    r o u r t e                  l e p h o n e            c o n v e r s a t           i         o     n    o n k            S     e      p    t     e     m b e r , y o              u
                    w         e     r     e        i n       a g r e e m e n t              w       i    t h t h e R                 e g u l a t i o          n 7 N o t i c               e         s        f o r d i          s     c      i    p     l      i n e p u r p             o s e s
                    b         e     i     n    g s        e r v e d b y K                 e n       n    e t h C o o p              e r , s i n c             e h e i s s                  t         i    l l a p p o           i     n      t    e     d         a s
                     I         n     v     e    s t i      g a t i n g O f f             i c       e    r .       I m m e            d i a t e l y             a f t e r w e                s         p   o k e , I               t     e     l     e     p     h o n e d C a             p t a i n
                     T         a    y     l    o r         a t t h e P o l                i c       e       C o m p l a i            n t s A u t h            o r i t y a n d                         h   e w a s i             n             f    u     l     l a g r e e m              e n t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c o n t                . . . .
 ‘vRCU t BY:                                                                                        ; 8 - 9 -8 9                                   8 : 22AM ;                                                      021 233 3256-^                                                       0742523409; # 3
8HQ PURCHflSING/flBMIN                                                                TEL N o .021-233-3256                                                                                                                     8 Sep 89                              8:16 No .001 P.03




                                                                                                                                                             -         2         -




               w      i      t  h        t h i   s         c    o  u r s    e         o f       a  c     t i o n .                  W e              a p     p    r    e    c    i a    t e             t h a t        t    h e r   e        a r e               l e g a    l
                r     e      q  u     i r e m    e     n t     s      c o    n c      e r n     i  n     g s p e           e     d o       f            s    e    r    v    i    c e         a   n    d      t h   e s     e w      o    u l d b e         s t b e
                d      i     s  c     h a r g    e     d        b y t        h e          N o   t  i     c e s b            e     i n g              s e     r    v    e    d       b    y        K    e  n n e    t h        C o   o    p e r .            W e b o t        h
                r      e      c o     g n i s    e     d         t h a t        a     n y       d  i     s c i p l         i     n a r     y             i    n    q   u    i    r y         w   o    u  l d ,         t    h e r   e    a f t e r ,           h a v e        t o b e
                 l     e      f t        i n       a    b e     y  a n c    e         u n t     i  l        a f t e        r         t h    e           c    r    i    m    i    n a    l        m     a  t t e    r s        h a   d        b e e n         r e s o l v    e d .
                B     y           t    h a t       d    e v    i  c e ,         t      h e r    e  f     o r e ,             t    h e        r        e q    u     i    r    e    m e    n t     s        o f       t h    e D       i    s c i p l i      n e
                 R     e      g u      l a t i    o     n s         c o u     l d         b e        d    i s c h a         r     g e d              w i      t    h    o    u    t        d e    l    a y a        n d       m y          p o s i t i      o n w i t           h m y
                 P      o     l i     c e A        u     t h    o r i t      y         w o u    l d         n o t            b    e c          o      m p    r    o    m    i    s e    d .                I t       i s   , I             s u g g e s     t , a n              e a t
                 s      o     l u      t i o n           i n        a l l         t     h e      c i      r c u m s        t     a n c     e        s .

                O      n      e        o f        t h e o v e r -                r i d      i n g             c   o n s     i d e r            a     t    i o n         s m u            s     t b          e t h      e n      e c e       s s i     t y       t o b      e f        a i r
                 a      n      d       e v e     n - h a n d e d                 w i t      h y          o    u   r o        f f i c           e     r    s i            n b o            t    h d           i s c i   p l i    n a r       y a        n d      c r i m    i n a     l
                 i      n      q    u i r y         m a t t e r s .                   I        k n       o    w      t h     a t y             o     u       h a         v e t             h    i s          a l r e   a d y       a t          t h    e f      o r e f    r o n     t o f
                y      o       u    r m i       n d .        I a m                  a b      s o l       u    t   e l y         s a t           i     s    f i e         d t h            a     t t          h e i r      p o    s i t       i o n        i s      n o t      b e     i n g
                 p       r      e    j u d i      c e d a t t h                  e p         r e s       e    n   t t        i m e ,                  n    e i t         h e r             d    o I            e n v   i s a    g e           t h a    t o      c c u r     r i n     g i n
                  t      h     e        f u t    u r e .       O n                t h e         c o       n   t   r a r     y , I                     w    o u l         d n o            t         a l      l o w      s u c    h a            s i     t u a   t i o n        t o
                  d      e      v   e l o p     .

                     O f c o u r s e , I w o u l d b e p l e a s e d t o                                                                                     d i s c u s s a n y o f t h e d e t a i l s                                                        o n t h e
                      t e l e p h o n e , i f y o u w i s h .   I s h a l l                                                                                  b e a t t h e o f f i c e o r o n t h e                                                            c a r
                      t e l e p h o n e a l l n e x t w e e k .
 jtRCU » BY:                                     ; S - 9 -8 9      8 : 20AM ;           021 233 3256-*                    0742523409; 8 1
®HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN                     TEL N o .021-233-3256                                 8 Sep 89       8:16 No .001 P .01


                                                                                                                                    WG 502
                                                                                                                                     (2.89)


               STAPLE
               ATTACHMENTS
                                                                                    West Midlands Police
               HERE
                                                                                                IV 1 E S S>    J   \ .   Ca E

                                                       ?.     WKtiOr^T                        C U
               FOR THE A T T E N T I O N OF
                                                                                                     0                   Ct)    H
                                                                           c.vJr.UiJ
                                                      -Sx*           ^CvVl.sA'i     ?»\ Kfc



                                                        Fax No:
                                                                      O J i + 2 -     S 2 . 1 1 + - 0 ?

               FSOM
                                                       W e s t Midlands Police                           Date: S    —       <j ~ %f
               C ^ 'S ,      c\l                        D ep a rtm e n t
                                                                           CX>* C. Ovv v\V\)\t ^
                                                        Telephone No: Q 2 ,\                             Extension: 2 ^ 0 O I

                                                        Fax No:                                                          SLO 1 1




               Total number of pages including this page



               RemarKs A o tio n   in q u i r e d :          ' '       1




               Authorised by:
TELEPHONE:                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742)                                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                           SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                       SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          6 September 1989


G J Dear Esq QPM DL LLB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
P 0 Box 52, Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham B4 6NQ




Stuart Anderson has brought to my attention a letter he has received from
Mervyn Jones dated 5 September, and I am extremely concerned about the
apparent misunderstanding that still seems to exist about the current
state of the criminal and discipline enquiry arising out of the Taylor
Repo r t .

Having spoken to both yourself and latterly to Sir Richard Barratt I
understood that the Coroner's inquiry and the criminal inquiry were being
pursued with the vigour and expedition that the matter requires.  The
letter from Mr Jones indicates that this is not the case and I cannot
accept that the inquiry should be set aside to await the outcome of
discussions on finance.

Again it is my understanding that all the evidence collected to date has
been stored on HOLMES and to quote from the Taylor Report 'it is unlikely
that any further evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to the
history of events'.

Against this background I am not sure what is meant by 'new work' other
than the interviews with the officers singled out for criticism by the
Taylor Report.  Whilst I understand the difficulties created for you by
the financial debate between the Home Office and our respective Police
Authorities, I think it is intolerable, considering the strain imposed on
the officers involved, that this should introduce delay in bringing the
criminal and discipline inquiry to a speedy conclusion.  In his letter
Mr Jones also implies my agreement to the continued involvement of Mr Cooper
in the disciplinary aspects of this enquiry, which is certainly not the
case.  Your decision not to serve notices or pursue disciplinary matters
until the financial issue is resolved, whilst understood, does not have my
agreement.

In order to gain a better understanding of the problems faced by yourself
and Mr Jones, I would appreciate the opportunity to be up-dated on the
current state of the inquiry and on the work perceived necessary in order
to bring it to a conclusion.
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                                                                                                                                            M EDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                                                                                                                     W atery Street
 H ILL S B O R O U G H                      INQUIRY                      T E A M                                                                                                              Sheffield S 3 7ET
                                                                                                                                                                                              Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                                                                                                                                                              Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 2 4 7
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                                                                                                                        KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensw ay                                                                                                                                                                     Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                                                                                                                                             Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021-           extn. 2 0 2 5                                                                                                                                                       Telephone: 0 5 1 £
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                                                                                                                                                     Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                                                                                                                                              Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                                                                                                                                                                       JM J/VS C
Telephone: 021-                                                                                                                                                                               Our Ref:
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6
                                                                                                                                                                                              Date:                      5       S e p t e m b e r                                  1 9 8 9




             K           S        A n d e r s o n E s q
             A s         s i      s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e
               ( C         o m     p l a i n t s a n d D i s c i p l i n e )
             S o         u t      h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e
             S n         i g         H i l l
             S h         e f      f i e l d
             S 3             8    L Y




              COMPLAINT AGAINST POLICE

              I r e f e r t o y o u r l e t t e r o f 3 0 A u g u s t 1 9 8 9                                                                                          w h i c h w a s                    r e c e i v e d a t t h i s
              P o l i c e H e a d q u a r t e r s y e s t e r d a y m o r n i n g b y                                                                                   t h e C h i e f                   C o n s t a b l e , M r D e a r .
             H e h a s a s k e d m e t o r e p l y .

             W e a c k n o w l e d g e s a f e r e c e i p t o f t h e c o p y s t a t e m e n t s m a d e b y L e i g h
              ( 2 7 7 / F 3 3 / 8 9 ) a n d H i c k s ( 2 7 8 / F 3 4 / 8 9 ) w h i c h c o n t a i n a l l e g a t i o n s a g a i n s t
             c e r t a i n m e m b e r s o f y o u r F o r c e .

             Y     o     u        w     i l l       p r        o     b a b l y b y         n o     w            b e       a w    a    r   e        t h a t        M r       D  e        a r        s p o k e t o          y o    u r        C    h i     e    f
              C     o    n   s     t     a b l e      y       e      s t e r d a y ,        s h     o r        t l y        a     f   t    e    r l u n        c h t i     m  e     ,           t o i n d i c a        t e        t h a    t        a    t           t     h        i s
              t     i    m   e    -     w e h       a v       e        n o t f o r       m a l     l  y            a c   c e     p    t   e    d t h e             c r i     m  i     n a      l / d i s c i p l      i n e          i n    v    e s      t   i    g     a         t i o n
              u    n     t   i    l        w e      h a        v     e r e c e i v       e d         t h       e w       r i     t    t   e     n a s s        u r a n      c  e        a      s f a r a s              t h e        f i    n   a n      c    i    a     l
              c     i    r   c    u      m s t a   n c        e     s a r e c o          n c e    r  n        e d .               I        u    n d e r s      t a n d          f    r o       m M r D e a r              t h    a t       M    r        W    r    i     g         h t
              f    u     l   l    y        a p p    r e        c     i a t e d t h       e p        o  s       i t i      o n         w   e        a r e        i n ,       g i      v e      n t h a t o u           r P         o l i    c    e         A    u    t     h         o r i t y
             h    a     s        m      a d e       i t              q u i t e c l       e a r         t        h a t        w   e         s    h o u l d         n o t         t    a k      e o n a n y              a d d    i t i      o    n a     l
             i     n     v    e   s     t i g a    t o        r     y r e s p o n        s i b     i l         i t y         u   n    t   i    l t h a        t w r        i t      t e       n a s s u r a n         c e        h a d          b e     e     n
             r     e    c    e   i     v e d .                 T    h i s m e a n      s t         h a        t w        e        a   r   e       n o t        i n a           p     o s      i t i o n t o           b e c     o m e            t h    e
             I     n    v     e   s     t i g a     t   i     n     g O f f i c e       r s        a n        d ,          t h    e   r   e    f o r e ,           b e      i n         a          p o s i t i o n        t o        s e   r    v e            N o t               i c e s
            o     n            t  h     e a f       f   e     c     t e d o f f i       c e r     s             i n       a c    c    o   r    d a n c e          w i t    h         R e      g u l a t i o n         7 o       f t        h    e        P     o l i               c e
            D     i     s    c   i     p l i n     e           R     e g u l a t i o   n s .                   I t       w a     s         a    g r e e d          b e t   w e      e n           M r W r i g h       t a        n d       M    r       D      e a r
             t     h    a    t           t h e      e    x     i    s t i n g I n        v e s    t      i     g a t     i n     g        O    f f i c e      r a l         r e     a d       y a p p o i n t        e d ,          M r         K e     n        C o               o p e r
            o     f           N o       r t h a    m    p    t     o n s h i r e ,         s h    o      u     l d        u n    d e      r    t a k e          t h e       s e      r v      i c e o f t h            o s e        N o    t    i c     e     s
            w     i     t    h o       u t d        e   l    a     y .        A t M     r W       r      i    g h t      ' s       s      u    g g e s t     i o n ,          M     r         D e a r a g r e         e d        t o       t     e l     e     p h o               n e
            C     a     p    t a       i n T        a    y    l     o r a t t h         e P        o      l    i c e         C   o m      p    l a i n t      s A u         t h     o r       i t y a s t o               t h   e d        e    c i     s     i o n            .




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T                                                                                                                 Lloyd House; Birmingham
                                   -   2 -




Shortly afterwards Mr Dear rang Captain Taylor at his office at the
Police Complaints Authority.  Captain Taylor agreed with the decision
that Mr Wright and Mr Dear had reached and said that he would contact
Mr Cooper for the action to be taken as quickly as possible.

In the meantime our investigation continues to satisfy the needs of the
Coroner.  To a large extent these enquiries are related to the criminal
inquiry and, therefore, nothing is being lost at this time in impetus.
However, there will come a time when I will not be able to undertake
'new work' for the criminal inquiry until we have received the assurance
from your Police Authority.  I know we both agree the sooner that
clarification comes from the Home Office to your Police Authority, the
better it will be for unhindered progress of the overall investigation.

I trust this clarifies the latest position.  If you wish to discuss
further please do not hesitate to make contact.  I have taken the liberty
of copying this letter to Captain Taylor for his information.
                               STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

Note for file;                                                    ACC(C&D)/KIH
                                                                  6 September 1989




HILLSBOROUGH

At approximately 3.00 pm on Tuesday 5 September 1989, Mr Noel Taylor, PCA,
contacted me to say that he had directed a letter to Mr David O'Dowd, Chief
Constable, Northamptonshire Police, to ask ACC Kenneth Cooper to serve
Regulation 7 Notices as soon as possible upon Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
and Superintendents Marshall, Murray and Greenwood.  He indicated that
Mr Cooper would be visiting South Yorkshire that evening and if arrangements to
facilitate the service could be made he would be most appreciative.  He was
anxious that the officers should have knowledge of the complaint made by Trevor
Hicks at the earliest opportunity.

The aforenamed police officers were contacted and Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield agreed to be visited by Mr Cooper at his home; Superintendents
                     were happy to attend at my office at 6.00 pm.

___________________________ <ras reluctant to do so and complained bitterly to me on
being approached on his day off at such short notice.       I explained to him the
full circumstances as to why Mr Cooper was to serve the notices instead of
Mr Dear/Mr Jones of the West Midlands Police.

___________________________ xras most upset and felt that it was an unnecessary
intrusion upon his leisure hours.       He did not consider any purpose would be
 served by having the Notice that day and seemed unable to accept the logic
behind the legal requirement to serve Notices in days rather than weeks.
However, I did persuade him to attend to see Mr Cooper and he did so.

I confirmed, at 9.00 am on Wednesday 6 September 1989, that all officers had
received Regulation 7 Notices.  Mr Cooper remarked that all were visibly upset
at the conclusion of the service of documents.

I took the opportunity to inform Chief Superintendent Duckenfield (by phone)
and Superintendents                       is to why Mr Cooper was to serve the
Notices.  They appreciated that action.
    *P olice                                                             10 Great George Street, London SW1P 3AE

C   o m p l a in t s
                                                                                               Telephone: 01-:
    a u t h o r it y

                                                                          Your reference
    D J O' Dowd Esq QPM BA MSc CBIM
    C hief Constable
    N ortham ptonshire Police                                             Our reference    INV/89 131/79
    Wootton Hail
    N ortham pton                                                         Date                        (X }
    N N 4 O JQ




    I re f e r to to d a y 's telephone co n v ersation regarding th e Hillsbrough enquiry. As discussed
    I require A ssistant Chief C o nstab le Cooper, as th e c u r r e n t Investigating O ffic e r, to
    serve Regulation 7 notices on th e o ffic e rs n am ed by Mr Hicks in his s t a t e m e n t of 2k
    August 1989. It is im p o r ta n t th a t th e n o tices a r e served w ith o u t delay.

    I confirm th a t Mr Cooper is only req u ired          to s e rv e th e no tices and th e enquiry will then
    be d e a lt with by a n o th er fo rc e . As soon      as th e s itu a tio n regarding th e a p p o in tm e n t of
    the new Investigating O fficer is reso lv ed ,         I will inform both yourself and Mr Cooper in
    order t h a t a rra n g e m e n ts can be m ade for   th e tr a n s f e r o f do cum ents e t c .

    Again thank you for your as s is ta n c e in th is m a t t e r .




    E N TAYLOR
    A u th o rity Member
    P o l ic e                                                               10 Great George Street, London SW1P 3AE

C   o m p l a in t s
                                                                                                     Telephone: 01-273 64-4-0
    AUTHORITY

                                                                              Your reference
    K S Anderson Esq
    A ssistant Chief C onstable
    South Yorkshire Police                                                    Our reference    IN V/89 1 3 1 /7 9 ENT
    Snig Hill
    Sheffield                                                                 Date             "*T     S ep tem b er 1989
    S3 8LY




    HILLSBROUGH DISASTER

    With re f e r e n c e to your l e t t e r of 30 August 1989 and my subsequent telephone calls with
    C hief Inspector Drabble, this is to confirm th a t the Police C om plaints A uthority will
    supervise the fu r th e r com p lain ts made by Mr Hicks and the com plaints made by Mr
    L e ig h , w h ic h I u n d e r s t a n d h a v e now b e e n r e c o r d e d by S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e .

    In view of the d ifficu lties p resen tly surrounding the ap p o in tm e n t of Mr G eo ffrey Dear as
    Investigating O fficer, I have in s tru c te d Mr K Cooper, A ssistant Chief C onstable of
    N o rth am p to n sh ire Police to serve R egulation 7 no tices as soon as possible, to the
    o ffic e rs nam ed by Mr Hicks in his s t a t e m e n t m ade on 2k August 1989.

    I would be g r a te f u l if you could c o n t a c t me as soon as any decision which could a f f e c t
    t h e c h a n g e in t h e a p p o i n t m e n t of t h e I n v e s t i g a t i n g O f f i c e r has b e e n m a d e .




    E N TAYL&R—
    A u tho rity Meml>
                             STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

Note for file:                                                 ACC(C&D)/KIH
                                                               4 September 1989




HILLSBOROUGH

At 4.00 pm on Friday 1.9.89, I spoke to Noel Taylor regarding the West Midlands
enquiry.  He explained that, having received our letter requesting supervisors,
he had telephoned Mervyn Jones to urge early service of Regulation 7 Notices.
Mr Jones had responded by saying that no further enquiries would be undertaken
until the question of payment had been resolved, and had suggested that it had
already been agreed that Mr Cooper could serve Regulation 7 Notices until West
Midlands commenced their enquiry once the finance had been agreed.

This was discussed and we both thought the best way was for West Midlands to
serve Regulation 7 Notices.

At 4.20 pm I spoke to Mr Jones and explained that the PCA would prefer West
Midlands to serve Regulation 7 Notices as they were the I/O's.  This would be
the sensible way forward.  Mr Jones said he would discuss with Mr Dear on his
return on 4.9.89, and declined to initiate any further action before such
discussion.  I pointed out the thrust of Section 85(7) PACE Act and asked for a
response to the duty contained therein.  Mr Jones said he would respond after
discussing the matter with Mr Dear.

Note   Mr Taylor intends sending a letter to West Midlands on Monday 4.9.89
instructing them to serve Regulation 7 Notices on the officers complained of by
Trevor Hicks.




1                       !
(Compla^?t|J^j
                                STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

Note for file;                                                 ACC(D&C)/KIH
                                                               29 August 1989


V IS IT TO PO LIC E COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY


At 10.30 am on Friday 25 August 1989, I attended a meeting in Mr Noel Taylor's
office at the PCA, together with his assistant Fiona Bowden; Christopher Newell
and Colin Cleugh of the DPP's office; ACC Mervyn Jones and Chief Superintendent
Michael Foster of the West Midlands Police.

Mr Taylor opened the meeting, saying that the present investigation being
undertaken by the West Midlands Police was somewhat different to those he had
experienced previously, and asked Mr Newell what he was expecting from the
inquiry.

Mr Newell responded by saying that he was expecting a widely based inquiry
touching upon all possible criminal offences by the Police, Club, Dr Eastwood,
Sheffield City Council and the Liverpool fans.

Mr Taylor went on to say that there was only one official recorded complaint
against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield for not telling the truth. He had had
a meeting with Trevor Hicks, in company with ACC Cooper and Superintendent
Jarrett, Northamptonshire Police, on 24 August 1989, when they had discussed
that complaint.   A statement had been taken from Mr Hicks setting out what he
is now complaining about.    He had explained to Hicks what procedures would
follow ___________________________________________________________________________
                                                               Hicks had explained
that he could produce 98 other complainants and that he had discussed the whole
issue with the Family Group, but Mr Taylor had stated that the very substance
of his complaint would cover the total criminal/discipline inquiry.

Included in the statement of complaint was an allegation against ACC Walter
Jackson, and Mr Taylor indicated that he would refer this direct to the Police
Authority.   He was of the view that Mr Hicks very much wished to remain in the
'limelight'.

ACC Jones indicated that they would prefer to deal with the crime side and any
discipline that followed, but not discipline complaints which were on the
fringe of the main issues.  He also saw Superintendent Ashton dealing with the
two complaints previously recorded for incivility and this was agreed.  It was
also agreed that GMP continue with their inquiry concerning a complaint with
regard to offences committed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

Mr Taylor said he had advised    Hicks that he wanted the inquiry to deal with the
matter without bias, and that    he saw Duckenfield in a prejudiced position
because of the media exposure    and he asked how the DPP saw it, pointing out
that what he had said was not    on oath or under caution.

Mr Newell did not respond, but ACC Jones said that Duckenfield would
subsequently be interviewed under caution.

Mr Taylor remarked that he would have thought that the evidence given at the
inquiry should have been under caution, and asked Mr Newell if that was so and
should he have been served with a Regulation 7 Notice.
                                       - 2 -




Mr Newell responded by saying that he could not answer that, it would depend
how long the inquiry took.  He was only concerned with potential criminal
proceedings and he expected a report into whether there was evidence to support
a criminal offence.

Mr Taylor said that Hicks had expressed the view that Lord Justice Taylor's
report proves all criminal matters.  He had explained to him that he did not
see it that way.  Duckenfield was certainly the man the Family Group were after
but they were not happy with other senior officers also.

Mr Newell remarked that Lord Justice Taylor was looking at a completely
different aspect to what Hicks was talking about.

Mr Taylor went on to say that what the Family Group are saying is that if
criminal proceedings were not preferred there was always the discipline aspect
but he had explained to Hicks that the same evidence would apply in both cases.

Mr Taylor then questioned the final paragraph of a complaint he had received
from a firm of solicitors from a man named        and referred to the
'Stockholm Syndrome'.  (The final paragraph contained a  reference to the West
Midlands Police which indicated that the complainant was perfectly happy with
the way that the West Midlands Police had dealt with their complaint and had no
criticism to make.)

ACC Jones and Mr Foster looked slightly embarrassed, and Jones responded by
saying that there was no evidence of anyone assuming the 'Stockholm Syndrome'.

The question of Regulation 7 Notices was then discussed at length, and
Mr Taylor made the point that, as he understood it, Geoffrey Dear was the I/O
and he must sign the Regulation 7 Notices, and he was quite specific on this
issue; also that they should be served as soon as possible.

I said that as far as South Yorkshire were concerned we  would not wish any
discipline proceedings to fail for want of a Regulation 7 Notice.

ACC Jones then said that West Midlands would not move until they had an
assurance that the South Yorkshire Police Authority would be paying the costs
of their inquiry.  This was a direct instruction from the West Midlands Police
Authority.  Therefore, at this stage, no I/O was i n - situ.

Mr Taylor   said that he would write to South Yorkshire enclosing the official
complaint   from Hicks and if the matter with regard to payment had not been
finalised   he would arrange for ACC Cooper to serve Notices then withdraw the
complaint   from him and pass it on to Mr Dear, who he saw as the only logical
person to   launch the inquiry.

Police Complaints Authority would supervise.

ACC Jones emphasised that there are five other parties to be investigated.

The current Duckenfield complaint was still viable, Hicks had not withdrawn it,
but Mr Taylor had told ACC Cooper that it would be transferred to Mr Dear.   He
further emphasised that Mr Dear's report must first come to South Yorkshire.
                                     - 3 -


On a point of information, the Coroner's Inquest had been adjourned sine die
and the DPP was in full agreement.

ACC Jones was asked when it was anticipated that the inquiry would be
completed.  He said that all matters had to be processed onto HOLMES and this
would take at least three months.  He did not expect to interview anyone until
October/November under caution, although they are still to interview PC's for
evidential purposes on behalf of the Cononer's Inquest.

During their continued inquiries, if any further criminal aspect comes to
notice, they will serve Regulation 7 Notices after prompting by Mr Taylor.

Mr Cleugh asked if there were any officers who were likely to be dealt with for
disciplinary offences alone.

ACC Jones responded by saying that he was unable to answer that at this time
and added that he hoped to have the full report ready for the DPP by
January/February 1990.  Their termination date was certainly at the end of
February.  Sixty officers were currently working on the inquiry and this would
increase to 90.

CJA statements required to be taken and Mr Cleugh indicated that he would look
at the present statements and vet them before deciding which should be taken
under caution.

As far as Press statements were concerned, the PCA did not intend to make any
such statements unless prompted by Hicks or any other interested party.

Mr Taylor asked whether the South Yorkshire Police would want to make a Press
statement following receipt of the further official complaint from Hicks.  I
indicated that I would discuss this with the Chief Constable.  (Discussed
Tuesday 29 August 1989 - no statement necessary.)

Whilst at Mr Taylor's office, to further the question of the service of Notices
and in the hope of simplifying matters, I contacted Steven Walker, Deputy Clerk
of the South Yorkshire Police Authority, to see if any indication had been
forthcoming from the Home Office in respect of payment for the further
inquiries to be conducted by West Midlands.  He in turn contacted the Home
Office but they stated that no decision would be made until Tuesday 29 or
Wednesday 30 August.

It was re-emphasised that ACC Cooper would serve Regulation 7 Notices if the
question of the I/O remained in suspension because of the failure of the Home
Office to respond, but Mr Taylor did highlight the fact that South Yorkshire
would have to record the complaint and this was not likely to be received until
either 29 or 30 August.  (Letter from PCA with complaint received 30.8.89)

Meeting terminated at 1.30 pm.




               ____________
Assistant Chie/ Constable
(Disciplines.-and Complaints)
®hQ PUR CH AS IN G/ RD MIN                                                                               TEL No .021-233-3256                                                                                                             24 Rug 89 17:11                                              N o . 002 P . 02/04



  J MERVYN JONES M 8o                                                                                                                                                                                                     MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
  ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                                                                                                                                               W atery Street
   M IIIS B O R O U G H                                      INQUIRY                          T FA M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sheffield S 3 7ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fax: 0 7 4 2 72 624 7
  WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
  PO Box 52, Uoyd House                                                                                                                                                                                                   KNOW8LEY HALL
  Colmore Circus Queensw ay                                                                                                                                                                                               Prescot
  Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                                                                                                                                                                       Merseyside L34 4AF
  Telephone: 0 2 1 -        extn. 2 0 2 5                                                                                                                                                                                 Telephone: 051
  Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                                                                                                                                                                               Fax: 0 6 1 -4 4 9 29 76

  NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                                                                                                                                                                             Your Ref:
  Fowler Street
  Birmingham B7 5DA                                                                                                                                                                                                         Our Ref:                             J M J / V S C
  Telephone: 021-
  Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 4      A u g u s t          1 9 8 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Date:




              P                   W         r     i g h t                 C   B    E 0 S t J L L B
              C         h         i         e     f C o n                 s   t    a b l e
              S         o         u         t     h Y o r                 k   s    h i r e P o l i c e
               P         o         l         i    c e H e                 a   d    q u a r t e r s
               S         n         i         g       H i l l
               S         h         e         f     f i e l d
               S        3                     8    L Y




               D e a r                                M r               W r i g h t

               I                       r      e f      e    r         t o y               o u r         l     e   t t e r       o   f 2 3            A u     g u s t            1    9 8 9              t o         M r   G         e    o f f r e y D                  e a r c o n c       e r n i       n g
               o             u         r          a     p    p     o i n t m              e n t         a    s        i n v e    s   t i g a      t  i n     g o f        f    i    c e r        s         i   n       re s         p    e c t o f c                      r i m i n a l      a n d
               d             i         s      c i      p    l     i n a r y                  m a    t t      e   r s w h        i   c h m         a  y        e m e r     g    e        f r      o     m       o    u r    i         n   q u i r i e s .                       M r D e a    r i s
                p             r        e       s e     n    t     l y a w                 a y       o u      t       o f t       h   e F o        r  c e        u n t     i    l         4        S    e p     t    e b e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m             r        a n d , t h                 e r e f o r e ,        I a       m
               r             e         p       l y     i    n      g o n                  h i s         b     e   h a l f .             I h        a  v e       n o t     e    d        y o      u     r        c    o m e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m            n    t s a b o u t                       t h e m e e    t i n g
               w             i         t      h        M    r         H i c k             s o       n         2   3 A u g        u s t a          n  d ,        a s       y    o    u p            r    o b     a   b y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l             k    n o w , I w                     i l l b e m        e e t i       n g
               w             i         t      h        y    o      u r M r                    A n   d e      r   s o n ,        M r C l           e  u g     h o f              t    h e         D     i r     e    c o r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t                  o f P u b l i                  c P r o s e c       u t i o       n s
               O             f         f      i c     e             a n d M               r N        o e     l       T a y l     o r o f               t h    e P o        l    i    c e          C     o m    p    l i n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a             t    s A u t h o r                  i t y , t o m        o r r o       w
                i            n                  L o    n    d     o n .                   A t        t h      a   t m e e       t i n g ,             b o     t h S       t    u    a r t               a n    d       I   h         a    v e a g r e e                 d t h a t w         e w i         l l
                p             u        r       s u     e            a c l e               a r        u n       d   e r s t a     n d i n g             f r    o m t        h    e        P o      l     i c     e      Co m          p    l a i n t s A                   u t h o r i t y       a n d
                t             h        e          D    i      r    e c t o r                  o f        P     u   b l i c        P r o s e       c u t      i o n s            o   n p           r     e c     i   s l y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e                  w h a t a r e                       t h e t e r    m s
                o            f                 r e      f     e    r e n c e             , t         h e           l i n e s         o f c        o m m       u n i c     a     t   i o n               a n     d       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c c         o     u n t a b i l i               t y .        A t      t h a t
                 t            i         m      e       w     e        a r e                h o p     i n      g t h a t               t h i ^      c o m      p l a i     n    t    s a           l     r e    a    d y     r       a     i s e d b y                    M r H i c k s          a n d
                o            t         h      e r     s     ,          c a n               b e        c o      n s i d e r       e d a s               t o      w h e     t     h    e r           t     h e    y      sh o         u     l d f a l l                      t o t h e
                 r            e         s      p o      n     s     i b i l i             t y        o f          m y J r       f q u i r y            t e    a m o       r           r e m       a     i n           t e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h            r     e s p o n s i b                i l i t y o f           t h o s e
                p             r         e      s e      n     t    l y i n                 v o l    v e      d .

                   I                   h a v e                     a     l s o         no t e d                    t h e      c o n    t  e n     t s o        f         y o u      r          t h i r d                  a n d          f     o     u r t h        p  a r a g   r a p h s           w i t h
                    r        e         g a r d                      t    o t         h  e  f i n a                 n c i n    g o      f      o    u r i        n v      e s t      i      g  a t i o n .                       S    i n       c     e r e        c e  i v i n    g y o u        r
                    l         e         t t e r                    I        h a     v  e   r e c e                 i v e d       a      l  e t    t e r ,          a        c o     p      y      o f w h                 i c h          i     s        a t t    a c  h e d ,        f r o m
                   M         r            S t e              p     h     e n        W  al k e r ,                    S o l    i c i    t  o r         t o       y o      u r          P      o  l i c e A                  u t h     o r      i     t y .           T  h i s       l e t t e    r ,        i n
                    f         a        c t t                 a     k    e s          u s   n o f                   u r t h    e r       u  n t    i l t         h e         H o     m      e      O f f i c               e r         e s     p     o n d .            W e ,       t h e r e    f o r     e ,
                   w         a         i t f                  o    r         t h     a  t   r e s p                o n s e       b e    f  o r     e w e            f     o r m      a      l  l y u n d                   e r t      a k      e         t h e      i n v e s      t i g a t     o r y
                    r         e         s p o n              s    i     b i l      i  ti e s .                       H a v    i n g        s a     i d t        h a     t ,          o      u  r i n t e                   n d e     d          i     n v e s    t i g a t i     o n o n            y o   u r
                    b         e         h a l f                    w     i l l          no t b e                      p r e   j u d    i c e       d a s            I        i n      t      e n d t o                      p u r     s u       e       o u r       i n q u i      r i e s        a s
                    p         a        r t o                 f    ,         w h     i c  h o b v                   i o u s    l y       t h e      y a r       e ,           t h     e          c o r o n a               l i         s s      u    e s .          H o w e v     e r , u          n t i       l
                    w        e             f o r              m     a     l l y       r e c e i v                   e a p      p o i   n t m       e n t         a s         I n       v    e s t i g a t                   i n g         O     f     f i c e    r s f o r            p o l i     c e
                    d         i         s c i p               l     i    n a r      y p u r p o                    s e s       a n d        h a     v e r        e c      e i v      e     d f o r m a                    l r          a t      i     f i c a    t i o n o         f t h a       t

                                                                                                                                                             Lloyd House, Birmingham
      PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
®HQ PURCHflSING/ADMIN                                              TEL No .021-233-3256                                                                                                         24 Rug 89 17:11 No.002 P.03/04
S   .   •




                                                                                                                                       -    2        -




            a   p     p    o   ni    t    m e n t         b y t h e         P o   l i c      e C      o    m    p    l     a i n t     s A      u  t     h o r      i     t y     ,            I d o n       o t s        e e t      h e           " c l    o c k
            r   u    n    n   ni    g     "      i n      r e s p e c   t o       f t        h e      s    e    r    v     i c e        o f     n  o     t i c      e     s           u n    d e r R e       g u l a     t i o n       7   .           M   y
            u   n    d     e   sr     t   a n d i       n g i s t        h a t        t h    e r       e    s    p    o     n s i b     i l i   t  y          f a     l    l s           u    p o n t h      e I n        v e s t    i g    a    t i n     g
            O   f    f    i   ec     r       o n l     y w h e n         h e       h a s        b e   c    o    m    e        t h e       I n    v e      s t i      g     a t        i n    g O f f i      c e r .           I f      t    h    e
            c    l    a    r    i
                                f     i    c a t i     o n w e b        o t h        s e     e k       f    r    o   m         t h e      H o   m  e         O f     f     i c        e        i s n o t         f o r    t h c o    m i     n    g i      n
            t   h    e         en    x    t f e        w d a y s ,         I      w i l     l l        i    a   i    s     e w i       t h      M  r         H a     y     e s          o    r M r A         n d e r     s o n      w i    t     h a
            v   i    e    w t        o       a d d      r e s s i n g       t h   i s         i s s   u    e           i   n o r        d e r        t     o e        n     s u       r e         t h a t     a n y       s u b s   e q     u    e n t
            d   i    s    c i p      l    i n a r      y i n v e s       t i g    a t i      o n      o    r          p    r o c e     e d i    n g      s a          r    e          n o    t c o m p       r o m i     s e d      b y           t h e
            f   a     i   l u r      e        t o       s e r v e s      u c h       n o     t i c    e    s           i    n g o       o d      t i      m e .

            I h o p e t h i s                            l e t t e r c l a r i f i e s o u r                                    u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f                                    t h e p o s i t i o n a s o f                                 n o w .
            N o d o u b t b y                            t h e e n d o f F r i d a y 2 5                                        A u g u s t m u c h w i l l                                      h a v e c o m e c l e a r e r .

            Y o u r s                 s i n c e r e l y




            A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e
             ( H i l l s b o r o u g h I n q u i r y )




                                                                                                                           Lloyd House, Birmingham
8HQ PURCHflSING/ADMIN                   TEL N o .021-233-3256         24 Aug 89 17:11 No.002 P.04/04
                                                                                                   1

                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                       POLICE AUTHORITY
  R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                           P.O. Box 37
  Clerk and Financial Officer                                                          Regent Street
                                                                                               Barnsley
                                                                               South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                        Telephone Barnsley (0226)

  our Ref.      P0LET54/SW/MR                 YnurRef                        Oate23 August 1989
  This matter is being dealt with by      Mr S Walker                        Telephone   M/620




             Dear Mr Dear
             RE : INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
             The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has sent me a copy of your letter to him
             of 17 August regarding your taking on responsibility for the criminal inquiry
             and any police disciplinary matters which may emerge.
             You have asked for a written assurance that expenditure incurred will be met in
             full by South Yorkshire Police with or without Home Office assistance.
             The South Yorkshire Police Authority met last Friday to consider further the
             offer made by the Home Office and agreed as a matter of practical expediency to
             reimburse the total expenditure of your Force subject to confirmation from the
             Home Office that the total costs would be subject to the level of assistance or
             contribution limit payable by South Yorkshire detailed in Lord Ferrers letter of
             27 June.
             In these circumstances, until I receive the necessary confirmation from the Home
             Office, I cannot give the assurance that your Authority requires.
             For your information, the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority has a copy
             of my letter to the Home Office detailing the terms of my Authority’s proposal.
             Yours sincerely


             S Walker
             Solicitor to the Authority




         Mr G J Dear QPM DL LLB
     !~ Chief Constable                                         ” 1
         West Midlands Police Headquarters
       ' PO Box 52
         Lloyds House
         Col more Circus Queensway
         Birmingham B4 6NQ
     L                                                          J
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                           MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                    W atery Street
 H IL L SB O R O U G H   INQUIRY   TE A M                                    Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                             Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                                             Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 2 4 7
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                       KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay                                                   Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                            Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0 2 1 -1        extn. 2 0 2 5                                     Telephone: 051^
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                                    Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                                Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                                             JMJ/VSC
                                                                             Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5
                                                                             Date:            24 August 1989




            P Wright CBE 0 St J LLB
            Chief Constable
            South Yorkshire Police                                                                          York
            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill
                                                                                                               /4
            Sheffield                                                                                    C h M Co
            S3 8LY




            Dear Mr Wright

            I refer to your letter of 23 August 1989 to Mr Geoffrey Dear concerning
            our appointment as investigating officers in respect of criminal and
            disciplinary matters which may emerge from our inquiries.  Mr Dear is
            presently away out of the Force until 4 September and, therefore, I am
            replying on his behalf.  I have noted your comments about the meeting
            with Mr Hicks on 23 August and, as you probably know, I will be meeting
            with your Mr Anderson, Mr Cleugh of the Director of Public Prosecutions
            Office and Mr Noel Taylor of the Police Complaints Authority, tomorrow
            in London.  At that meeting, both Stuart and I have agreed that we will
            pursue a clear understanding from the Police Complaints Authority and
            the Director of Public Prosecutions on precisely what are the terms
            of reference, the lines of communication and accountability.  At that
            time we are hoping that the complaints already raised by Mr Hicks and
            others, can be considered as to whether they should fall to the
            responsibility of my inquiry team or remain the responsibility of those
            presently involved.

            I have also noted the contents of your third and fourth paragraphs with
            regard to the financing of our investigation.  Since receiving your
            letter I have received a letter, a copy of which is attached, from
            Mr Stephen Walker, Solicitor to your Police Authority.  This letter, in
            fact takes us no further until the Home Office respond.  We, therefore,
            wait for that response before we formally undertake the investigatory
            responsibilities.  Having said that, our intended investigation on your
            behalf will not be prejudiced as I intend to pursue our inquiries as
            part of, which obviously they are, the coronal issues.  However, until
            we formally receive appointment as Investigating Officers for police
            disciplinary purposes and have received formal ratification of that


   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T ................L lo yd , .HP.U? ? >. ? i™ in g h a m
                                   -   2 -



appointment by the Police Complaints Authority, I do not see the "clock
running" in respect of the service of notices under Regulation 7. My
understanding is that the responsibility falls upon the Investigating
Officer only when he has become the Investigating Officer.  If the
clarification we both seek from the Home Office is not forthcoming in
the next few days, I will liaise with Mr Hayes or Mr Anderson with a
view to addressing this issue in order to ensure that any subsequent
disciplinary investigation or proceedings are not compromised by the
failure to serve such notices in good time.

I hope this letter clarifies our understanding of the position as of now.
No doubt by the end of Friday 25 August much will have come clearer.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable
(Hillsborough Inquiry)




                              Lloyd House, Birmingham
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                      POLICE AUTHORITY
R .C . Johnston B .A ., I.P .F .A .                                                 P.O. Box 37
C le rk and Financial O fficer                                                     Regent Street
                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                       South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

our Kef       P0LET54/SW/MR                Your Ref                   Date   23 August 1989
Thu matter is bring dealt Htth by      Mr S Walker                   Telephone ext.^ 2 0




          Dear Mr Dear
           RE : INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
           The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has sent me a copy of your letter to him
           of 17 August regarding your taking on responsibility for the criminal inquiry
           and any police disciplinary matters which may emerge.
           You have asked for a written assurance that expenditure incurred will be met in
           full by South Yorkshire Police with or without Home Office assistance.
           The South Yorkshire Police Authority met last Friday to consider further the
           offer made by the Home Office and agreed as a matter of practical expediency to
           reimburse the total expenditure of your Force subject to confirmation from the
           Home Office that the total costs would be subject to the level of assistance or
           contribution limit payable by South Yorkshire detailed in Lord Ferrers letter of
           27 June.

           In these circumstances, until I receive the necessary confirmation from the Home
           Office, I cannot give the assurance that your Authority requires.
           For your information, the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority has a copy
           of my letter to the Home Office detailing the terms of my Authority’s proposal.
           Y mire     cinrprplv




           S Walker
           Solicitor to the Authority




           Mr G J Dear QPM DL LLB
    i~~    Chief Constable                              ~I
           West Midlands Police Headquarters
           PO Box 52
           Lloyds House
           Col more Circus Queensway
           Birmingham B4 6NQ
    L                                                   J
TELEPHONE:
S H E FFIE L D ( 0 7 4 2 )


                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                           SNIG HILL
                                               SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

P. HAYES, LL.B., M.A.
D E P U T Y C H IE F C O N ST A B L E
A t U ^ C ^                  >^rt^>                                                                       •




X .
     s £ ^ r& s + ^ j£                 X - C M - ^ C ^ v -    q^   J ^    'h r # * * ,   (r *    '& 4 s       OsC£_ji__x

                                                                          n



                                                   % //      < J jL s L s L A jL         y^b




'   '                    T                                         z

        ’ * ^   j* ju    s ^   5   ■           i o .     -                                 -




                               w ? ;               f i^ U L ,            ■^f'c C '              > y f% -

     -4< !^ t     /& CLc<-ji&-zJLs ^V /C fjJJ ^ t ^ ^ ^ t \ J c '                        Y tf/y f y f e

    «^W ^ , , /tjuc-^a^u_^                   6\JL sAA^ A ^ L 'th              c^ \-A j C%j Q      -
                                                                        Northamptonshire Police
                                                                                        S T A T E M E N T OF WITNESS
                                                                   (C. J. ACT 1967 Sec. 9, M.C. ACT 1980. Sec. 102, M.C. RULES 1981, r. 70)




                                                 1 revor Hicks                                                                       Age (if under 21, date of birth,           ^-
                              N am e..............                                                                                   if over 2.1, age or estimated age) .........*..................

                             Address
                               (and tel. no if any)                                                                                                                  'tiddlesex
BL OC K OU T DATES
W I TN ES S NOT AVAILABLE
                             O c c u p a tio n        ............................................... ................................


     1    8   15   22 29
     2    9   16   23 30      Ihls        s tatement               Is       made           rollowing                  the         Taylor        Judicial            Review            .into        the
     3   10   17   24 31
     4   11   18   25        Hillsborough Disaster earlier this year,
     5   12   19   25
     6   13   20   27
     7   14   21   23


                             j. am making the following                                         complaints                   as an individual but I should also
     1    8   1b   22 29
     2    9   16   23 30
     3   10   17   24 31     clarify that I am the Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.
     4   11   18   25
     5   12   19   26
     6   13   20   27        Within            this        capacity                 I have               taken           a      deep        interest         in       the       review            and
     7   14   21   28
                             all aspects of the event.

     1    8   15   22 29
     2    3   16   23 30
     3   10   17   24 31
     4   11   18   25        I was           a     spectator                 with          my           wife          and         two daughters             at the            Liverpool                v/
     5   12   19   26
     6   13   20   27
     7   14   21   28        Nottingham                 Forest             football                    match             on       the 15th          April       1        989held            at       the

                             Ilillsborough Football                                 ground.                 As a           result of            the disaster                  I lost both
     1    8 15     22 29
     2    9 16     23 30
     3     10 17   24 31     my daughters Sarah Louise and Victoria Jane Hicks.
     4     11 18   25
     5     12 19   26
     6     13 20   27
     7     VI 21   28
                             I     gav/e         evidence               t,o       the         Hillsborough                        Stadium         Disaster            enquiry              before

     1    8   15   22 29
     2    9   16   23 30     His Hon Lord Justice                                 Ia y l o r .            Subsequently I have taken a deep interest
     3   10   17   24 31
     4   11   18   25        in the matters arising and I                                               have collated evidence both                                      as an individua.I.
     5   12   19   26
     6   13   20   27
     7   14   21   28        and as Chairman of the Hillsborough Family                                                                   Support Group.


     1    8   15   22 29
     2    9   16   23 30
     3   10   17   24 31     ffly presence                 on      the         day        and         my      consideration                    of    the      evidence               leads          me
     4   11   18   25
     5   12   19   26
     6   13   20   27        to     conclude               that          several               Police             Officers                neglected         to      discharge                their
     7   14   21   28

in te r J if h o d a te s           This state m ent (consisting o f            3     pages each signed by me) is true to the best o f m y k n o w le d g e
 O BE A V O I D E D
                            and belief and I make it kn o w in g that, if it is te nd ered in evidence, I shall be liable to p ro se cu tio n if I have
                            w il f u l ly stated in it a ny th in g w h ic h I k n o w to be false or do not believe to be true.


                            Dated the               24th                    day of               August 1 989                            (Signed) ............................
                                                                                                                                                            Trevor Hicks
                            ta ken/w itnessed b y ...........................................................................................................................................................
         FORM 67                                                          D Jarratt, Det Superintendent                                                                                              303170
          CONTINUATION                                                                   rage No.
          STATEMENT OF          I'revor Hicks



          duties relating to the staging of this Football match.




          I am able to identify       the following officers and I wish to make a formal

          complaint against them.




          1    Mr Walter Jackson

               Assistant Chief Constable

               South Yorkshire Police




               Fly complaint    against   him   is that     he   failed    to    take    control    of   the

               disaster.




           2   Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield




           3   Superintendent Roger Marshall




           A   Superintendent Bernard Murray




               It is my complaint that these officers




               (a)   Failed     to   prevent    a dangerous      build    up    of    supporters    outside

                      of the gates.




               (b)    Failed    to   control    the     movement   of     supporters       subsequent      to

                         the opening of gate     ’C .




                                                                                     Signed: Trevor Hicks




FORM 69                                                                                                  303290
                                                                                           Thru
          CONTINUATION                                                          rage No............
          STATEMENT OF     Trevor Hicks




               (c)    Failed   to   respond   to   the   developing   tragedy    and     were         slow

                      to effect a rescue operation.




           I have previously contacted South Yorkshire Police and they have recorded

           two matters of complaint.




               (a)    Incivility towards me by a Police Inspector.




               (b)   . My treatment   by a different Police     Inspector at the temporary

                      mortuary.




                                                                        Signed: Trevor Hicks




FORM 69                                                                                           3032.90
TELEPHONE:                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

SHEFFIELD (0742)                                       POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                           SNIG HILL

FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                            23 August 1989

G J Dear Esq QPH DL LLB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
P 0 Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham B4 6NQ




 I refer to your letter of 17 August 1989 and note your willingness to accept
 my invitation to undertake the full criminal enquiry into the events at
 Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 following the advice from the Director of Public
 Prosecutions. Also that you will enquire into the related discipline or
 complaint matters including those specifically referred to in my letter of
 16 August and others which may emerge.

 Regarding the complaint matters I will advise further as requested after the
 planned meeting with Hr Trevor Hicks this date (23 August) and agree
 thereafter the meetings as necessary between the various parties you describe
 to clarify your terms of reference, responsibilities, lines of communication
 between ourselves and accountability.

 The South Yorkshire Police Authority have already met and considered the offer
 made by the Home Office as set out in the letter from Lord Ferrers and a
 subsequent letter from Hr H J Addison of the Home Office, both of which you
 refer to.

 Hy understanding is they are accepting the Home Office offer but I have asked
 Hr Stephen Walker (Deputy Clerk of the South Yorkshire Police Authority) in
 the absence of the Clerk who is on holiday, to correspond with you direct on
 this issue and you should regard his letter as authoritative on this point.
      BY:                                    ; 2 2 - 8 -8 9     10:54AM J 0 12 73 64 01                                    -»                 0 -^ 2 5 ;
              1989-08-22             10=57    POLICE COMPLAINTS                                       012736401                                 P.Gl
.   M **
A '

       P o l ic e                                                                                      10 C           CU ' ( S t r i v l , L o n d o n S ' . Ji ’ .^AH


    i OMPLAINTS..
      ^JTHORITY                                                                                                OIJR     I7A X   N O 27.3 M O i




                                                                                                      Yi'lll1IVlrtrliM




                                                                                                      i M ir




                                                FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION SHEET




       Tc* ...................                        r........................................            FA X NO:




                                                  A C C            .          -T.           r ^ K /lto C l O A J
      FC                  .i i   ENTlON OP:,




       DATE:                                 E 3 ............................ TIMR,                            !.9 £ L


                                                                                                           /
      or                  ir     !




      N U M l'FR OF SHEETS {INCLUDING C                                   O         V             I    :        )
R C U   B Y :                               ; 22— 8 -8 9    1 0 : 54ftM ;0 1 2 7 3 6 4 0 1               -*                     0742523409; U
                1989-08-22        10:57      POLICE COMPLAINTS                               012736401                           P. 02




                                                            8
l l / E / 8 9 - Following a m essage from 3 an et t h a t Mr Hicks had telep h o n ed th e previous
evening isking to speak to m e urgently I c o n t a c te d ACC Cooper to a s c e rta in w h eth er or
not he had been in touch with Mr Hicks. Cooper advised t h a t he had spoken to Hicks
who had asked q u ite a lot of questions as to th e next possible s ta g e s in th e handling of
his co m p laint. Mr Hicks had also indicated he may possibly wish to lodge fu rth e r
com plaints ag ain st Other office rs. Cooper arra n g e d a m e etin g for Wednesday 23 August
a t N o rth am p to n - Hicks had asked t h a t I be th e re .

Subsequently I telephoned Mr Hicks - which developed into a th i r ty m inute conversation.
Initially 1 explained th e co m p lain ts p ro ced ure, including th e senior o ffice rs and th e PCA
role. Mr Hicks has a lread y lodged a co m p lain t ag ainst th e DCC of South Yorkshire and
from our co n versatio n was also considering complaining ab o u t ACC Jackson. Mr Hicks is
the C hairm an of th e Hillsborough "Fam ily Group" which a t p resen t has som e 150
m em bers - and according to Mr Hicks over 100 solicitors rep resen tin g them who have
form ed a "legal c o m m itte e " . Though Sir Henry L iv erm ore is th e recognised legal
spokesman. Mr Hicks asked if it w ere possible for th e group to m ake a co m p lain t - I
explained th a t PACE specifically p reclu d e com p lain ts by groups or organisations and only
com p lain ts by individuals - or m ade by someone else w ith th e c o m p lain an t's w ritten |
au th o rity would be reco rd e d and in v e stig ated - R egarding Mr Hicks' p resen t c o m p b
outlined th e possibilities as I now saw th e m .
                                                                                                                  i
 1. He may a f t e r reconsidering wish not to p roceed - in th a t ca s e we would requ
      short signed s t a t e m e n t to t n a t e n e c t . T h e re a fte r xhe maxxer as f a r as Ml H leki a? j
      concerned would be oensidered closed. However in view of th e published f                              that t
       South Yorkshire had passed Lord J u s tic e T aylor's r e p o r t to th e DPP it w.:.
       every a s p e c t rela tin g to th e d is a s te r was still being exam ined.

 2.     He may wish to proceed with his co m p lain t - in t h a t c as e we would rec,                               .
        s t a t e m e n t f r o m him s e t t i n g o u t c l e a r l y t h e s p e c i f i c p o in t s of c   o m       >,.

 3.     He may wish to e n larg e on his p resen t co m p laint - which is specifically ag ain st CS
        Duckenfield. Should he nam e o th e r o ffic e rs I would ask Mr Cooper to ta k e a full
        s t a t e m e n t again clearly indicating th e specific points of com plaint and against
        which o ffice rs. This would then be passed to South Yorks who w ere responsible for
        recording such co m p lain ts before f u r th e r action is tak en .

 It was obvious from our discussion t h a t Mr Hicks in his own right or th e Family t
 of which he is n o t only th e C h airm an b ut I would suggest th e m ost dornir
 outside of Sir Henry Liverm ore - have not m ade up th e ir minds what they r                                                           j
 Though personally I think th e p red o m in an ce of feeling will be for civil                                                    a     j
 com pensation - especially with a legal group t h a l large!

 Mr Hicks told me t h a t th e y had been in c o n t a c t with th e Association t h a t had been set
 up a f t e r th e Zeebrugge F erry d isaste r and think th e Family Group w ere looking to a
 similar o u tc o m e - m an slau g hter through negligence e tc .

 At this sta g e our d isci'           n turned to th e o u tc o m e of various procedures. I think in
 common w ith th e majv.’                >f th e population Mr Hicks thought t h a t findings such as in
 Lord J u s tic e Taylor's re-         t could be used for possible crim inal or discipline purposes. 1
 explained t h a t whilst they          could lead to such ch arg es being laid th e s t a t e m e n t s made
 w ere n ot ta k e n under th e        usual c a u tio n , nor w ere th e persons who gave oral evidence
F"'       gv:                           ',22.- 3 - 3 9   10:55PM ; 0127.36401                               0742523409J# 3
                1989-08-22     10:58     POLICE COMPLAINTS                      012736401                    P. 03

                                                                                       Refine*. IN V /S ?.131/79
      r



                required to ta k e an o ath . Whilst Taylor's enquiry had h eard a large num ber of witnesses,
                th e West Midlands te a m had ta k e n thousands of s ta t e m e n ts which had not all been given
                in ev id en ce and of which som e may have a d ir e c t bearing on th e a c tio n s being
                considered.

                 I explained th e d ifferin g burdens of proof required for crim inal and discipline as opposed
                 to c i v il actio n s. I got th e d istin ct im pression th a t Sir Henry L iverm ore had alread y got
                 th e point across to th e "Family Group" th a t should crim in al ch arg e s - especially
                 m an slau g h ter be proved, th e civil claim was alm ost a u to m a tic .

                 At this point 1 r e i t e r a t e d th a t the A u th o rity 's position would be s tra ig h t down +he
                 middle to establish th e tru th , and th e role of supevision could b est be described                g
                 th e public p re s e n c e a t th e police investigation.

                 Mr Hicks stre s s e d th a t he personally very much welcom ed th e PCA involvem ent. He : l'o
                 said he had been very im preseed with th e way th e West Midlands had conduct ht
                 investigations on behalf of th e Taylor enquiry, h e had w ritte n to Messrs Dean & Murrey
                 Hones personal le t t e r s of thanks. It is obvious he has a very good rap p o rt with mem bers
                 of th e West Midlands te a m ,

                 Mr Hicks will be discussing th e various points listed above v                           v erm ere and th e
                 Family Group. No doubt th e opportunity will be tak en to decide                       sieir ta c ti c s and if
                 n ecessary fo rm u la te th e wording of "their" com plaint.

                 I o ffe re d t h a t Mr Hicks may like to have Sir Henry or any oth--               r’a! r e p r e s e n ta tiv e at
                 our m e e tin g and he w elcom m ed th e offer.

                 Throughout our discussion Mr Hicks was e x tre m e ly p leasan t                a          •: headed. He
                 stre s s e s he does not bear any personal grudges and is not looking                 ■rng*nce.^ Indeed I
                 g ot th e sense of a c e r ta in am o u n t of self guilt. I think he form ed   th e Family Group , is
                 obviously th e leading m e m b er who appears to m ake a!l th e                  moves. I gained the
                 im pression he was slightly torn b etw ee n enjoying th e lim elight            and s t a g i n g to realise
                 w hat w as involved and how it could ta k e over his life.

                 Following our co n v ersatio n I b rie fe d th e Chairm an and advised s-vMTh Yorks th a t a
                 r-'f -nmg had been arran g e d fo r Weds 23rd, ACC Anderson of Souti Yorks was most
                 i- ^ r e c ia tiv e lo r being k e p t inform ed.


                  ENT




 cooe is-y;
G J DEAR QPM OL LLB                                    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        HEADQUARTERS
                                                       PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                       Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                       Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                       Telephone: 021-




 P Wright Esq CBE O.St.J CBXM                           GJD/AMS
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Snigg Hill
 Sheffield
 S3 8LY                                                 17 August 1989




  INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

  X refer to your letter of 16 August 1989 in which you formally request
  us to undertake a full criminal enquiry - wider than just the Police -
  into the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989- I have noted the .
  Director of Public Prosecutions' interest and advice. I also note that
  you would like us to undertake responsibility for any police
  disciplinary aspects which may emerge.
  Given that we have already undertaken a considerable investigation on
  behalf of Lord Justice Taylor and presently for HM Coroner, it is
  logical that we should take on the added responsibilities for any
  criminal aspects and any police disciplinary matters which may emerge.
  We will willingly take on these added responsibilities to our current
  investigation.   My Police Authority have asked me to seek a written
  assurance that expenditure incurred by us will bemet in    full by South
  Yorkshire Police with or without Home Office assistance.
                      S’

   In respect of the financing of the investigation I have had sight of
   Lord Ferrers' original letter to your Police Authority and I am aware ot
   a subsequent letter which clarifies the definition of the 'investigation'
   to be in the widest sense.  It would appear, therefore, that if your
   Police Authority, which I understand will meet on Friday of this week,
   agrees the original Lord Ferrers offer, as clarified, then all financial
   costs will be met by the Home Office over and above an agreed
   contribution by the South Yorkshire Police Authority.  Subject to your
   Police Authority agreement there appears to be no impediment to our


                                                              cont
                                   ~ 2 -


pursuing the investigations without delay.  After your Police Authority
has had its meeting it would be helpful to me if you could acquaint us
with their decision so that I can keep my Police Authority fully
informed.

The investigations will continue on a day to day basis to be headed by
Mr Mervyn Jones with his existing team which will be increased for a
short period to address the added responsibilities.   In your letter you
asked if we would like to take on the three matters of public complaint
made by Mr Trevor Hicks as well as a fourth complaint of alleged
corruption. Before taking on these responsibilities I think it would be
helpful if the meeting with Mr Hicks takes place on 23 August.
Thereafter I can see advantages in there being a meeting between
ourselves, yourselves, a representative of the Director of Public
Prosecutions Office and Mr E N Taylor of the Police Complaints
Authority.   At that meeting we could agree what responsibilities we are
undertaking, the terms of reference, lines of communication and
 accountability.

I trust this satisfactorily addresses the issues raised in your letter.




                                           1389-   08-   21   15=35       PAGE   =03
                                                                  ACC(D&C)/KIH
(Discipline and Complaints)
                                                                  17 August 1989

Hr E H Taylor
Police Complaints Authority
10 Great George Street
London
SW1P 3AB




Dear

I enclose for your information a copy of a letter which the Chief Constable has
forwarded to Hr Geoffrey Dear, the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police.

The letter is self-explanatory, and I feel it meets your wishes in respect of
the present and possible additional complaints which may be raised by Mr Trevor
Hicks.

It does seem, following your meeting on 23 August 1989, that a joint meeting of
all the parties involved will be necessary, and I wonder if you would care to
take the initiative in that regard?

Sir Harry Livermore, Mr Hicks’ solicitor, has appeared on Yorkshire Television
and made certain uncomplimentary remarks following the Vest Midlands local
difficulties.  I deduce from his comments that he may well be seeking, quite
firmly, an independent element but I am sure any thrust will be revealed on
23 August.

I look forward to hearing from you when you resume after leave.

Yours sincerely




me


Copy to:   Chief Inspector Drabble
G J Sear Esq QPM DL LLB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Folics
? 0 3o:i ;2
      .ICUSS
^clacrs Circus Quesssway
Sirainghaa 34 5«Q




I have today received a letter from the Director of Public Prosecutions
expressing his view that in relation to the events at Hillsborough on
13 April last there should now be a full criminal enquiry - not limited to the
possible culpability of polics officers alone.  I understand you ara in
receipt of a copy of this letter.  I would be grateful if you will undertake
this enquiry together with any police discipline aspects which may emerge.

There uro currently three matters of public complaint under investigation and
vhich have been raisou by Hr Trevor Hicks.

ihe Soucn foru^iiiro Poxics Authority is to consider    .1 1 3   comoioxnt against my
Cepucy. Hr Peter Hayes, on “riday next.

His complaint against Mr Ducken-rield is with *"lr R Cooper, Assistant Chief
Constable of Northamptonshire Police, and is supervised by Mr 2 N Taylor of
the Police Complaints Authority. A meeting i3 arrangea between them and
Mr Hicks on 2 3 ‘August and until this has taken place it is considered
appropriate that the complaint remains with Mr Cooper.     If after 23 August
Mr Hicks is persisting with the matter of complaint then I suggest it 3hould
be referred to you and this will be arranged through tne Police Complaints
Authority.

His r a a a m i n g complaint is of incivility which is being investigated by a
superintendent from this Force.

There is a fourth complaint of corruption, namely police officers allowing
fans into the ground on payment, which is being investigated by an officer
from Greater Manchester Police. You may wish to consider which if any of
these you would wish to take over.

In relation to costs, I an advised by our Treasurer that in the light of on­
going negotiations between the Authority and the Home Office it is highly
probable that an agreement will soon be reached. The effect of thi3 is likely
to be that the cost3 of the enquiries you have undertaken so far and in the
G J Dear Esq QPM DL LLB            -   2   -                    16 August 1989




future in relation to any discipline or criminal matters or in respect of the
inquest will be aet in full froa central governaent following the agreed
contribution iron the South Yorkshire Police Authority.  If such an agreement
is reached it will effectively deal with the queries you raised in your letter
of 11 August.

It is ay intention to aaks an announcement of the Director's asvics and of
action on the afternoon of 15 August.
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                          MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                   W atery Street
 H ILLSB O R O U G H   INQUIRY   TE A M                     Sheffield S 3 7ET
                                                            Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                            Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 2 4 7
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                      KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Q ueensway                                   Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                           Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021-             extn. 2 0 2 5                   Telephone: 051-1
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 z s e ^                                 Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                               Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                           JM J/V S C
                                                            Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1-|
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6735                                                      15 August 1989
                                                            Date:



           K S Anderson Esq
           Assistant Chief Constable (Staff Services)
           South Yorkshire Police
           Snigg Hill
           Sheffield
           S3 8LY




           Dear Mr Anderson

           Following our telephone conversation of yesterday evening, I thought itf__
           would be useful if I summarised my understanding of our position at the
           present time.

           We have now concluded statement taking and information gathering for
           Lord Justice Taylor and, as you know, he has publicised his Interim
           Report. The majority of those statements taken will help us
           significantly in the second part of our investigation which is to
           undertake, on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police, the Coroner’s
           Inquiries into the disaster at Hillsborough. There will probably be
           additional statement taking for the purpose of providing the precise
           continuity as far as the 95 individuals are concerned, as well as
           clearing up any ambiguities which have been identified in the statements
           already taken or the recollections received from Police Officers.


           However, at this stage we are not undertaking a criminal inquiry as such
           into Hillsborough other than should we, during the course of our
           Coroner’s inquiries, come across circumstances which would suggest that
           there is prima-facie, a criminal allegation against any person or
           persons. Should we uncover such evidence during our Coroner’s inquiries,
           by reason of our office of Constable, we would duly report such matters
           to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, and your local Crown
           Prosecution Service.  As you know this policy has been in operation as
           long as we have been involved in Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry and you
           will remember that we have already reported two alleged crimes to you.




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT            Lloyd House, -Birmingham
                                 -   2 -



As far as police complaint/discipline matters are concerned, neither
Mr Geoffrey Dear or myself see ourselves as Investigating Officers,
South Yorkshire Police not yet having invited us to take on this
particular role. As with crime, however, should we discover
circumstances which could amount to disciplinary allegations against
Police Officers, over and above anything already suggested in Lord
Justice Taylor’s Interim Report, then we will duly notify you of what we
have found for you to take the appropriate action. At this time we do
not see ourselves responsible to serve Regulation 7 Notices.  I
think you agree.

With regard to the future, I understand that Mr Wright now awaits a
response from the Director of Public Prosecutions to his earlier letter
asking, as I understand it, whether criminal proceedings/investigation
should follow. Our understanding from a meeting at the Director of
Public Prosecution’s Office last Friday is that the Director of Public
Prosecutions will be writing to South Yorkshire Police suggesting that a
criminal investigation should follow into all the circumstances arising
out of the Hillsborough disaster.  I understand that it is likely that
you will invite Mr Geoffrey Dear and the West Midlands Police to
undertake that investigation. However, you await the response of the
Director of Public Prosecutions.

As far as a disciplinary/complaint investigation is concerned, I think
we both agree that these will become part and parcel of the investigation
if you invite us to undertake the crime inquiry.

Should you ask us to take on these additional aspects within our
existing investigation we will willingly do so. However, we would
require formal invitation from South Yorkshire Police to undertake
these enquiries, together with a written assurance that the financial
expenditure incurred by us will be met by the South Yorkshire Police,
with or without assistance from the Home Office.

Finally, we both agree that should you invite us to undertake the
criminal/disciplinary investigations it will be extremely beneficial for
us to meet with the representatives of the Director of Public
Prosecutions Office and the Police Complaints Authority so that terms of
reference, lines of communication and accountability can be formally
determined.

I hope that this is a useful summary of the position we both occupy at
the present time.  If you would like to discuss further please do not
hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




Hssxsuanu biutii uunauauxe 'Vw       i
(Hillsborough Inquiry)




                             Lloyd House, Birmingham
                             STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

Note for file:                                                 ACC(D&C)/KIH
                                                               11 August 1989


VISIT TO POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

On Thursday 10 August 1989, in company with Chief Inspector Drabble, I visited
the Police Complaints Authority, Great George Street, London.  I discussed with
Mr Noel Taylor, who is currently supervising a complaint made by Mr Trevor
Hicks,                                         Middlesex, against Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, the investigation being undertaken by Assistant
Chief Constable Mr Kenneth Cooper of the Northamptonshire Police.

Since that complaint was allocated, the Chief Constable had forwarded to the DPP
the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry Report on the Hillsborough Disaster, asking if
he would consider the question of criminal offences arising out of the events at
Hillsborough.  Consequently, it was necessary to consider a way forward.  I gave
copies of the Chief Constable's letters to the DPP and Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief
Constable, West Midlands Police, dated 4 and 9 August respectively, to
Mr Taylor.

As supervisor, Mr Taylor said that he had written to Mr Hicks and had agreed
with ACC Cooper that they would both see Mr Hicks after 22 August to ascertain
the full intent of his complaint. (Mr Taylor was of the opinion that following
the publication of the Inquiry Report he may well be satisfied to proceed on
civil litigation lines.) Consequently, Mr Taylor hoped that Mr Hicks might well
withdraw that element of his letter of complaint concerning Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield.  If that was the case, Mr Cooper's involvement would cease
following a short report to that effect.

If Mr Hicks decided to expand his complaint to incorporate other South Yorkshire
Police officers, Mr Taylor was of the view that Mr Cooper could not proceed and
such an enquiry would have to be undertaken by the West Midlands force with
Mr Dear being appointed Investigating Officer. He also felt that this would be
the case if the DPP asked for further enquiries to be made following his request
from the Chief Constable to consider criminal offences on the basis of the Lord
Justice Taylor Inquiry Report.

I discussed with Mr Taylor, in the presence of Mr Roland Moyle, the question of
service of Regulation 7 Notices, and it was agreed that such notices could only
be served by an Investigating Officer, and this must await a decision by the
DPP. They both considered this to be a unique case and felt it important that,
should the DPP ask for further enquiries to be made, it would be necessary for
all interested parties - DPP, SYP, PCA - to meet and discuss the issues. As
Lord Justice Taylor had effectively completed his reporting there would be no
independent element to oversee the enquiry, and Mr Taylor was of the view that
the public would require such independence: this could be, and should be
provided by the PCA.  I agreed with this observation, which had Mr Moyle's
blessing.

Mr Taylor was at pains to point out that the South Yorkshire Police had the full
support of the PCA. He noted my reservations concerning some aspects of the
Taylor Inquiry Report and commented upon those, and he gave me confidence that
his supervision of any enquiry, criminal or discipline, would be both thorough
and without prejudice.
Before leaving Mr Taylor, he said he wished to give me his notes concerning
discussions and conversations touching upon the Hicks complaint.  It was obvious
from those notes and verbal exchanges that he felt some unease with the
activities of senior and junior officers engaged on the West Midlands enquiry.




Assi              onstao±e
(Dis              iplaints)




Addendum

At 2.50 pm on Friday 11 August 1989, I had a telephone call from Mr Noel Taylor
who was ringing from his home as he was on leave but said that he had had a long
telephone conversation with Trevor Hicks. He had advised Hicks as to what would
be expected of him when he saw him with ACC Cooper on 23 August 1989, and that
he would require a statement in some detail as to what he is complaining about.

Hicks had indicated that he wanted to make a detailed complaint on behalf of the
Family Group of which he is Chairman. Mr Taylor had indicated quite firmly th^t
this would not be allowed. Hicks had said that there were over a hundred
solicitors who had formed themselves into a legal group. He was extremely
pleased that the PCA were representing the public but became quite sycophantic
about Messrs Dear and Jones, who had done such a wonderful job, and he had
written personal letters thanking them for their diligence and perseverance.

He also said that he had been in touch with dependants and their solicitors
following the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster, and that he was looking quite
definitely for manslaughter charges to be preferred.

He had informed ACC Cooper of the conversation and told the Chairman of the PCA
as to what had occurred. Hicks had kept repeating the need for an independent
element.

I thanked Mr Taylor for his comments and said how much I had appreciated his
frankness when we met on 10 August.




Assistant CJhiet/CJonstable
(Pi sclp'bajie S^uomplaints)                                   11.8.89
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                               MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        Watery Street
 HILLSBOROUGH         INQUIRY TEAM                               Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                 Telephone: 0 7 4 2
                                                                 Fax: 0 7 4 2 72 6 2 4 7
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                           KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensw ay                                        Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0        2     1 - bxt n. 2 025                       Telephone: 051
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                        Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 29 76
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                    Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                               JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 021-________                                          Our Ref:
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5
                                                                 Date:          10 August 1989




           P Wright Esq CBE
           Chief Constable
           South Yorkshire Police
           Snigg Hill
           Sheffield
           S3 8LY                            |South Yofte-NfB Potteej
                                                         H ff
                                                 t 5 AUG 1389
                                                 Chtet Confab*




           Dear Mr Wright

           CORRESPONDENCE FROM MR            OF HARROW

           I refer to your letter of 14 July 1989 enclosing the correspondence you
           have received from           I have acknowledged to         that I have
           received the correspondence and that if my enquiries revealed a prima
           facie case against any party involved in the Hillsborough disaster, then
           I will report accordingly.

                    you will recall, is of the opinion that Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Club should be prosecuted for manslaughter.    Today,         ~
           telephoned me at my Birmingham office.    The purpose was to clarify who
           was responsible, in law, for the initiation of any proceedings against
           any party involved in the Hillsborough disaster.    I advised him that you
           had delegated to Geoffrey Dear and myself the responsibility for carrying
           out the Coro ner’s enquiries and anything else which may emerge as a
           result of those enquiries.    However, it is my understanding that you
           cannot delegate your jurisdiction in these matters and that anything
           which could follow could only be through your office in conjunction with
           the Crown Prosecution Service and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
           The reason f o r |        [call was to establish this fact in order that
           he could seek a writ of mandamus against the appopriate authority or
           authorities to pursue a prosecution against Sheffield Wednesday Football
            Club.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT               Birmingham
    ■»

¥



                                                -   2 -



             I spent some time explaining to         the nature of my enquiries and
             the fact that if a prima facie case was discovered against any party
             involved in the Hillsborough disaster then I would be duty bound to
             report it with a view to seeking direction as to how the issue should be
             resolved.          acknowledged what I was saying, but said he intended
             to pursue his course of action.

             I forward this information for your attention.

             Yours sincerely




         C
             Assistant Chief Constable
             (Hillsborough Inquiry)
    X

f




                                                                 9 August 1939




        6 J Dear Esq QPM DL LLfi
        Chief Constable
        West Midlanas Police
        P 0 Box 52
        Lloyd House
        Colmore Circus Queensway
        Birmingham B4 6NQ




        Mervyn Jones may now have related to you Che conversation I had with him
        on the evening of 8 August, and I thought 1 would consolidate our
        conversation by writing to you.

        The nature of the inquiry has placed the South Yorkshire Police merely as
        witnesses at the disposal of Lora Justice Taylor, and quite properly we
        have received no communication from the West Midlands Police officers
        engaged in gathering evidence which would indicate their views on issues
        as taey emerged.

        Hy Police Authority received a latter of complaint from Hr Trevor Hicks.
                                                Middlesex, against the Peputy
        Chief Constable, Peter Hayes, for the comments he made following Chief
        Superintendent Duckenfield's evidence to the inquiry and the allegation
        against him of untruthfulness. That is now with the Police Authority who
        will decide on whatever course of actios they feel appropriate in respect
        of Nr Hayes. On receipt of the correspondence 1 regarded it also as a
        complaint against Mr Duckenfield. 1 caused the complaint to be recorded
        and Mr K P D Cooper, Assistant Chief Constable of Northamptonshire, lias
        been appointed to Investigate the specific allegation of untruthfulness
        levelled against Mr Duckenfield.

        On receipt of Lord Justice Taylor’s report I considered that the question
        of criminal liability needed to be addressed and I have asked the Director
        of Public Prosecutions to give me his advico in this regard, and that is
        awaited. If he considers that prima facie there is evidence which
        justifies police enquiries then 1 presume that these will be carried out
        by members of your Force. This leaves the question of possible discipline
        offences which may lie against one or more members of the South Yorkshire
        Palic*, *nd it would also aeea appropriate if you were to p u rsu e these.




                            4i~C          — —
G J Dear Esq QPM DL LLB                                       9 August 1989


In the noraal course of events an officer conducting an enquiry would
bring to the attention of the Chief Constable of the area his views in
regard to all of these issues but I recognise your peculiar situation and
understand why 1 have received no information froa you that vould assist
me in deciding on a proper course of action. For instance your officers
may have taken statementa which would in normal circuastancea be regarded
as containing a complaint against police and vould merit the appointment
of an investigating officer.

th e paramount consideration in this regard is, of course, the service of
Regulation 7 notices on the officers involved at the earliest opportunity.

It Bay well be that now the public hearing aspect of the inquiry is over
you feel you are now in a position to coasunicate with ae onthese
important matters. All the evidence which exists is in      yc-ur p
                                                                  ossession
and clearly if further enquiries are required it would be both practical
and appropriate for your officers to pursue them.

I should be obliged if you would let   me have your views    on tais issue.
                                                                                     Su n d a y Express
                                                                                     AUGUST 6 1989                                                                                                                                                                   3N              Weather: Rain spreading South, See Page 4                                                            PRICE 50p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d e s ig n e d f o r m e n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LEEDS (0532) 432455




                     WIN 20 jj^                                                                                                                                                                                                          IS YOURmm
                   FIAT TIROS
                   ■             ■»             »              ■          ■ ■ ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           u                                                                                                                                   WENT
                     TODAY                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHECK INSIDE THE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COLOUR MAGAZINE NOW


        NEWS
        IN BRIEF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mission for Major
                                                                            N EW . F oreign S ecretary John
   Eddie, 4 0 , is                                                          Major is to make a surprise visit to                                                                            ANTHONY SMITH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            by                      th e c a m p a ig n th e r e fo r B r it is h p a s sp o r t-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    h o ld e r s in the. c o lo n y t o h a v e t h e o p t io n o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o u t h i s o w n o n -th e -s p o t a s s e s s m e n t b e f o r e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v ita l, lo n g -te r m p o lic y d e c is io n s a xe t a k e n
                                                                            Hong Kong later this year.                                                                                                                              e m ig r a tin g t o t h e U n it e d K in g d o m .                                              b y t h e C a b in et.
   ready to take                                                               H is m ission, announced only a                                                                               Political Editor                             S ir G e o ffr e y ’s v is it w a s w id e ly s e e n a s a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d ip lo m a t ic fa ilu r e , w h ic h o n ly r e in fo r c e d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “H o n g K o n g i s a m a t t e r o f g r ea t c o n c e r n .
                                                                            m o n th after th e m an he replaced, Sir                                            a c r a c k d o w n b y t h e h a r d lin e C h in e s e lea d -                                                                                                     T h e r e are m a n y p e o p le i n H o n g K o n g w h o
   on Aussies                                                               Geoffrey Howe, re tu rn e d from his visit                                           e r s h ip a fte r t h e c o lo n y 's h a n d -o v e r i n 1997.
                                                                                                                                                                       M r M ajor r e v e a le d t h e in it ia t iv e i n h i s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w o r r ie s in t h e H o n g K o n g c o m m u n ity !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T h e G o v e r n m e n t h a s m a d e c le a r i t s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      f e e l th a t t h e c o n f id e n c e t h e y h a d i n th e ir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fu tu re m a y h a v e b e e n sh a ttered b y th e
   T H E n e w , y o u n g E n g la n d                                     there, is a fresh effort to defuse th e                                                                                                                 o p p o s it io n to a n y " b la n k c h e q u e " d ea l                                        e v e n t s i n C h in a in J u n e ,” h e sa id .
   c r ic k e t sid e e x p ected yester-                                   political crisis facing th e B ritish Gov­                                           f ir s t in t e r v ie w s i h c e h is. d r a m a tic p r o m o -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w h ic h c o u ld le a d to B r it a in b e in g s w a m p e d                                          “W e h a v e t o r e b u ild t h e c o n f id e n c e i n
 ' day to play Australia in - the                                                                                                                              . t i o n in t h e C a b in e t r e s h u f f le — w h ic h fol- ’
   fifth T e st startin g a t T ren t
                                                                            ern m en t over dem ands to allow six                                                lo w e d S ir G e o ffr e y ’s fa ilu r e in H o n g K o n g       in a f u t u r e c r i s i s in v o lv in g t h e c o lo n y ’s s ix                              H o n g K o n g . T h e o n u s i s o n t h e C h in e s e to
   B r id g e , N o t t i n g h a m , oij                                   m illion H ong K ong Chinese th e right                                              t o d a m p d o w n w id e s p r e a d a n g e r t o w a r d s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    m i ll i o n p e o p le .                                      ' .                                r e s t o r e t h a t c o n f id e n c e . T h a t ’s a p o in t- I
   T hursday h ad o n e m ajor sur­                                         of entry to th is country.                                                           B r it a in 's h a n d lin g o f t h e tr a n s itio n .                 B u t a fte r ta lk in g b lu n t ly to t h e C h in ese'                                   w a n t e d t o p u t to C h in a a t a v e r y e a r ly sta g e ,                                  Colbourne; Collapsed
   p r i s e . . . 4 0 - y e a r -o ld s p in                                     M r M a jo r h a s o r d e r e d t o u g h n e g o t ia ­                                                                                         f o r e ig n m in is t e r i n Paris- la s t S u n d a y                                          a n d I r eg a r d H o n g K o n g a s a m a tte r o f v e r y
                                                                                                                                                                       I t i s a h ig h r is k str a te g y fo r M r M a jo r ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    — w h e n h e r a is e d t h e q u e s t io n o f t h e P e o ­                                   h ig h p riority."
   b o w ler Eddie. He'm m ings.
      T h e N o tts v etera n is jo in ed
   In th e sq uad o f 12 by n e w c o m ­
                                                                            t i o n s w it h P e k in g t o w in c o n c e s s i o n s a im e d
                                                                            a t r e a s s u r in g H o n g K o n g c it i z e n s w h o fe a r
                                                                                                                                                                 b e c a u s e S ir G e o ffr e y w a s g iv e n a r o u g h
                                                                                                                                                                 r e c e p t io n b y H o n g K o n g C h in e s e le a d in g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p l e ’s L ib e r a tio n A r m y b e in g k e p t o u t o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H o n g K o n g — M r M a jo r d e c id e d to c a r r y                                                                OPINION: Page 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H ow ards’
   ers M ike A therton, th e young
   L a n c a sh ir e b a ts m a n an d
   D evo n M alcolm , D erb ysh ire’s
   Jam aican-born fast bow ler..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            . and Tory chairman goes to the country                                                                                                              star dies

                                                                          DISASTER
  • S P O R T S M in is te r C o lin 1
  M o y n ih a n w a s w a r n e d by
  T ory M P John C arlisle ye ste r ­
  day th a t h e m ay b e ta k e n to
  eo u rt for u rg in g top c rick eters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mm                                                   mmzmms.                            in w ife’s
  to b reak th e ir contracts and
  n o t to go on a to u r to S ou th
  Africa.
  P a t       G i b s o n        o n        t h e         n e w - o l d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 embrace
                   l o o k   —     P a g e          2 8   ..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H O W A RD S' W ay s ta r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M a u r ic e     C o lb o u r n e
  Victim named


                                                                          POLICE TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                — Tom H ow ard in the
 T H E . la st tw o o f four b od ies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to p TV s a ilin g so a p
 recovered by divers from th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  — h as died in his wife’s
 s e a o ff A rram nore Islan d, Co                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             arm s a t th e ir F rench h o l­
 D onegal, w ere id en tified y e s­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            iday hom e, ju s t hours
 terday a s th a t o f M atth ew Hal-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           after a sailing trip.
 Hfax, so n o f A dm iral S ir David
 H alllfax, C on stable an d Gov­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The 49-year-old actor is
 ern or o f W indsor C astle,and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thought to have suffered a
 A lexander R ick ets, 2 2 . T he                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               heart attack. .
 fo u r E d in b u r g h U n iv e r s ity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y e sterd a y a c tr e ss Jan




                                                                          BE
 stu d en ts w ere p resu m ed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H a r v e y , w h o p la y s h i s w if e
 d r o w n e d w lie n th e ir 12ft. din­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in t h e s e r ie s , s u m m e d u p
 g h y capsized in rain an d high                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t h e f e e lin g s o f t h e ca st: "W e
 s e a s n in e days ago.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a r e -d e v a s ta te d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "H e w a s a caring, a n d c o m ­
 March arrests                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p a s sio n a te m a n a n d .w e w ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                all m is s h im dreadfully."
  FORTY-EIGHT p e o p le w ere                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mr C olbourne, h is M alay­
  arrested yesterd ay a s thou-,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sian-b orn w ife, Jeany, . and
  s a n d s o f IR A s u p p o r t e r s                                                                                                                                                       m a n S ir J a c k L ayden, w h o                                                                                                                                                                                                th eir eight-year-old daughter
  m a rch ed th r o u g h ' London to                                     MANY police officers                                              by                                                 w ill c o n s id e r th e p o lic e                                                                                                                                                                                              Clara, w ere h o lid a y in g at th e
  p ro test again st th e 20th ann i­                                     im p lic a te d in th e                                       GRAHAM BELL                                            c h ie f’s resig n a tio n n e x t w eek.                                                                                                                                                                                        h o m e th e y b o u g h t recen tly in:
  versa ry n e x t w e e k o f th e                                       Hillsborough disaster                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 th e p ic tu r e s q u e to w n o f
  arrival - o f B ritish tro o p s in                                                                                                                                                              M r D u ck en field , w h o had
                                                                          face prosecution and                                                                                                 n o t • v i s i t e d H il l s b o r o u g h                                                                                                                                                                                     D inan, n ea r R en n es.
. N o r t h e r n Ir e la n d .     1                                                                                     in g o th e r sc a p e g o a ts w ill b e
                                                                          the sack.                                       foun d. ‘                                                            b e fo re th e m a tc h , w a s n o t at
                                                                                                                                                                                               h is S h effie ld h o m e.                                                                                                                                                                            Filming
 Suspect flees                                                              S outh Y orkshire offi­
                                                                          cers spoke b itterly -o f a
                                                                                                                              A se n io r s o u r c e in v o lv ed in
                                                                                                                          th e in q u iry said: “It’s im p o s s i­
                                                                                                                          b le t o p in th e Tj.lan^e o n one
                                                                                                                                                                                                   S o u t h Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e
                                                                                                                                                                                               Authority, m e m b e r s w ere giv­                                                                                                                                             H e b e c a m e ill a s h e w a s p r e ­
T H E M AN su sp e c te d o f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p a rin g to d o a d eco ra tin g job:
atta ck in g E m p lo y m e n t M in is­                                  w itch'hunt last night,and.                     m an . M any m o r e h a ve to h o ld                                ing. aw ay h o c lu e s v&b'out t h e
                                                                          fear even ju n io r ran k s                    1th e ir h a n d s u p ;                                              career p r o sp e c ts -of sen io r                                                                                                                                                  Jeany, 35, heard- a th u d
t e r T im E g g a r w a s b e in g                                                                                                                                                            officers.                                                                                                                                                                       fr o m th e co u rty a rd and
hu n ted by , p o lice la st night                                        will be m ade scapegoats.                         • “T h e y in c lu d e p o l i c e on
                                                                                                                                                                                                   C o u n cillo r C lareh ce S w in ­                                                                                                                                         t h   o u g h t her- h u s b a n d h a d
after fleein g h is g irlfrien d ’s                                                                                       d u ty 13': m ile s frorfr th e sta ­                                                                                                                                                                                                                fa lle n o ff a, ladder. W h en sh e
                                                                              T h e fo r c e , r e e lin g f r o m        d iu m , w h o w ere su p p o se d to                                dell, o n e o f 1 1 L abour m e m ­
h o m e in K en n in gton , S o u th '                                                                                                                                                         b e r s o f th e au th ority, said: “It                                                                                                                                         rea c h e d him ,, s h e fo u n d h im
London. A row b roke o u t after                                          o f f ic ia l b la m e fo r B r ita in 's       b e m o n ito r in g th e bu lld -up o f
                                                                          w o r s t s p o r t in g tr a g e d y , is                                                                           is a v ery s e r io u s situ a tio n w e                                                                                                                                        c o lla p sed w ith c h e s t p ain s.
th e M P tick ed o ff a g irl p ic k ­                                                                                    fa n s, t h o s e in c h a rg e o f c o m ­
                                                                           c o n d u c t in g i t s o w n in q u ir y     m u n ic a tio n s w h o fa ile d to                                 fin d o u r se lv e s in. O u r jo b at                                                                                                                                              A fully-trained n u rsin g s is ­
ing flo w ers from h is garden.                                                                                                                                                                th e a u th o rity m e e tin g is n o t                                                                                                                                         ter, s h e tried d esp era tely to '
                                                                          in t o t h e d is a s t e r w h ic h c o s t    rela y m e ssa g e s a b o u t crow d
                                                                           95 liv e s .                                   m o v e m e n ts a n d th e c h iefs                                 an en v iab le one.                                                                                                                                                          •sa v e h im by' givin g h im th e
 Woman killed                                                                 O n e o ffice r said: “It se e m s
                                                                          w e are to b e th e r itu a l sa cri­
                                                                                                                          w h o la id d ow n th e w ron g t a c ­
                                                                                                                          tics."
                                                                                                                                                                                                   “W e w ill h a ve to d eb a te Mr
                                                                                                                                                                                               W righ t’s offer o f resign ation .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■ k is s o f life, b u t all in vain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H is agent, S u sa n A ngel, said
 A WOMAN p ea ce cam paigner                                               fice. ITie fa n s h a v e b e e n c o m ­                                                                           And th a t le a v e s m e ex trem ely                                                                                                                                          it a ll h a p p e n e d “instantly."
 w a s d e c a p it a t e d y e s t e r d a y                                                                                H e added: “T h e fall-o u t w ill
                                                                          p le te ly ex o n era ted an d w e              b e e n o r m o u s.” ' ' ' ■                                        sa d an d sorry.                                                                                                                                                                     M r C o lb o u m e h a d b e e n d u e
 after fa llin g u n d er th e w h e e ls                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b a c k o n T u esd a y to fin ish
 o f a p o lice h o rseb o x o u tsid e                                    fin d th a t h a r d to b elieve.               . T h e p o lic e m e n in v o lv ed sa y                               “T h e C h ief C o n sta b le is one
                                                                              "We h a v e beeri to ld to sa y                                                                                  o f n a tu re's g e n tle m e n a n d a                                                                                                                                        film in g th e fifth se r ie s o f
 th e U.S. airb ase a t G reenham                                                                                         th e y h a v e b e e n ord ered n o t to                                                                                                                                                                                                            H ow ards' W ay, w h ic h w iil b e
 C om m on , B erk sh ire.                                                 n oth in g, b u t ev er y o n e in th e        sp e a k a b o u t H illsb o ro u g h to                             t o t a lly p r o f e s s i o n a l p o l i c e ­
                                                                           fo r ce is a b so lu tely seeth in g .                                                                              m an , w h o h a s th e r e sp e c t of                                                                                                                                        sc r e e n e d in th e au tu m n .
                                                                                                                          a n y o n e apart fr o m o fficers,
                                                                                                                                                                                               th e o ffice rs h e c o m m a n d s and                                                                                                                                             H is d ea th w ill c a u se seriou s,
 Crying off                                                                   “T h e p r e ssu re o n u s during
                                                                          th e s e la s t c o u p le o f m o n th s
                                                                                                                          co n d u c tin g th e inquiry.
                                                                                                                              “E v e ry o ffice r in th e force
                                                                                                                          h a s b e e n w arn ed h is jo b i s o n -
                                                                                                                                                                                               o f th e p o lic e c o m m itte e m e m ­
                                                                                                                                                                                              b e r s h e s it s a lo n g sid e.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h e a d a c h e s fo r scrip tw riters. ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S k ilfu l ed itin g m a y sa v e th e
                                                                          h a s b e e n u n b ea ra b le.’’                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  day. B u t a s t h e frien d ly b o a t
  SP A N ISH op era tic su p erstar                                                                                                                                                               I n L iv e r p o o l la w y e r S ir
  P lacid o D o m in g o sh o u ld have                                       H e a d d e d : " E v e r y o n e is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d esig n er T o m w a s c en tra l to
                                                                          looking, over th e ir sh o u ld e r s                         OPINION: Page 14                                       H a r r y L iv e r m o r e s a id h e
  su n g a t h is so n ’s w ed d in g in                                                                                                                                                      b e lie v e d m o s t o f th e rep orted                                                                                                                                       t h e s e r ie s , t h e o p t io n o f
  A lican te's cath ed ral ch u rch of                                    a n d m a n y are g e n u in e ly fear­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            axein g th e p ro g ra m m e a lto ­
                                                                          in g for th e ir ca reers.”                     th e lin e, if h e u tte r s so m u c h                              £30 m illio n in c iv il c o m p e n sa ­
  S an N ic o la s la st n ig h t. In stea d                                                                                                                                                   tio n c la im s w o u ld g o t h e fa m i­                                                                                                                                    g e th er m a y b e considered .
: h e cried. T h e to p te n o r said                                         C h ief S u p e rin te n d en t D avid      as a w ord about w hat hap­                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M r C olb ou rn e’s TV b reak ­
                                                                                                                          pened," h e said. .                                                  lie s o f th e b e r ea v e d and
  afterw ards: “S e e in g m y son                                        D u c k e n f ie ld , w h o w a s in                                                                                 injured.                                                                                                                                                                      th ro u g h ca m e w ith th e B B C
  sta n d in g by th e a ltar I w a s                                     ch a rge o f p o lic in g th e FA Cup               M r D u c k e n f ie l d a n d M r                                                                                                                                                                                                             se r ie s G angsters. H e w a s due
  a b so lu tely in cap a b le o f sin g­                                 sem i-fin a l b e tw e e n L iverpool           W right, a lo n g w ith S h effie ld                                    I t w a s q u ite c le a r fo llow in g                                                                                                                                    to app ear in p a n to m im e at
  ing. I w a s too o v erco m e by                                        an d ' N o ttin g h a m F o r e st in           W ed n esd a y FCj* c o u ld also                                   th e r ep o rt th a t th e "finger of                                                                                                                                          th e T h ea tre R oyal, B a th , th is
  em otion ."                                                             S h effield , h a s alread y b e e n            fin d th e m se lv e s s u e d in the                               c iv il guilt" 'pointed a t the                      >hirt sleeve order: Kenneth Baker is se t to fight for votes nationwide              Picture: PAUL REED                  year.
                                                                          su sp e n d e d a n d C h ief C on sta­         c iv il c o u r ts b y rela tiv es o f the                          S o u th Y ork sh ire P o lic e a n d
                                                                          b le P eter W right h a s offered               bereaved.                                                           S h effie ld W ed n esd ay FC, h e
    MADDOCKS                                                              to resign .
                                                                              B u t in w h a t a m o u n ts to a
                                                                          pu rge, se v e ra l m o re o f the
                                                                                                                              M any front-lin e p o lic e m a n
                                                                                                                          r em a in d e e p ly critical of the
                                                                                                                          m en in ch arge a t H illsb o r ­
                                                                                                                                                                                              said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Liz S te e l, ch a irm a n o f the •
                                                                                                                                                                                              H ills b o r o u g h           S o lic ito r s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B aker’s grand tour
                                                                          1,100 o ffice rs w h o .w e r e on              o u gh .                ;                                           G roup, w h ic h rep re se n ts fam ­
                                                                                                                                                                                              ilie s o f th e bereaved, said: “I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TORY Party chairman Ken­             Labour has freshened its                                                      B O U R N E M O U T H
                                                                          d u t y w i l l f in d t h e m s e l v e s          O n e said: “T h ey d eserv e to                                                                                     neth Baker reveals today image and is six per cent
                                                                          d e m o ted , transferred, sa c k e d
                                                                          or in th e dock.
                                                                                                                          c o p th e lot.
                                                                                                                              “All too o ften it ’s the lo w li­
                                                                                                                                                                                              th in k th e p o lic e lo o k e d a t th e
                                                                                                                                                                                              situ a tio n w ith e y es th a t were
                                                                                                                                                                                              ex p e ctin g cro w d disorder, b u t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  that he will tour Britain in a h e a d in la te s t opinion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  coming w eeks talking and polls; b u t Mr Baker will now
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LUXURY
                                                                              T h e D irecto r o f P u b lic P r o s­     e s t c o n sta b le w h o 1gets th e
                                                                          e c u tio n s h a s b e e n a sk e d to
                                                                          c o n s id e r w h e t h e r c r im in a l
                                                                                                                          b la m e w h en th in g s go w rong.”
                                                                                                                             L ord J u s tic e T ay lor’s c o n ­
                                                                                                                                                                                              w h ic h very, q u ick ly turned
                                                                                                                                                                                              into crow d injury :and- pain .”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  listening to grassroots sup ­ roll up his sleeves.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  porters a s he begins the           Many Tory MPs believe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C O -O W N E R S H IP
                                                                          ch a r g e s, in c lu d in g m an .
                                                                          slau gh ter, are ju stified .
                                                                                                                          d e m n a tio n o f p o lic e ta c tic s is
                                                                                                                          s o se v e re th at it c o u ld even
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S h e sa id th e grolip’s clients
                                                                                                                                                                                              w a n ted a ll th e e v id en ce exam ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  major task of winning lost former party chairman Peter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  support, writes Political Edi­ B ro o k e — p r o m o te d     to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A P A R T M E N T S IN A
                                                                              S u c h c a s e s w ill m a k e B r it­
                                                                          ish legal h isto r y a n d o ffice rs
                                                                                                                          h e r a ld a n o f f i c i a l H o m e
                                                                                                                          O ffice rev iew lo l train in g for
                                                                                                                                                                                              in e d very ca refu lly
                                                                                                                                                                                             ' T h e S c o ttish L ea gu e says it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      j           tor Anthony Smith.               Ulster Secretary in the Cabi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The move acknowledges net re sh u ffle — w a s too
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5-S TA R S E T T IN G
                                                                          o f all r a n k s are lo o k in g over          se n io r officers.                                                 w ill b e im p o ss ib le to im p le­
                                                                          their sh o u ld e r s in an a tm o ­                                                                                                                                   deep anxiety in Tory heart­ la c k lu s tre in exp laining             P runlim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e p a r e lo o n ie r a w a r ld o l .     ☆ ola rethjue stN aewshoForest a n d H ardy Country
                        AiUtn                                             sp h e re o f fear.
                                                                                                                             S ev era l p o lic e a u th o rities
                                                                                                                          feel th e e sta b lish e d c h a in o f
                                                                                                                                                                                              m e n t a ll o f L o rd JusticejTay-
                                                                                                                                                                                             .lo r’s 43 r eco m m en d a tio n s on              lands.                            unpopular policies.                                ited luxury; The Cartton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Club A partm ents a l (ha Corllon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rt drive ow oy.
                                                                              Mr D u ck en field , 44, h ea vily                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  You'll llnd yoursell co u n tin g ihe
                                                                                                                          c o m m a n d a n d c o m m u n ic a ­                              cro w d sa fe ty b efo re thejstart                   It recognises the Govern­         •John Major has revealed         Hotel, Bournem outh.                                  d a y s unlit yo u r next visit, And o s o
                                                                          c r it ic is e d b y L o r d J u s t ic e       tio n s w ith in th e r a n k s are in                              o f th eir se a so n .                 I .         ment h as failed so far to win that he, too, will be a “travel­             As a c o -o w n e r ol o n e ot these           c o -o w n e r ol.The Carllan Club
                                                                          T aylor in- h is in terim inquiry-              u r g e n t n e e d o f overhaul.                                       A sp o k e sm a n said: I "The                 s u f fic ie n t b a c k in g for ling and listening” Foreign          1  7  m ag n ltlcen  t ap  artm  e n ts, yo u     ☆ A p artm en is you'll enjoy y e a r s ol
                                                                          rep o rt for la ck o f lead ersh ip ,              Mr W righ t w a s n o t avail­                                   tro u b le is th e tim e scale for                                                                                       □ I s a en jo y  all th e to b u lo u s facilities    inflation prooi.hoiidays.
                                                                          is. th e m a n m o s t in danger o f            a b le for c o m m e n t la s t nigh t                              im p le m e n tin g s o m e of the                 planned NHS reform, priva­ Secretary.                                 ot the a d jo in in g Corllon Hotel,                       But w a r d s c a n hardly d o justice la
    H e l lo ,         c a n       I        s p e a k          to         goin g to court.                                a n d n e ith e r w a s S o u th Y ork ­                            r e c o m m e n d a tio n s i s jukt n o t         tising water and m easures          Revivalist message — Page 7 4     Britain’s only privately o w n e d 5 -sta r * ihe reollfy. W h y no t c o m e to
    s o m         e o n e          c o n c e r n e d                         B u t c o lle a g u e s are predict*         sh ir e p o lic e . a u th o rity ch air­                           reasonable."                         I             to  clean    up  pollution.         A private Major — Page 15         hotel.                                                B o u rn e m o u th a n d see these
    w     i t h      t h e       J o h n            P l a y e r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        No e x p e n se h a s b e e n sp a re d la               luxurious o p a rtm en ts for yoursell.
    Q u e e n '         M    u m       ’s     p o r t r a i t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m a k e th e o p a rtm e n ts th e m se lv es the            For a b ro ch u re o n d detolls ot h a w
                         a w a r d ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               last w o rd In luxury. S p a c io u s                      . y o u cfin enjoy a w ee k en d oi



                                                                            Bush offers &3bn to free hostages
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lou n g e, lasielully lurnls hed                    ■ fa     m id w e ek bredK tor tw a here ol the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b e d ro o m s , o d r e a m Kllchen o nd                    5 -sta r Carlton Hotel ot very special
  Bond winners
 W IN N E R S in th e N ational
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d elu x e en su lle b a th ro o m s, plus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ro o m service a v ailab le w h e n e v e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   you n e e d It.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tales, till In th e c o u p o n . O r qu ic k e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stitt rin g M ile s F ield in g on

 S a v in g s P r e m iu m B o n d s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   And w h e n y a u 'r e no t relaxing In         • £ ( 0202 ) 22011 . .
                                                                          PR ESID EN T BUSH has                                                                                                                                                              S h eik h F a d la lla h w ere “m a k ­           B u t Iran 's lead er is w arning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ••            .m                      ..
 w e e k l y p r i z e d r a w a r e:                                                                                                      by ANTHONY SMITH, WILLIAM MASSI eI                                                                                                                                                                                      y o u r s u m p tu o u s ap artm e n t,
 £100,000, n u m b e r 20CT 475949,                                       secretly offered to give                                                                                                                                                           in g p ro g ress”.                            th at h is h e lp is c o n d itio n a l on              B o u rn e m o u th otters o w eollh ot
 w in n e r iiv e s in B e r k sh ir e ;                                  back nearly £3 billion of                                                a n d GERARD KEMP                                                                                         . H e z b o lla h a c t iv is t s , h o w ­   th e rele a se o f S h e ik h O beid.                   diversions. There’s excellent . . . .
 £50,000, n u m b e r 1SS 249990,                                         Ira n ’s m oney in a m ajor                                                                                                                                                        ever, said th e y w o u ld h o ld on              In. a n o th er su rp rise d evel­                  sh o p p in g , first c lo ss,„,^v
 w in n er liv e s in Clydebank;                                                                                         se iz e d th e se n io r c leric o f the'                                 L ast nigh t, at M j B u s h ’s                           to their c a p tiv es u n til all their       o p m e n t la st n ig h t, it w a s                    sporting facilities
 £25,000, n u m b e r 19DZ 808342,
                                                                          d riv e to s e c u r e th e                    H e z b o lla h — th e           k id n a p                            in vitation , high-level]Algerian                            d em a n d s w ere m et.                      r e v e a le d b y I s r a e li i n t e ll i ­          o n d th e pastoral
 w in n er liv es in W est Lothian.                                       release of B ritish and                        group th o u g h t to b e h old in g                                   o fficia ls w ere negotiating in                                “The fa ct th a t the A lgerians           gen ce th a t th eir o rig in al tar­                   sp lend o u rs
                                                                          other W estern hostages                        se v e r a l h o s ta g e s , in c lu d in g                           th e M o slem se c to r of B eirut.                                                                        g et h a d b e e n S h eik h Fadlal-
                                                                                                                         C h u r c h o f E n g la n d e n v o y                                                                                              are n ow in v o lv ed is th e b e st
    ON OTHER PAGES                                                        held in B eirut.                               Terry Wai'te.                                                              T here is g row in g Jptim ism                           n e w s th at w e h a v e h a d for a         la h        h im s e lf,     and       th e
                                                                             S e n io r W h ite H o u s e o f f i­                                                                              in d ip lo m a tic circle; th a t an                         lo n g tim e,” sa id D r R azah               H ez b o lla h lead er w a s sh a d ­
                                                                                                                            T he ca p tu red m an, S h e ik h                                                                                                                                              o w e d b y M o ssa d agents.
                                                                          c ia ls a d m it t e d la s t n ig h t         Abdul-K arim O beid, i s n ow                                          e n d to th e p lig h t o f the kidnap                       R aad , th e L e b a n e se -b o r n
 Home News ..............2,3,5,7                                                                                                                                                                v ic tim s c o u ld b e in sight. B u t                      F ren ch m a n w h o la s t year                 B u t th e Isra e lis fea red h is
                                                                          t h a t t h e P r e s id e n t h a d t o ld    b e in g u s e d in a h u m a n barter.-
 Foreign N e w s ................              A                          th e T e h r a n a d m in is tr a tio n           Mr M ajor h a s m ade a plea                                        th ere is a lso cautioij in W ash ­                          h e lp e d se c u r e th e rele a se o f      su p p o rte rs w o u ld carry o u t a
 B o o k s ....................;............ 11'                          t h a t if t h e y h e lp e d w in th e                                                                               in gton a n d Londoi/, b eca u se                            th ree F rench h ostag es.                    "slaughter o f the innocents"
                                                                                                                         for everyone in v o lv ed to stay                                                                                                      “In the end, th ere h a s to be            a m o n g th eir v ic tim s a s a
 Crosswords'................ 2 & 28                                       c a p t iv e s ’ fr e e d o m , h e w o u ld   co o l, and. h a s ap p ea led to the                                  hop es- have b e e n raised and
                                                                                                                                                                                                d a sh e d before.             I                             dialogue."                                    reprisal.
                                                                          b e g in t a lk s im m e d ia t e ly o n       kid n ap p ers to let th e h o sta g e s
 H oroscope................ v...... 13                                    r e le a s in g t h e a s s e t s w h ic h     retu rn h om e.                                                                                                                        D r R aad w o r k s w ith the                 I n s t e a d , th e c o m m a n d o
                                                                                                                                                                                                    T he A lgerians hive proved                              A m erican-b ased In tern a tio n a l         u n it w h ic h h ad fo llo w e d F ad­
 D ia ry ..................... •...13                                     a re b lo c k e d i n A m e ric a .               In W ash in g to n , Mr B u s h                                      s u c c e s s fu l n e g o tia o r s before
 Leaders................................. 14                                 T h e offer w a s p a sse d to              h a s p u t the m ilitary o p tio n on                                 in h o sta ge crisislsituations',                            H u m a n ita r ia n C o m m is s io n ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w h ic h r e p r e s e n t s th e h o s ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           lallah to T ehran sto o d back
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w h ile a n o th er crack sq u ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
 John J u n o r...........................14                              Ira n ’s n ew P re sid e n t R afsan-          h o ld w h ile Iran u s e s its c o n ­                                 a n d Algerian R a a o rep orted                            ta g e s’ fam ilies, a n d the n ew           se iz e d O beid.                                                                                                                     THE
                                                                          ja n i as. th e d ip lo m a tic o ffe n ­      sid era b le in flu e n c e w ith the                                   th a t the face-to-fjce n eg o tia ­                        A n g lo -I r a n ia n F r i e n d s h i p                                                                                                                                        CARLTON
 Byron Rogers                ................-15                          siv e to b rin g h o m e the h o s ­           kid napp ers.                                                           tio n s w ith H ezbollah leader                                                                              M r M ajor sa id yesterday:
 TV & R a d io ........................ f6                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A ssociation.                                 "My m e ssa g e to th e k id n a p ­                                                                                                     CLUB
                                                                          tages reach ed fever p itc h in                                                                                                                                                                                                  p e r s is clear. I d o n ’t th in k
                                                                          th e M id d le E a st.                                               PRAYER FOB THE HOSTAGES                                                                                          A lso trying to b rea k the                                                                                                      XV\                                             APARTMENTS
 Showbusiness                    ......... 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                d e a d lo ck is sp ec ia l U.N. envoy        th at in h o ld in g th o s e h o sta g e s
 Sunday Expressions 18 & 19                                                • In- L on d on , M rs T hatcher                                                                                                                                                  M arrack G oulding, a form er                 th e y h e lp th e ir c a u s e in any
                                                                          w a s k e e p in g in h ou rly tou ch          9 932 d a y s h a v e p a s s e d s ih c e T e rr y W a ite d isa p ie a r e d , 1,208                                              B r itish dip lom at, w h o is try­           w ay.”
 F ashion              ............. 18 & 19                              w ith th e u n fo ld in g drama.               s in c e J o h n M cC a rth y w a s k id n a p p e d , 1,213 lin p c B r ia n !
 Glenys R oberts.................• 19                                        F o r e ig n S e c r e t a r y J o h n .    K e e n a n v a n is h e d a n d 86 s in c e J a c k M a n n w a s a b d u c te d in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in g to esta b lish w h eth er U.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M a r in e L ie u t e n a n t C o lo n e l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           • A P a le stin ia n a c c u se d o f                   A co-ownershipcocktail of luxury and opulence
 L e tte rs ............................... 20-                           M a jo r t o l d ’ t h e S u n d a y           B e ir u t.                                                             •                                                                                                         killing- 16 p e o p le w h o s e b u s
                                                                          E x p r e s s th a t B r it a in w a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W illia m H ig g in s h a s b e e n           h e s e n t p lu n g in g in to a ravine              The Cartton Club Apartments, The Carlton Hotel, FREEPOST,                                                          T
 Travel ................                      23                                                                                   O u r       h e a r t s   g o      o u t   to    t h e   f a m   i l y   o f    C o i o n s .     H i g g i n s     i n   h a n g ed b y h is k id n ap p ers,          is a m o n g p r iso n e r s m ilita n t            I Bournemouth BH1 3TS. Please send m e a Carlton Club Apartment
                                                                          u s in g . ex ten siv e M id dle E a st                                                                                                                                             - T h e m o o d o f o p tim ism h a s                                                                                                                                                                                     I
 Business & C it y                     29 - 34                            c o n ta c ts to h elp the search
                                                                                                                         t h e i r     g r e a t    d i s t r e s s   a n d   w e     p r a y     L o r d    t h a t    y o i i . w i l l   b e    w i t h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L e b a n ese S h i’ite s w a n t Israel              brochure and details of m idweek and weekend breaks for two at
                                                                                                                         t h e    f a m i l i e s    o f a l l t h e    h o s t a g e s ;   s u r r o u n d       t h e m    m     t h   y o u r   l o v e   grow n sh arp ly w ith P resid en t           t o fr e e . B u t a. s t a t e m e n t ,           I The Carlton Hotel.
 M otoring..,.'..........................35                               fo r a p e a c efu l so lu tio n to the                                                                                                                                            R afsanjani, n ew ly sw o rn into                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                          crisis.                                        a r id      g i v e    t h e m      c o m f o r t    i n   t h e s e     a n x i o u s    d a y s . j                                                                             is s u e d in B eiru t, ru led o u t an
 G ardening.......................... 36                                                                                                                                                                   C a n o n Jolirf O a te s,-R e c to r of          office; p led g in g h e lp to .w in          ex ch a n g e for th r e e Is r a e li s o l­         N am e              —
                                                                             It b eg a n w h en th e Isra elis                                                                                                                                               th e rele a se o f th e h o sta g es.         diers.                                              I Address                                                                                                                I
 S p o rt............................ 24 - 28                                                                                                                                                          S t B r id e ’s C h ir c h . F le e t S tr e e t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I                                                                                                                        I
   MURDERED..                                                                                                                                                                                           YOUNG BRITONS ABROAD: PAGES 8 and 9                                                                                                                    L T8l«
                                          all too much thar
                                        end of a nervy week
                                     is that both President         Engl
Rafsanj                        ish, to their credit, seem to      is a vuiga
understand                                                        vulgarity is Ha'S
                                                                  the time when tf
                                                                  Bible in the coml
                                                                  more than the lei
                                                                  scratching of the
                                                                  at-it reflex,, promoted1
                                                                  (surely the most del
PETER W RIGHT, the South Yorkshire Chief Consta­                  world). It is a kind oT|
ble, deserves credit for one thing in the aftermath of the        which finds virtue
Hillsborough disaster. By offering his resignation, he            reduction of man, a nob!
has revived the honourable tradition of the acceptance
of responsibility by the man at the top — an example
that some of Mrs Thatcher’s Ministers, and many
businessmen, might well reflect on.
   It is right that there has been a thorough inquiry into
the tragedy, but wrong that the nation should now be
seeking scapegoats. Far more important is that Lord
Justice Taylor’s investigation should ensure that such a
                                                                    The 0
                                                                  PITY the poor old Chu|
stupefyingly awful accident never happens again.
   The hapless Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield,            England. It never seems a
                                                                  get it quite right. One mi
promoted just 21 days before the disaster, made wrong             the Archbishop of Canterbj
decisions in the worst afternoon in British sporting              telling the Synod at Yorli
history and should not have lied about them afterwards.           fundamentalism is wrong
But that is an internal policy disciplinary concern rather        intolerance of others. .The
than a matter for the courts, and the notion that                 moment his lay adviser is
Duckenfield or any other policeman should be prose­               ing to the BBC asking
cuted for manslaughter is nonsense.                               suppress a programme
   The police may well have made serious mistakes, but            might upset the intolerant.
they did not willingly allow 95 people to go to their                The two positions are
deaths. Indeed, they deserve more understanding than              fectly compatible, of com
they have received at the hands of Lord Justice Taylor.           church of toleration has c
Stewarding football matches is a thankless task at best,          feet right to preach the v
and it is unfair to lay the panoply of ills of British            of discretion as a means 01
soccer — under-investment by clubs, wretchedly poor               serving tolerance. Being
stadium facilities, and so on — at their door.                    cerned for the feelings of <
   The Taylor Report is a forthright document that                is a respectable positio
should be taken seriously by everyone concerned with              sometimes a slightly wet c
the future of British soccer, not least a government              runs counter in this case
obsessed with the irrelevancies of its fatuous identity           the principles of freedo
card scheme. Let us hope that the rest of the judge’s             expression and freedom of
findings, due at the end of the year, will balance the            ination that post-Renaii
harsh indictment of the police made so far.                       Europe holds so dear. Bui
                                                                  the Church has often
                                                                  counter to that.             ■
          SAYINGS OF THE WEEK                                        The Anglican Establishflj
 ■ Society drives people crazy with lust and calls it advertis­   not obliged, after all, tel
ing. — John Lahr.                                                 the values of a secular socl
■ If you are going to do a thing, you should do it thoroughly.    is no longer secularism, i||
If you’re going to be a Christian, you may as well be a           but fundamentalism whi
Catholic.-—Muriel Spark.                                          now seen to be its greatest
                                                                  lenge. In seeking to be m
■ I established the fact that he didn’t wear braces or use a
                                                                  and acceptable to a secular
purse, which I thought were very good signs. — Norma              ence, it has seemed to ha\
Major, on first meeting her future husband, John.                 its own roots. Archbishop
■ I know very little about the situation.— Mike Gatting on        cie’s address to York, wi
South Africa.                                                     concern over the dilemma
■ ff every time an American gets threatened we wring our          Lord Chancellor in obeyir
hands and s^rt attacking our friends, there’s going to be a       harsh tenets of his Presby
tremendous amount of hostage-taking around the world. —           group, was ail honest pu
Dr Henry Kissinger.                                               over the conundrum that
                                                                  firm faith that makes the
                                  „ atures the Gov-
                            . It is a position riddled
               _ _ Iiis y , misjudgment and false        be en o tr
           _ _ R Mandela’s release, for example,            In                             combined
           Seen developed into a perfect aurora          leverage of                    It would be
       -/disinform ation. This man, who has              agreeable to believe that South Africa will
       Jtserved so well of his people and nation,        be transformed more easily, for the birth
      rhould of course be instantly let out of           of Zimbabwe cost 27,000 lives. But the
      prison. But Mandela’s release is not going         signs, unhappily, point the other way.


                                                               way thereafter. Moreover, the elec­
                                                               tion can, it seems, take place only
                                                               at the annual conference in the
                                                               autumn. Accordingly if M r Neil
                                                               Kinnock died suddenly in office the
                                                               Queen would have no alternative


'id the Palace
                                                               but to send for M r Roy Hattersley,
                                                               or whoever was the deputy leader
                                                               of the day, till October came
                                                               round — unless there was a Deputy
                                                               Prime Minister who was a different
                     of Deputy in the previous year.           person.
                        In 1957 the prerogative was more           The Conservatives do not, as a
                     in evidence when the Queen,               party, have a deputy leader. So that
                     advised by a few swells led by Lord       complication does not arise. They
                     Salisbury, sent for Macmillan in
mam                  preference to Butler. The Parlia­
                                                               do, however, have a moderately
                                                               sensible electoral system, obtained
                     mentary Labour Party was, among           through the endeavours of Mr
                     others, shocked by these goings-on        Humphry Berkeley in 1963-65. It
                     and, on 21 January 1957, issued a         is certainly more sensible than
                     press statement saying what it            Labour’s new-fangled system, even
                     would do in comparable circum­            though the provision about per­
                     stances. It would hold an election.       centages (varied between 1965 and
                     Lord St John of Fawsley, in his           1975) leave the largely innumerate
tTKINS               Introduction (1974). to Bagehot’s         Conservative MPs in a state of per­
                     ‘English Constitution’, sought to         plexity. If Mrs Thatcher resigned
                     cast doubt on the validity, propri­       in her own time, having given the
                     ety even, of this declaration. He         Queen notice, the Conservatives
 when Winston        did so on the same basis as people        would follow Lord Wilson’s 1976
 C. R. Attlee his    are now supposed to be questioning        precedent. If she died, or resigned
i fact Churchill     Sir Geoffrey’s title: that it inter­      suddenly, the Queen would send
to send not for      fered with the Queen’s prerogative        for Sir Geoffrey as a caretaker until
ithony Eden if       to appoint a Prime Minister.               the election was completed —
to him.                 But the Palace was perfectly con­       though she would probably have
itler acted as de    tent to follow the Labour Party’s          sent for him anyway in this capac­
•ee Conservative     elective procedure when Lord Wil­          ity.
Churchill, Eden      son resigned in 1976. Indeed, I               The truth is that the Conserva­
[lan, he held the     should guess ffianrw as^ relieved to      tives’ adoption of an electoral sys­
p3. A fat lot of      be freed of the necessity to make a       tem in 1965 has rendered talk of
!m when it came       choice. The Queen had certainly           the Royal prerogative largely obso­
lillan’s successor    received a lot of notice, going back      lete. The prerogative retains some
;n argued, nota-      to 1975, in common with other             m eaning'in relation to t he granting
jhnson, that the      persons of near-Royal status in our       of a dissolution or t he appointment
e was effectively     polity, such as Lords Tonypandy           of a Prime Minister in a ‘hung’
occasion not by       and Goodman.                               Parliament, which looked more
position (which          It has largely escaped remark           likely before the collapse of the
inyone’s calcula-     that under Labour’s ridiculously           Alliance. The suggestion that Sir
  by Macmillan’s      cumbersome post-1980 system the            Geoffrey is a threat to the preroga­
  candidate only,     election would take longer than it         tive is ridiciilous. If it comes from
in, there is no       did in 1976, when Lord Callaghan          the Palace, it is also, as George IV
ueen’s objecting      succeeded smoothly, even if all did        would have said, a piece of damned
;iven his position     not proceed in the same smooth            impudence.
C H IE F C O N ­                                                                                 who repeatedly clashed with
                                                                                                 Mr Wright, during the year
S T A B L E Peter                                                                                long pit strike, said today: “I
Wright will not be                                                                               don’t believe he should
                                                                                                 resign, he is far too valuable
allowed to q u it                                                                                to lose:      ;
over the H i l l s ­                                                t    « ..                    - “He is such an excellent
borough disaster,                                                                                • 4 page special inside -
rival politicians                                                                                9 Inquiry latest: Page 2
v owe d t h i s
                                                                                                 chief that it would be a grave
afternoon..                                                                                      p ity if the a u th o r ity
  L abour and T ory                                                                              accepted his resignation. My
members are planning                                                                             only criticism Is that he has
                                                                                                 been too protective of his
to cast aside their dif-                                                                         senior officers.”       ■-;*;
fe ren ce s to u n i te                                                                             Present authority boss Sir
behind the troubled                                                                              Jack Layden publically
boss. .              ■ ■                                          m J#f                iWm       declared Mr Wright’s job
                                                                  - « IW             \'S Jt:     was safe earlier this week.
  Influential authority                                                                          Today he was on holiday
nem ber Coun Danny                 G e o r g e Wright              C oun D anny G e o r g e ,
                                                                                                 needing “time to give proper
3eorge said: “He is a                                                                            co n sid era tio n ” to Mr
jreat man and we will                                                                            Wright’s resignation.
definitely not accept his                                                                           This afternoon emergency
resignation.                                                            Paul Whitehousc
                                                                                                 se r v ic e s at S h e ffie ld
   “f am writing a speech                                                                        United’s Bramall Lane
.vhich hopefully will satisfy go,” said the Conservative          speak to my colleagues and     ground carried out- their
:veryone_ at the meeting to councillor.           ■:              make a collective decision.”   annual disaster drill in the
discuss his future on August      Labour member Coun                Coun Walayat added that      wake of the Hillsborough
14. '                           Choudry Walayat agreed:           they would face a tremen­      findings.
                                “There is a strong possiblity -   dous problem replacing a          Staff ran through their
           Calibre        ' , that we will say he should;         man of his calibre if he was   emergency evacuation pro­
                                carry on.            c ■          to go.                         cedure for the stadium prior
   “ I think everyone will
 tand as one and ask him to       “We have always got on             Mr W right’s biggest        to the start of the new footr
 arry on as chief constable. • well with him and he’s-            adversary Labour Coun.         ball season.                ,
 le is the best. The effect on: handled this situation with       George M oores — the. • Sheffield Council’s gen­
 orce^ morale- would be- dignity. I would like to see             former South Yorkshire eral services sub committee
ireadful'if he was allowed to - him stay although I have to       police 'committee chairman" meets on Monday and is
                                                                                               expected to hear a report
                                                                                               from senior officers on
                                                                                               safety measures at Hills­
                                                                                               borough in the light of the
                                                                                               inquiry findings.
                                                                                                                                                                        THE STAR, Sm




                                                                      £ N     m   »




                                                                                                             By Bob Westerdale and Paul Whitehouse
                                                                                       B ELEA G U RED South Yorkshire police today refused
                                                                    iililiif t         point-blank to discuss the fate of a third top officer;
                                                                                       embroiled in the Hillsborough disaster. = ; T         I
                                                                                         Assistant Chief Constable Walter Jackson escaped public criticism j
                                                                    &?%&£$$            following Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry into the 95 deaths.-               ~ j
                                                                                                                                        . His future was not
                                                                                                                                       mentioned as Chief Con­
                                                                                                                                       sta b le P eter W rig h t
                                                                      Mimi                                                             o f f e r e d to qu i t a n d
                                                                                                                                        match-day commander
                                                I« I» I§ # I                                                                            C h i e f S up t David;
                                               P8$PM«P                                                                                  Duckenfield was sus­
                                                                                                                                        pended following sting-:
                                                                                                                                        ing criticism of “lack of:
                                                                                                                                        leadership”.                 j
                                                                                                                      , This afternoon the force
                                                                                                                     refused to answer any ques­
                                                                                                                     tions over whether Mr Jack-
                                                                                                                     son w ill fa ce s i mi l ar
                                                                                  __________________________ sanction.
                                                        SOUTH Yorkshire police obvious parallels one could Mr Taylor’s report says
f Supt Duckenfield after hearing the judge’s findings and Sheffield Wednesday FC draw, it’s a question of he attended the match as a
                                   wzmTmzmjw            could face criminal man- degree. The matter will be g u e s t o f S h e f f i e l d
                                                        slaughter proceedings over gone into at the time of the Wednesday,
                                                        the Hillsborough disaster, inquest and, as we know, it But The Star believes that
                               MAS&.?**.*    '<         lawyers representing the was following the Zeebrugge as weekend cover officer he
                                                        bereaved and injured said inquest that the DPP then was the senior man on duty
                                                        today.                        looked at that.”               in South Yorkshire that day
                                                         - Any action .would be          Test actions for eompcn- — and available at the
                                                        brought by the Director of sation have already begun s t a d i u m i n c a s e o f
                                                        Public Prosecutions, they and the first civil case should emergency. ’ . ;
                                                        stressed.                     begin next year, with                             :
                                                          ! Solicitors acting for 600 Sheffield Wednesday and the -               Approved
                                                        people a ffec ted by the South Yorkshire force in the when catastrophe struck
                                                        tragedy compared it to the dock.                             Mr Jackson went on to the
                                                        Zeebrugge ferry disaster,        Ms Steel said: “Clients of pitch and, according to Mr
                                                        where manslaughter pi'osecu- the group have been very Duckenfield, took corn-
                                                      'tio n s have been brought critical of the police both on mand of the situation,
                                                        against individual crew the question of the lack of             „ ,           .         ._ ,
                                                           „A steering com mittee control and of the failure to t Before the semi-final Mr
                                                       representing around 150 law appreciate exactly what was Jackson had also discussed
                                                       firms said today’s inquiry going on there.             -      the event witn his top
                                                                             -
                                                       report “exonerates those    •
                                                                                 who     M i . f i *i. i i j » officers and approved
                                                                                         “I think they looked at it ordersforthe !,i i fbobbies
                                                       were injured and those who wrth eyes that were expecting          . . .              I          • ,
                                                       died from any responsibility crowd disorder and failed to        At the inquiry impartia.
                                                       for causing the tragedy”.      appreciate
                                                                                        _..        crowd
                                                                                                       «•discomfort
                                                                                                         1        * co.
                                                                                                                     pm/ij*n”*li‘
                                                                                                                              'ln. il • j £ e^ .AC♦ho#
                                                                                                                                                     “ Ps
                                                                                                                                                       nfi
                                                           Committee chairman Liz which very quickly turned said: “The sad fact is that he
                                immi                   Steel said: “There are some into crowd injury and pain.”      (M   r   J a  c k  s o n ) d id n ot
                                                                                                                    .achieve very much.” v
           ®SiifI®i«
                                           Club secretary Graham Mackrell               A SHEFFIELD fire control
Chief Supt Brian Mole
                                                                                        operator concerned in the
                                                                                        Hillsborough Disaster is
                                                                                        claim ing libel dam ages
                                                                                                                                 Action                       Mr Taylor states there
                                                                                                                                                           w a s ‘A n o e f f e c t i v e
                                                                                                                                                           leadership” on the pitch to
                                                                                                                                                           harness rescue efforts until
                                                                                        against The Sun newspaper.
                                                                                           In a High Court writ, Ms
                                                                                        Susan Davies, claims she
                                                                                        was libelled in ' an article
                                                                                                                                on news                    Chief Supt John Nesbit
                                                                                                                                                           arrived.           ~
                                                                                                                                                             Chief Supt Puckenfield
 (ackrell said the Hillsborough boSrd    by 5,000 would cause little hardship.          h e a d e d “ K n o w 'w h e re                                   to o k over com m and at
to consider, in depth, the interalim                                                    you’re at if you’re dying” on                                     Sheffield North from’Brian
                                           Hillsborough averaged under 20,000 last      June 16.          ■      ",
>ut the suggestions relating to crowd    season and United’s home crowds hovered                                                                          Mole 21 days before the fix-
ies on the terraces were welcome,        Around 12,500. The capacity of neither            Ms Davies, of Broxhome              She is seeking an injunc- ture. Mr Taylor’s report
                                         ground is likely to be tested next season     , R oad, W oodseats, who             tion to prevent The S u n said that *‘it might _have
report wants crowds cut by IS per
  standing area and both Sheffield       when the Owls stadium will be taken Off the   , works for South Yorkshire        • from  publishing articles, on been wiser, to Jiave left Mr
                                                                                                                            the same subject in future.,. M o 1e _i r e c h a r g e o f the
 uld easily cope with such a demand.     roster for FA Cup semi-finals.          A,      Fire Service,- claims her
                                        ■* Tbeother South Yorkshire clubs will also         ____
                                                                                       ?reputation’W   as’‘seriously W-                                                              /S.
                    ,-b£      £Si&3 find no difficulty in reducing standing            r' ltmMnAAil'Vfin/l   ^CtlfTai**w44: 1
  Hillsboroi^harvd ^ a m a llL a n e .. capacity. Barnsley, (Doncaster, Rotherham
sliding room for around 30,000 sup- and Chesterfield have grounds that can all         ^embarrassment’’ as ^ Result ‘‘and Paftn^ri,’o f Bainbridge op t *o n_ Dec®11s e” ofjMr
but a decisionto reduce thisfimire           AArSIc wfflt          itHAndonfM           nf    nrtir!f»                Road. London.                Duckenfield s experience.
                               H M



 service
criticisms
mfounded’
By Simon Glover
IE SOUTH Yorkshire
ibuiance Service says
tors’ criticisms of its
idling of the Hills-
rough disaster have-
;n found to be ‘‘totally ;
hout foundation”
jord Chief Justice Taylor,
bis interim report on the
:ful FA Cup semi-final,
<1 “ no valid criticism ”
Id be made of the service.
Uan H opkins, deputy
:f of the county service,
1 staff had acted in the
;hest traditions o f the
buiance service.- , -
‘This service is Justifiably                                                         EVIDENCE from the 70-page Hillsborough disaster rep<
 ud that the interim report
iings are that no valid
                                                                                     will be used by the Director of Public Prosecutions — w
:icism can be made of our                                                            has to decide whether Chief Supt David Duckenfield shot
ponse.                                                                               face criminal charges.
“The claims of deficiencies
 our response and levels of                                                             South Yorkshire’s Chief Constabie Peter VVright asked DPP Allan Gr
 uipment by two doctors                                                               QC to look at die case — in connection with alleged “untruths” — a!
 re been found to be totally                                                         suspending Chief Supt Duckenfield. ;'
thout foundation,” be said.                                                                                                    By Paul Whitehouse
                                                                                       A spokesman for the
 And M r H op k in s has                                                             DPP explained: “The report on iactions he pro­ that Chief Supt Ducken!
 plauded the interim recom-
—         that an ambulance                                                          Chief Constable asked posed to take in the light of was accompanied at
                                     Dotor wrinht: 'some criticism’                  the DPP to consider the inquiry.                    game by experienced su
                                                                                     whether the circum­                                 m tendents and assist
                                                                                     stances surrounding the “That will be done,” he c h ief co n stab le W a
                                                                                     H ills b o ro u g h d is a s te r   said,                          Jackson. ;
                                                                                     disclosed evidence o f any            “Before responding to the       It w as “ u n f a i r £
                                                                                     criminal offences.                  Home Secretary it will be unrealistic” to expect sc
                                                                                        “ He will be using the           necessary for me to consult officers would want to t
                                                                                     interim report and may ask          WI£ “ mb2» <£?ny police on responsibly for sui
                                                                                     for futher information when         au* o nt& the Director of vising crowd control
                                                                                     he has looked at that. I            Public Prosecutions, the matches again. But ShefI
                                                                                     cannot say how long it will                                       Wednesday’s ground wc
                                                                                                                          Police Complaints A u th -.....................
                                                                                     take but it may be a couple         ority and others.”      •     have to be patrolled
                                                                                     o f weeks,         said the                                       including next season’s '
                                                                                     spokesman.                             Mr Wright said he did not of Liverpool.       •
                                                                                        Mr Wright admitted at a          regard as a mistake the          In a message to the pec
                                                                                     Press conference that Chief         change of commanders in o f Liverpool M r Wri
                                                                                     S u p t D u ck e n field had         Sheffield North police divi- said: “There is extreme
                                                                                     expected some criticism but
                                                                                     not the level he had received.      Senior officers on duty at the ground t
                                                                                      'Senior officers on duty at        wide experience. . .but It was their perfos
                                                                                     the ground had wide experi­         ance on the day which was In question.
                                                                                     ence, he said in response to
                                                                                     criticisms o f a “ lack o f         sion three weeks before the    ness this force shoul<
                                                                                     leadership” in the report,          semi-final. Chief Supt Brian   held to be part of the c
                                                                                     but it was their perfonnance        Mol e was sw itch ed to        of this disaster. ,
                                               *anl Whitehouse ;                     on the day which was in             Barnsley division to make         “We in South York
                                                                                     question.                           way for David Duckenfield.     are h o p in g to p ut
                                                tg. ... “I was extremely pleased        Mr Wright said he had               He said the life of the     behind us and carry on.
                                                rly with the way personnel had        oeen asked by the Home             force was not ruled by a       it is a tall order. We
                                               m-      behaved.                      S ecretary to p re p a re a                                        never forget the events.'
                                                                                                                         single football match and
                                               ins        “If we could have done
                                               tad more we would have done,
                                                       but I don’t think there was
                                                lin — we did our best.”
                                                it*     - He added that the con­
                                                 its trol operator on the day
                                                nd had been exonerated by the
                                                                                       Death terrace
                                                                                     THE Hillsborough death terraces at                          By Tony Pritchett V?
                                                     , report and said the Tire      Leppings Lane will remain closed at
                                                - a ; service'was taking actions     the start of tbe new season.^SSi©^'               30,000 fans from Liverpool who visited t!
                                                •r- ^ from lessons learned during                                                      grotmd last AprtL^wfll be directed to t


                                                                                            We.'ifcV*-- ii,i.
                                                     ined and would never
                                                                     . *11_
                                                         4 August 1989




A Green Esq QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
4/12 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AZ




The Report of the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor into the
tragedy at Hillsborough has been published today. In his findings Lord
Justice Taylor criticises a number of officers of the South Yorkshire
Police, particularly Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

During the course of the Inquiry the question of manslaughter by criminal
negligence was raised by Counsel for the bereaved and injured and attempts
have already been made to obtain a private prosecution against me and the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for this offence.

I am of the view that the finding of the Inquiry will cause renewed
attempts to be made to pursue private prosecutions against the major
parties involved including Mr Duckenfield.

The question of criminal offences arising out of the events at
Hillsborough will continue to be raised and I should be obliged if you
would give this question your consideration and let me have your advice.

All the available evidence collected during the course of the Inquiry is
in the possession of Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of the Vest
Midlands Police.
TELEPHONE:                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                             SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                          SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                             4 August 1989




 The Report of the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor into the
 tragedy at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 is       published today. The
 Report in part is critical of your handling of the incident and indicates
 that your failure to take certain decisions and actions was a contributory
 factor to the disaster that occurred.

 In view of criticisms voiced by Lord Justice Taylor L-lra'i'u tuTiJtd the
 Inquiry R e p o r c fea forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions so
 that he can give the question of criminal offences his consideration and
 advise accordingly.
Accompanying ~ U U ’
                   '5~fl'0iuuiefil ai'TT extracts from the Report of the

Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor,into,the tragedy at  .  y
                            n-r. W r —              jo   Ik
Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. The Report in part is critical of

your handling of the incident and indicates that your failure to

take certain decisions and actions was a contributory factor                  C fa& frvk*'

tter dt,u Llio u£ fli "P'CujjIl. . j'          ",   W   '


                                  ir r u ^ -    ^
In View Of t-hi g anii..thp inriiration that pryrat-g> prng<arw*4-mTR frtr

criminal negligence will be boaglTt by t h ir d p a r t i e s concerning—

your -aetlonfr, I have caused the Inquiry Report to be forwarded to

the Director of Public Prosecutions for hi-a aJylLLr.~<t*"

 CM.On.C.uJ'             -   60
                    A                                       nzL    ’wtKm.    \.J (
                                                                                         lUfenaee..{M V /
                                                                                                            r q u i 9-c?




    Doc 1                  Telex referral from




                           Referred Under                 S      (i) (h)


                          Investigation is/is not sub-judice. Supervision is not mandatory.
                          Notification to Force by:-




                           a) ? Defer decision until outcome of




                           b) ? The public interest does not appear to require the Authority to supervise
                                the investigation. As within.




   D oc 2                                                                                 b*-
                        Telephone call to ACC Ken Cooper a t N o rth an ts to ^ a d v is e d t h a t he was p resen tly
                        visiting South Yorkshire for discussions w ith A C C S tu a r t Anderson.

                        Telephone call then to South Yorks and had a joint discussion on open line w ith the
                        above m entioned A C C s C o n firm ed th e approval of Cooper as IO.

                        Discussed th e co m p lain ts and w h e th e r or not J u s t ic e T aylor's r e p o rt would still be due
                        out to m o rro w morning a t 09.15, w h e th e r this would include evidence or would t h a t form
                        a s u p p lem en ta ry r e p o r t to be issued la te r . Advised by South Yorks th a t they had a full
                        tr a n s c r i p t and had alread y given a copy to th e IO.

                        Discussed press re le a s e and m ad e th e point t h a t as f a r as th e PCA was c o n ce rn ed we
                        would advise th e C e n tr a l O ffic e of Inform ation th a t we would not issue a voluntary
                        re le a s e and only r e a c t to d ir e c t enquiries. Such enquiries should be an sw ered in a single
                        s t a t e m e n t , who th e IO was and t h a t th e A u th o rity w ere supervising




CODE 1 8 -7 7
A W O L td .   7 /8 4
4 /8 /8 9 - Telephone call to South Yorks C&D Dept req u esting copy of l e t t e r d a te d
25/7/89 sen t to Mr Trevor Hicks advising him t h a t th ey w ere recording his l e t t e r to th e
Home S e c r e ta r y d ated 7 June^fis a co m p lain t ag ainst CS D uckenfield. Copy was faxed to
me som e te n minutes la ter.




4 /8 /8 9 - O btained p r e - r e le ase -copy of J u s tic e Taylor's in terim re p o rt from th e Home
O ffice.




4 /8 /8 9 - Telephone call to ACC C ooper. Now able to discuss th e m a t t e r w ith o u t any
third p a r ty person present.

Cooper still h a s n 't obtained a copy of J u s t ic e T ay lo r's r e p o r t, he ex p ec ts to do so la te r
on today.

Advised Cooper th a t I was slightly ap p reh en sive w ith re s p e c t to Mr Hicks and th e
in t e r p r e ta tio n of his l e t t e r d a te d 7 June as a co m plaint ag ain st Duckenfield. It would be
n ecessary to establish whom Hicks th o u g h t D uckenfield had misled or even lied to, from
his l e t t e r it was d ifficu lt to a s c e r ta in w h e th e r he considered this was during th e tra g ed y
or subsequently even to th e e x te n t to J u s t ic e T aylor's enquiry. I advised Cooper t h a t I
would be w riting to Mr Hicks telling him th a t th e A uth o rity would supervise his
co m p lain t and th a t I was asking Mr C ooper to a r r a n g e a m eetin g to discuss various
points. Cooper m entioned th e f a c t t h a t Mr Hicks had ap p eared on television just
r e c e n tly and whilst it is a p p r e c ia te d th a t he is very d is tra u g h t a t the tra g ic loss of his
d au g h ters he was now appearing as th e leading spokesm an for all those who had
suffered . Cooper is very a w a re of th e f a c t t h a t his m e e tin g with Mr Hicks could be
fairly sensitiv e especially as Hicks has laid a fo rm al co m p lain t with th e Police A u th o rity
regarding a s ta t e m e n t by th e DCC, y e t it is his rem a rk s in th e l e t t e r th a t a re being
co nstru ed by South Yorkshire as a co m p lain t ag ain st th e C hief S uperintendent. Cooper is
a w a re t h a t any discussion clarifying th e point regarding a com plaint could be co nstru ed
as e i th e r pressu re to fu rth e r th a t com p lain t or to w ith d raw it. In th e c irc u m s ta n c e s
C ooper would p re fe r th a t I would be p re s e n t a t th e initial m eetin g with Mr Hicks.
                                                           R e f e r e n c e . . IN V/89.131/79




Cooper then referred to the fa c t th a t West Mids had undertaken a very comprehensive
investigation and asked to what ex ten t th ere had been agreem ent as to access to their
evidence. I explained th a t I didn't think there had been any formal agreem ent however
there had been a threeway exchange of correspondence between South Yorks, the Home
Office and the Authority which basically precluded two separate enquiries into- the same
event proceeding side by side and th a t once the public enquiry was completed the
evidence th a t had been obtained would then be available for the purpose of resolving any
complaints. I understood this had the agreem ent of all parties. Cooper advised me that
he had been in touch with the ACC Mervyn Jones who was number 2 to Jefferey Dear in
this enquiry and whilst he was fairly friendly with Mervyn Jones, the la tte r had
indicated th at there could be some difficulty with respect to giving him access to their
investigation. Cooper didn't         +o make a big thing of this and was going to follow it
up again with Mervyn Jones.
                            /
                                             5

4/8/89 - Briefed the Chairman advising him th a t the report was to be published at 11am
and considerable media atte n tio n would be drawn to it. Gave him a b rie | resume on
what I had discussed with both South Yorks and the IO with respect to /p u b licity. The
Chairman in complete ag reem en t th a t we should maintain a low profile.
                                                                              /

ENT

                                             6

8/8 - Visit to Northants to discuss the investigation with ACC Cooper. Mr Cooper
confirmed th a t when he visited South Yorkshire on the 4th he served CS Duckenfield
with a Reg 7 notice basically covering falsehood or prevarication based mainly on 5(a)
and neglect of duty based on 4(a) and discreditable conduct under 1.

We endeavoured to analyse the roles and relationships of the various parties th a t are
now involved in the Hillsborough disaster. For instance there is Lord Justice Taylor
enquiry and report to the Home Secretary.

South Yorkshire referral on Lord Justice Taylor's report to the DPP for possible criminal
charges.

South Yorkshire's role and responsibility with respect to the Coroner and the inquest for
the 95 dead.

South Yorkshire's recording of Mr Hicks' complaint about Duckenfield and its re fe rra l to
the PCA.

There are two other complaints which South Yorkshire have recorded and have appointed
officers to investigate, the first is one of incivility (thought to be Hicks) and is being
investigated by Supt Ashton of South Yorks.

The next one could be classed as corruption where officers have allegedly received
payment to allow fans into the ground. This complaint is being investigated by a CS
from G reater Manchester.

The next consideration is the various police forces involved, West Mids have undertaken
the massive investigation and collection of evidence to support the Lord Justice Taylor
inquiry, they will also a c t as agents for South Yorks to provide the coroner with the
necessary evidence and information he requires.

The ACC of Northants originally appointed by South Yorks, however with the agreem ent
to supervision by ourselves now he reports to the PCA.
 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR                                                   HOME SECRETARY
         T
 WEST MIDLANDS



 SOUTH YORKSHIRE                           ^       DPP

 SOUTH       YORKSHIRE                                                           CORONER
         T
 WEST MIDLANDS


 COMPLAINTS

 SOUTH       YORKS - (H icks        ComD                                   PCA        (PII)?
                Duckenfield

 ACC NORTHAMPTON           ------

 POLICE AUTHORITY (Hicks re Hayes)




SUPT ASHTON - INCIVILITY (Hicks)
CS GMP    - CORRUPTION ?




S YORKS         -COMPLAINTS
     *
ASHTON (SY)       GMP



Mr Cooper expressed his concern with resp ect to his relationships and possible future
role with West Mids. When he visited West Mids on Monday he was left in no doubt by
Mervyn Jones th a t West Mids considered them selves responsible for all investigations and
the followup to any outcome which may arise ie such things as the possible criminal
and/or discipline m atters which may arise from Lord Justice Taylor's report. It would
appear th a t West Mids would resist having to hand over evidence, documents e tc to a
third party. Cooper also made the point th a t some of the West Mids officers have
developed a very close relationship with Mr Hicks to the ex ten t th at they have told
Cooper th a t Mr Hicks is looking to involve two other officers, Murray and Greenwood,
along with Duckenfield. Cooper expressed surprise and to an ex ten t concern th a t the
West Mids officers should have discussed the roles of the various officers in such detail
with Hicks.
                                                                          Reference




               I advised Mr Cooper th a t it was imperative when we did m eet with Mr Hicks we
               establish without any doubt th a t he really did mean to complain about Mr Duckenfield
               and th a t he still wished to pursue such a complaint. And also to set down the precise
               points about which he wishes to complain. Should Mr Hicks bring in other officers such
               as Murray and Greenwood it would be necessary to take a s ta te m e n t as to what he is
               alleging and pass th at to the South Yorks Force who must then decide whether or not to
               record it as a complaint under the Act.

               I asked Mr Cooper to w rite to Mr Hicks to arrange a convenient d ate for a meeting and
               suggested th a t whilst I would be available if required I would prefer it to be a fte r 21st
               when I return from a weeks leave.

               Cooper raised a fu rth er query with respect to the evidence th a t had been given a t the
               Lord Ju stice's enquiry and also the statem en ts taken by the West Mids team . Cooper
               understands th a t none of these statem e n ts were taken on the form headed by the
               standard caution, nor was the evidence given on oath a t the enquiry. It would also
               appear th a t a t no stage was CS Duckenfield cautioned as to his own position and the
               evidence th a t he was giving. It would appear th a t a t the beginning he was offered his
               own counsel but declined it. This will raise queries as to what ex te n t the various
               witnesses s tatem e n ts and evidence taken by Lord Justice Taylor would be acceptable in
               a criminal or discipline hearing.

               At the close of the meeting I advised Mr Cooper th a t I would be briefing the Chairman
               and Deputy Chairman on our meeting to explain the situation as I saw it and just prior
               to leaving I received a telephone call from the CC David O'Dowd who was attending a
               meeting in Lancashire mainly to ask me if I was happy with the development but I must
               admit it appeared more like a fishing trip on his behalf. David O'Dowd tried to make
               the point th a t should the DPP decide on any criminal charges it would fall back in the
               court of West Mids to undertake the necessary investigation. I told him th a t a t this
               stage I didn't think it was fair f e / m e to commefff as I required to really analyse the
               points I had just been discussing with Mr Cooper




               9/8 - Briefed the Chairman and DC(I) on my discussions with Cooper I set in min 6 and
               outlined the steps we proposed to take especially with respect to establishing from Mr
               Hicks whether or not he intended to make a formal complaint and if so to be specific in
               the points he wished t o com slain about. Both the Chairman and DC were in agreem ent
               with this plan of action!


               ENT




CODE   18-77
Hjl. BBOROUGH REPORT        EXTENDED INCIDENT    84 (STARTED       4/MB/S9 )   PAGE   t OF  16
X;<47?HAMCD0 '
REC BY i 0          HER 'i Ai ; 4H3    IDENT;HAMCDO          144*i    04/08/89
PHONE;
! OCAT ION jOPFRAT IONS ROOM *SHEF'EIFi D
TYPE ;      70                         EAS RR P ?HAiflW/M / i3P     'INFO        SUB DIV:HA
SOURCE?     TNBPPEOiTm M C O O M E U

DE T A I1.;         HI1 j.
                         .BB( men IfeH RF PO R'f




HI! SBuROUGH REPORT                    t.   X TENDED   (NC(»tNr        UfJ   (STARTED       A/WB/H9       S      PAGE           OF        '1.6
1347 ;HAMCDO
                                                             INCIDENT ! OG
1 4 4 6 HAMCDO      RC:7Bi1. 14
1 3 4 7 HAMCDO      1T ;04; HILBBOROIiGH REPORT _____
1 4 4 9 U iA H C D 0MESSAGE OF SUOPPORT" FROM
 4 /0 8 /8 9        SKEGNESS
? 3 5 « s H A 2 6 m MESSAGE F R O M I                                              SOUTH WAS. EB
 4 /W B /B 9        OFFERING HER !W0 PER PENT SUPPORT FOR THE POL [CE fN SOUTH
                    YORKSHIRE AN!) THROUGHOUT       HE COUNTRY.
141,*:F1 1.440 MESSAGE F R O M MRS,                               iHEFE fEt J>, FT VINE HER
  4/(SH/B9          SOpPfjRT FOR T HE CHIEF CONSTABLE ,
1.b47;HA2J.54 MR                 OF J                                   JHAEEOGAFE, N YORKS
  4/W B /89         TEi FPHONED HIS SUPPORT OF THE: CHIEF CONSTABLE, AMD SI AT ED
                    THAT 'THE CHiEE OFFICER AND HIS '4INDERSTUDY" SHOULD NO"!
                                                                                                                                      <^r
                    RESIGN - WUT RATHER - E V E R Y O N E SHOULD SHOULDER THE IR OWN
                    RES PONS IB IE EV YC IT IS EASY TO PONT IFF C A T E AFTER THE EVENT WETS                                              O O
                    HINDSIGHT.                                                                                                        .



h :
  cl b b o r o u g h     REPORT        j-XTFN'PED INCIDENT             H4 (STARTED           4/MB/H9       )     PAGE       3   OF        16
1.447; HAMCDO
1H4V;HAf...0CH HESSA«F FROM MRS                   CORNWAI C ;- j. HOPE MR WRIGHT
 4/WB/H9       Wu.l NOT RESIGN, I FEEL. VERY AGGRIEVED THAI T H E POLICE HAVE TAKEN
               THE EUL1... BLAME,




j 7 4 9 sHA804           MESSAGE F R O M MRS                                                   SHEFFIELD;- 1 FEEL
  4 /0 B 7 S 9           THE -REPORT iS ■DT-SEy S'riNfi A WO RUBBISH,THE SITUATION IS DOWN TO
                         d r i n k .i S i n c e r e l y h o p e t h e CHIEF CONBTABi E DOES NOT RESTEN,
t.H 1 6 s « 2 1 H 9 2    TELEPHONE C A L L FROM MR I                                                                     hSOMBWFl L
  4/00/09                STATED HE WAS DISGUSTED THAT MR WEIGHT WAS BEING BLAMED AND HE
                         HOPED THAT A L L T H E LAW AMIDfME CCTCZENS WOULD SUPPORT MR WRIGHT
18   1 S’ i   HA B H 4   MESSAGE F ROM HR I                  1                                            p L D H A M ; - 1 AH
 4 /£ 1 « /8 9           VFRY SORRY FOR THE WAY 'THE P0», ICE IN SHEFFIELD ARE B E TNG
                         v*iCTaMXSED AND Pit FORCED AS A RESULT OF THE E N Q U I R Y , ! HAVE
                         EXPERIENCED THE C O N D U C T OF i IvERPOOl FANS CN THE PAST AND I !'
                         IS A FRIGHTENING S I G H T .
iRv 4; I-1AS 04          MESSAGE FROM MR                                                                 LEIGH — I FEE!
 4/WS/B9                 T O T A L ? Y DISGUSTED AT THE             OU'TCOME OF    T H E   ENQUIRY       CONSIDER)NG
                         FHE D R U N K E N S T A T E OF THE I , r V F R P O O i. S U P P O R T E R S , I HAVE SEEN THEM


BiLBBOROUSH RR PORT           FXTENDED INC! DEN f P3 *S T A R ? E D                4/1*8/89 )         PAGE          4 OR                   16
t.447 ;HAMf-DO
                 IN THE PAST CAUSINE DAMAGE AND DISRUPT ION,j HOPE YOUR CHIEF
                 CONSTABLE DOEBNOT RESIGN,
IS H H jP t.1440 FROM MRS,                                                                           13 G O T L A N D
  4/«H/H9        MESSAGE OF SUPPORT FOR THE CHIEF CONSTABLE A N D H R . D U C K E N F I E l J > .
                 HOPING T H A T M R . W R I G H T ’ S R E S I G N A T I O N IS NOT ACCEPT'ED,
t.tBH;HAHW4 MESSAEE FROM MR                                                                        |B H E F F IEi ..D=-
  4/PS8/H9       HAVINE P'UST SEEN THE NE!           Jws i    DO     NDT   THINK   T H A T JUDGE   TAYLORS
                 INTERIM REPORT IS FAIR TO               FT    T H E N   THE  CHIEF    CONSTABLE     OR HIS
                 BT A F F ,1 SAW T HE PICT ORES         ON    THE      TV  AT  THE   TIME   AND  3   FES T THEN
                 THAT T H E POLICE HAD NO CHANCE OF C O M I N G O U T OF 'THE I N Q U I R Y
                 wrfHOUT BFINfi C R I T I C I S E D . I HAVE SYMPATHY FOR THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
                 AND H I S STAFF AND IT IS EASY IN HINDS(EH I TO A P P O R T I O N B L A M E .
                                 SHOULD BIASE T O N I G H T , J HOPE YOUR POI. ICE C O M M J T T F h DO
1.Bo 9 %HA8M4    NOT At .LOW THE CHIEF CONSTABLE TO RESIGN.
  4 /0 8 /0 9
    .. ..... ...._....;


                          HILSBOROUGH R E P O R T                 EXTENDED   I N C I OH N T   H3    CSTARTED       4 /W 8 /8 9   >     PAGE         j      OF   ?6
                          1347; H A M C D O
                          190G?HA!.17H MRS                                                                STRONGLY         O BJECTS    TO    P OI. T C F
                           4/WH/H9               B E IN G   m
                                                            AMED FOR H IL L S B R O U G H ,        MESSAGE   c)F   S U P P O R T FOR   THE
                                                 CHIEF C O N S T ABJ F _____________________
                          1914;HA691             C A L L RFCD F R O M _______________         MERSEYSIDE PRESS O F F I C E .   HE HAS
                           4/M8/H9               RECFivEfi 2 CALEB FROM MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC EXPRESSING THEIR
                                                 A P P R F C I A T I O N 10 HR MR) GHT, A N i i SAY INF HF HOST NOT R E S I G N ,
                                                 FIRSr C A L L FROM          EEMAi F W C i'H A L f U E R P O O L ACCENT,
                                                 S E C O N D C A L L FROM A N                                        SCOTTAND,
                                                 BO s'H CAf.I ERS T E R M »N A T E D CALLS IN T E A R S .
                          1 9 1 (S i H A A 9 1   H R S _______________________
                           4/0B/99               TENDERED HIS RESIGNATION A N D MR DUCKENEIELD HAS BEEN SUSPENDED.
                                                 SHE A N D MANY OTHER FRIENDS ARE T O T A L L Y SUPPORTIVE OE THE POLICE,,
                          191.9;HA1 t 7 h        HRS                                    OFFERCNG SUPPORT FOR CHIEF
                           4/BH/89               CONSTABLE, 1HINKS IT IS OUTRAGEOUS THAT THE THUGS
                                                 WHO CAUSE!f THE DISASTER HAVE SOI" A W A Y SCOT FREE,
                                                                                                                                                                      s§




                          HI j..SBOROUGH RFPUR              V     EXPENDED   I NO ’j   DENI   133   (SI ARTE D     4 /0 B /B 9         PAGE         h      OF   1S
                          1.347: HAMCDO




                          1923:F14S7             MR AND MRS                                         SHEFEI El D„
                           4/08/H9               WE ARE A P P A L L E D AT THE O U T C O M E OE THE E N Q U I RY ( N TO THRE
                                                 HU. I.RBOROUGH DISASTER A N D we WISH TO EXPRESS OUR SUPPORT
       0                                         FOR THE; pqLCCE IN THiS DTEElXUt.T SITUATION,                        _________
                          1 V ; T S:E1467        HRS                                                      WAKET IfcLlT
                           4 /M B /8 9            i WISH 'TO EXPRESS M ¥ SUPPORT F O R THE POi TOE A F T E R THE
       m                                          C O N D E M N A T I O N OF THE HITI. BBOROUGN ENQUIRY, P L F A S F TELL
                                                 YOUR COLLEGUFS THAT THE P U B L I C ARE BEHfND Y O U ,
                          193MsHA691             r!R |                                                             CL E VET A N D , SAYS 1 HAT
       t                   4/lfl8/89             'T H E PEOPLE R E S P O N S I B L E FOR H !TT.SBOROUGH WERE THE L I V E R P O O L
                                                 SUPPORTERS, AND A!. THOUGH MR WRjHH'I I S RIGHT T H A T HE IS U L T I M A T E ! .
                                                 Y RESRONSIBEE TT WAS NOT H I S F A U L T , AND HE S H O U L D W I T H D R A W HIS
                                                  RES IC O N A T IO N ,    THE F I N D I N G OF 'THE ENQUIRY BLAH IMS THE POLICE
                                                 ARE R I D I C U L O U S ,     MANY OE HIS WORi M A T E S AND FRIENDS SUPPORT
                                                 US ALSO,
       9                                                                                                                                                              w



' s
                          HTI. SBOROUGH REPORT         EXTENDED '}N C I D E N I W3 {STARTED            4/MB/H9 }     RASE         7 OE                          1f*
                          134'/; HAH COO
       e                  1 934:HAMEBS MRS                                                                       fBEFEIELIL
                            4 /0 H /B 9  WISHES TO EXPRESS HOW F U R I O U S SHE 'IS ABOUT THE OUTCONE OF
                                         THE R E P O R T - WE ARE A L L IwW% BEHIND THE POLICE,
; §                       19 3 H -HACRES from hr|                                S c a r b o r o u g h offering h i s s u p p o r t
                            4/WB/H9      T O MR WRIGHT, WISHED TO POINT OUT THAT IE THE POI iCE WERE
                                         INCOMPETENT' HE FOUND IT RATHER STRANGE THAT THE I N C O M P E T E N C E
                                         ON? Y AEEECTE'D I EPPfNGS L A N E AND NOT THE WHOLE OF H I L L S B O R O U G H
■                                                S T A D IU M ,
                          1 9 ^ 4 ; HACRES       PROM HR
       #;                   4/B8/H9              K ID D E R M IN S T E R             'THE EFFECT THAI HE H O P E S HR
                                                                                      TO                                                                              a
                                                 WRIGHT GE1S ALL THE                 HF DEBT RVEE; AND HE SHOUI D N O T BE
                                                                                 SUPPORT
                                                 A F F O R D E D ALL THE BLAME, HE HOPES HE OOFS- N O T RESIGN,
       *                  vffH3:HAAvl            CAI. I. FROM ANON F E M A L E IN HILLSBOROUGH A R E A , WHO HAS J U S T SEEN
.v:*r-A^5>v

                                        SHE PARSED ON HE- R SUPPORT F O R THE POLICE, AND hi"FATED                               THAT   MANY
                                        OF HER N E I G H B O U R S A L S O P A S S E D ON T H E X R SUPPORT,



               H IL S B O R O U G H     repor   r      EXTENDED    T ftJ O lO F N l   613   <STARTED       4 /0 8 /8 9       )   PAGE       8   OF
               13A/:FfAMCD0
               23 30;HA8*'»4            FROM    MR
                4/HS/HP               MANCHESTER TO THE' EFFECT HE H E E L S THE POL. CCE ARE f|M NO WAY T O
                                      BLAME FOR "IHE INCIDENT BUT THAT L I E S F I R M L Y AT THE PE FT OF THE
                                      LA IE AND D R U N K A R R I V A L S . HE HOPES NO PERRON RES IKM F R O M THE FORCE                                  r>
                                      AS A RESULT OF THE REPORT.
                i t 5 1 t H A H t'1 4 FROM HR                                          [KENT WHO F E E L S THE REPORT
                  4 /W 8 /B 9                        IS SOMEWHAT W RONG TO Bl A M F U S . I F 7 HE FANS H A D BEEN
                                      BOHER A N D ARRIVED IN AN ORDERLY FASHION THE PROBLEM WOULD WOT
                                      HAVE O C C U R R E D .
               7.2.W/ :F 1 HE! I (-ALL. FROM HR |                               |oF
                 4/«h?/ev                 HAVE JUST' S A T AW I) WAT'CHE 0 THE 9 O CLOCK NEWS ON .BBC I
                                      AND AM TOTAI, Y DISGUSTEJ), rr IS G R O S S L Y UNFAIR THAT THE POL 1 CE
                                      NAVE BEEN B L A M E D EOp THE; BEHAVIOR OF THE S f V E R P O O I f a n s , rr is
                                      A B O U T TIME T H A T SOMEONE H A D THE GUT'S T O PUT THE B L A M E WERE IT
                                      B E L O N G S , N O r ON IHE POLICE WHO ]UO A WONDERFUL JOB AND DID IT
                                      TO 'fHE B E S T O F THERE A B I L I T Y BUT ON T H E D R U N K E N YOBS WHO THINK
                                      AND ARE AiJ .OWED TO PULE THE D A Y .




              H J.L. S B O R O U G H   REPORT          EXTENDED IN C IDEN        f    03    CSTARTED      4 /0 8 /8 9    )       page      9 OF      IS
              1 .3 4 7 '; HAM CDO
               2289 ?FI HELJ. MR                        ^ J W IH          BE WRITING TO THE CHIEF CONSTABLE Q U O T I N G
                4/PJB/89          HIS V I E W S ON THE W H O L E M A T T E R AND HOPES THE HIS RESIGNATION
                                  WILL N O T BE A C C E P T E D ,
              2 2 2 3 sH A S 1 6 MR I ----------                                                         l -O N D O N ,R A N G TO
                4 /8 8 /8 9      H I VET C O M P L E T E SUPPORT FOR MR W R I G H T . H F F E E L S THAT HR
                                 WRIGHT S H O U L D WOT BE HE! J) R E S P O N S I B L E FOR THE ENT IRE
                                 DISASTER.MR                                  stated that he had A C R I M I N A L RECORD
                                 BUT 'THAT HE BEL.. CEVED THE POLICE D I D THE BEST T H E Y COULD IN
                                 THE S I T U A T I O N .
              y y 29; HAJENi     CALI. FROM MRS                                                                                 ROCHDALE.THIS
                4 / m / m        WOMAN VERY D I S T R E S S E D , S A Y S THAT THE CHIEF C O N S T A B L E SHOULD N O T
                                 RESIGN, HE HAS BEEN DOING A FIRST' C:i A S S JOB
              22-12-HAHM4                                                                                                     -1 1 A P E S HAS
                4/MB/89                        s - n f - j . j i M ^ S A .K O U J I HE S I T U A T I O N AND TFT ■* B L O O D Y * DISGUSTED BY
                                 5h e    PRESS AND MEDIA. T H E POi.. I C E A FIE N O T T O BLAME AND A TREMENDOUS
                                 AMOUNT OF PEO Pi. E DOWN HERE ARE DEE P I Y HURT A B O U ' T H E C R I T I C I S M
                                 B E ’ N G t . E V E i . L E D AS" THE POLICE,! GIVE YOU MY SUPPORI



              HTLSBOROUGH REPOR !                      EXTENDED INCIDENT              W3 (STARTED 4/«e/B9 )                    PAGE        10 O F    16
              I347;HAMCDO
              2233;HAJENK CAi. FROM MRS
                                                               _________________________________________________________________________ |S. EEDS
                 4 /M B /89            TEL. NO.________]SAYS
                                                    I                   THE POLICE HAVE G O T A ROTTEN DEAL,SHE HAS
                                       F O L L O W E D THE H I L L S B O R O U G H ENCfUJ RY FROM THE DAY IT HAPPENED A N D
                                      SHE HAS N O T HEARD ONE MEMBER OF THE GENERAL P U B L I C BLAME THE
                                       P O L I C E I N ANY WAY, SHE RAYS "           IHEY HAD TO BLAME SOMEONE AND THE
                                      POLICE HAVE BEEN MADE S C A P E G O A T R .
              • ' 2 4 0 : H A J E N K CAST F ROM MRS ’
               4/08/89                !MO« I H Y O R K S . J U S T BEEN WATCHING THE R E P O R T ON V V ^ SHE F E E L . S SORRY
                                      t-UK^ AS...L. P O L I C E OFFj ('EPS IN S O U T H YORKSHIRE T O N I G H T . S H F SAYS WE
                                      no A W O ND E R F U L JOB AND DO NOT D E S E R V E All. THE CRITICISM
                                       r*S I t r s w                                            ^ K K M X        K.IU.TMO
                             ~'r;T^f;ry;-=r . : ............. ;   ,   .,   .,   .   3¥T;::-.Kr-K'.::r.,’     ?r~""rrr-y-rrr"     T-.Tr.-rs"?    .~,.-?vrr .....................
        4/BS/B9               “WHO! FHEARTED SUPPORT TO THE CHIEF CONSTABLE3
       724H %HA804            F R O M MRS |                    MAGOLESFIEi D SAYING THAI SHE HAS
        4/BB/Bv               WROTE AN ECGHT PAGE. t F T T E R OP SYMPATHY T O THE C H [ F F C O N S T A B L E
                              TOGETHER MT!H A P I C T U R E POST CARD- 3 HOPE YOUR O F F I C E R S W I I L BE
                              HADE AWARE OE i TS CONTENTS,



       HIESBOROUGH REPOR                  E XTEN D ED IN C J iE N T & ,< ( S T A R T P D   4 /fd S /R 9  )   PAGE  5 I OF
       1T 4 7 ;HAMCOO
       72nS;HAHM4       PROM                                                        ;;Ok NWA! 1 — -WISHING TO
        4/«R/H9         COMPLAIN ABOUT JUDGF i'AYs .OR, Ar .THOUGH HE HAS HIS DOUBTS
                        ABOUT THE POL ICE; HE TEFS.S iHAT LARGE CROWDS OE DRUNKEN
                        PEOPI .F cannot be controlled BY A SMALL HANDFUL? OF POi. ICE
                        O F F I C E R S , HP FEPLS THE POL). CF ARE NOT’ TO BLAME AND CANNOT
                        EE SO ! ..E L Y RESPONSIHLE F O R THE OUTCOME,
       ?2hf.:HA1 ST     C A L L F R O M MR                               "....           CHESH1RE EXPRESSING
        A / m / m       HIS F U I J . SUPPORT F O R THE; ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                        POL ICE AND HIS DISGUST AT "THEIR CONDEMNATION :ftY THF HF.D1A WHO
                        HE e,Ff.I F v E 'B ARE WRONG IN THE WAY THEY ARE REPORTCNG THE
                        OUTCOME OE THE INQUIRY,
                        HP HOPES THAT OFF I CT.RS OE 'THIS F O R C E 1)0 NOT BECOME DOWNHEARTED
                        WITH ALL THE ADVERSE PRESS,
       2 7 M H :PiAJFMK CAs L I"ROM A MR                                                                ...~~ |READING
        4 /W B /8 9     JUST WATCHING NEWSNIGHT REPORT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH E N Q U I R Y . H E




'tss                           .IS ABSOLUTELY APPALLED AT Ail THE CRITICISM OE THE P O L I C E AND
                               SAYS IT IS NOT DESERVED,WE HAVE BEEN MADE SCAPEGOATS,


       HILSBOKOUGH REPORT'                 EXTENDED INCIDENT                   MS (STARTED         i/ias./H9 )      PAGE         17 OF                                                    IE
       1S47;HAiiCD0
f£~    * * * * * * * D A T E CHANGF           -
       «21.9:HAJENK CAl .1 . F R O M                                                       ~                     lC A M B S , T / N
         .*3/08/89     f                    H  B H F   I S  I         I
                                                                      f O U R  N A i ..) S T AND NON I
                                                                                                     _ _______________     I
«»                       P S Y C H O L O G I S T , S H E I S MOST' D I S G U S T E D WITH THE OUTCOME OF THE
                         T A Y I..O R E N Q U I R Y A N D S A Y S I I        :iS V E R Y UNFAIR,SHE HAS STUDIED
                         F O O T B A IT .. H O O L I G A N I S M A N D S T A T E S I T       IS A CULT AND ENQUIRY WIT.
                         S TAM P L f O U T ,S H E          1=   AVAIL.ABLE           JN    HER CAPACITY AS A PSYCHOLOGIST
                               IE      R E Q U IR E D ,
       KI220 sHAJENK REE ABOVE SHOULD BE                                        NO      ENQUIRY WILT.                     STAMP      IT OUT
©       fs /m /m
       15741 ; H A 2 1 H 4                                                    SHEEEIFI.D CAS. i .E D TO
        n/MH/es              EXPRESS HIS SUPPORT FOR THE CHIEF  CONSTABLE,SUGGESTED        THAT THE
                             OFFICER DID NOT RESIGN AS - 0THAT  M E A N S THE  YOBS  HAVE  WON DOESr-L
                             T IT ",
       B 7 n 2 ? H A 2 i H 4 MR
         5/«H/S9                                         [BEDFORD TEL NO |   _______ ^______ |
                             THE ORGANISATION HAS SUPPORTED THE CHIEF CONSTABLE THROUGHOUT


       HILSBOROUGH REPORT                             EXTENDED             INCIDENT                        f- O   (S T A R TED    4 /« B /8 9       )          PAGE               IT OF   16
       J 3 4 7 ? HAMCDO
                               THE AFFAIRS.ETTERS WRITTEN 10 THE PRIME MINISTER (REPI IES R F C 1 D )
                               w F R E F O R W A R D E D T O LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR, AND THE CAL I..E R URGES THE
                               OFFICER TO WITHDRAW H I S TENDERED RESIGNATION AND SET T H E EXAMPLE
                               TO HIS DEMORALISED O F F £ C E R S -- THAT LIFE AND POLCCING MUST GO ON
                               AFTER A TRAGIC A C C I D E N I S WHERE THE POLICE ARE UNFAIRLY C R T T I O S E D
       R H 4V s H A 6 V t
         n/i/lH/H9             FROM I                                                                                                          1P A S S I N G        on       a mess
                                                                                                                                      m                             .■ -,r, - 7
                                                                            may wxsh to e x p r e s s -
                 USE 'THI-j B POL UMNS EOR ANY OPiMIONS HE'
                 SHOULD !'H'CS OFFER U'fSH TO RE Va KEN UR
                                iM'i'Af'TF-T) ON A Buy E NUMBER EX'!             ::a e .e .ei.) w i t h a m e s s a g e
                                                           _H A C C LE S F *F LP
                 MRS                                                             yRTT i NS TO THE P.f'-E.
                 o f S U P P O N T FOR H R K D..K1 N Ft FI'i> A N O                          t[.p oi;r, C E R
O/0S/S9
                                                                                                                            THAT       ^

                 PATENT     DFFEC i      H


                                                                                                                                PAPE             14 OF     IE
                                F X"1ENPEP 1N«;iDENT                 «3 (STARVED                    4/W b /0 v          >
HI LSBOROUGH      REPORT
C.M7 ;HAMCPO                                                                           SUSSEX, SAYS HE HAS
«ViflE;HAA9t                                                               (V ) repi.a iNF.3D ABOt? i En-> MAmt
                  UAH MAWV ptJN IMS WCf'H IHh PO!..i _-..„ A N D
 5 / scH / E V
                  V ^ J ' E E . T u f r HI- T J N K S THAT THK S U S P E N S I O N
                                                                                     OE.........
                                                                                           CHIEF SOFT
                                                                                                 AT H U .ES.BOE0URH
                  I h E k m E S T IB W . . I o u r OF OHDF H, ANO THfc rt. S i a
                  ARE NOT PO^N TO, THE EcH, JCE , ---------- OEtt'RYSHIRE CALLED TO :-*AY

                  X HAT    A LAPSE PERCENTAGE OE THE P»W M- ^                                      ^    ^   ?       J
                                                                                                              R TT H E TN   ^   F
 n/WE/«9
                  T H IS   A F F A IR S                                                                         VERY        -
                  EVEN'ITWEm Ail •m, w -                        -        ^             A T " rMF SCENES AMD HAVE TO
                  i>(feeeenr HowfVKK **<-.« u                   «    -       r    ,   - T^ n0 A MARvei ecus ,um

                                                                                                                                    thh;m rv




                  1 HE W 1 E E 1 M RE P ORT .                           '■TFA1 E D HOW
                                                      "SHE EE 1ECO
     J.:E 12W7"': ME                                 OFFERED HIS SUPPORT yISHINS                                                                                     m
  “i/W B /W       SHOCKED FIE F 0 T A f THE EEFOE f,
                  HF COUi D HFEE IN SOME WAY.
                                                                                                                                                                     is*
                                                                                                                                    PASE          t*» OF    16
                                  EXTENDED          INCIDENT             m       (S rAETEP             A /««/*** ;
 HIEHHOHOUHH REPORT
 1347: HAMCPO     ___                                        :    SHEFFIELD,
 09b4;HA691   P R ___                                    E AMP AO. SOUTH YORKS
  H/WH/89     SEND soon WISHES ro THE CH I EE ^^NSTABI
                       use 1C: AppAi 1 Ep BY JBh- KEE0ki THAT PEACES A1.J... BLAME
                                                                                                                                and        the
                                   v    ™ : « ch:        ' « E al,
                    RFPOHT      IS A IFSBII'I.F Si ilSli ON THF                        tO R C t-,                               -KIRBY,
  t«y{v;H421."A MRS                          TsE                                                                                ■«EE
                                       ttaiTl f p   to    say   that         the      hoL i^ w         1N « fV O K ^                   1}
   S./MR/89         LIVFRPOOi
                    W O N D E R F U L , A N O T HERE.                                                   \ Y Vk MORALLY W R O N S
                    EESJHiSi O R K E P K O S r C U i f W r ^ m                          —                           fV F R E O O i         HOOLIGANS
                     f0 u s e T H E P O L I C E A S SCAJ'tAMJAl s,                    wMt.w                     ^    —
                     WHO UEKE RESPONSE*! E FOR ^                                               -v               o^TO ”                OFFICERS
                     fiK):ArF.SV RESPECTS AMP K m O E S ^                        w j w w      c .X,               .-
                     OE THIS FORCE,
   1 w M i H A 7 tti4                                                    ANCS CAEsEP TO SAY
     n/MB/HV          MR
                                                         lr
                                                     THE POLICE           Vt C-ISEP ON THE
                     THAI WHILST HE AUKE p S W Ll'H ■ 'fHE REFORT IS UNEAIR ANP PI ACES
                                                                                                Kfr, i . mi xJrt

                     OCCASIONS iHAT WARRANT IT -

                                                                                                                                      PARE         IS OF        tA
                              E X I'EKiPEP CNCIT'^FN X                       M3 (S'VARTEP               4/fflB/HV )
   H u ..SBOEOUHH RFPOFs'
   13 4 7 ;HAMCOO
                  Kt B F„N« IB,1.:,TV HO« .HF

                                                                                                                                       -     —        TO
                      “ romFF           OONSIAeiF BY            iHF CAL.L.FR IN                W         OOURFF.
  6/08/89 2k‘:46 HAE HAJENK
                        REp0R T                   E X TE N D E D IN C ID E N T                           03       (S T A R T E D 4 /0 8 /8 9 )       PASE 1 4 OF
H IL S B O R O U S H
1 3 4 7 ; H A M C D O ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1      |      S U S S E X , SAY S HE HAS
0 9 0 6 :H A 6 9 1
  5 /0 8 /8 9          HAD MANY RUN J n S W IT H T H E P O L IC E , AND                                                                      * g ° “ TJ T          ?
                        THES            H O F E V F R H E T 1 N K S T H A I T H h SUSPENSION o h C H l t F ^                                                r i ,r H
                        D U C K E N F I E L D I S W E L L O U T O F O R D E R , A N D T H t fc V fc M lS A i H I L U . 1 K . R - 1

                          ARE      NOT     DOW N      TO       THE     P O L IC E .            ---------------------------D E R B Y S H I R E   CALLED         TO      SAY
0 9 3 8 :H A 2 154
                          THAT       A   LARGE        PERCENTAGE                OF         TH F:          P U B L IC    A RE     B E H IN D     THE      PO L .I C t    11N
  H /0 8 /8 9
                          T H IS A F F A IR . I T          IS EASY            TO       BE           W IS E AND J O   '^  ^    I f      A,                lE R ^ H t
                          E V F N T , W IT H A L L         THE F A C       I L l T I E S             O f A P U B L IC E N Q U IR Y , n
                          DIFFERENT HOWLVEK WHEN uFhlL-ERB ARE A f THE -                                                                            “ ai iq TOP
                          MAKE       D E C IS IO N S       THERE         AND       T   H   E    N   . T   H   E   P O L IC E   DO    A   MARVELLOUS              JOB
                          AND      DO     NOT     DESERVE            THE      LEVEL                 or        C K lilC ib M      D iR tC T b D      Ai

                           THE      IN T E R IM      H E P g g T , -----------------------------------^S H E F F I E L D                        [S T A T E D   HOW
 0 9 5 1 :F 1 2 @ ;        lih |
                               _____________||__________________                                          OFFERED         H IS      SUPPORT         W IS H IN G
   5 /0 3 /8 9            SHOCKED           HE    FELT         AT    THE      REPORT.
                           HE    COULD        HELP        IN    SOME        W AY.



 ADD COMMENTS;
   6/08/89 22;46 HAB HAJENK

H IL S B O R O U G H
                           REPUR I                 EXTENDED           IN C ID E N T        Bd   (S T A R T E D       4 /0 8 /8 9 )        PAGE            15   OF
1 3 4 7 ; HAMCDO
0 V 5 4 ;H A 6 9 i     DR
  5 /0 8 /8 9          n r-hi                                                                                   S H E F F IE L D ,
                       *      ,                    W io r itt5   !u    iH ^    C H IE F    CONSTABLE            AND A L L SOUTH            YORKS
                       S '                     HEJ         S A P P A L L E D BY THE REPORT T H A T P LA C E S A L L BLAM E
                                               *        * ;L I l j E ’ _ WE A l L k w o w w h o i s    r e s p o n s ib l e an d th e
                       REPO kT           i S       A    T E R R I B I h Si t l R R q m t h f J-Q R C E
1 0 0 2 ;H A 2 15 4
  5 /0 8 /8 9
                       MRSJ                                                   ||                   [|       ”                         k ir b y
                       L I VEkhooL                 CALLED        TO   SAY      I HAT      THE   POL i (Jt       IN   S   YORKS       ARE         *
                       ^ ^         E f t _ U L ’ A N D T H E R E I S N O R E A S O N WHY A N Y O F F I C E R S H O U L D
                       In                 J * B |_ P R O S E C U T C D FO R T H E I N C I D E N T . I T I S M O R A L L Y WRONG
                       u w r / r f r J 1 „ Ptl 5 L l L ' E               S C A P E G O A T S , WHEN I T WAS L I V E R P O O L               H O O L IG A N S
                       ^      W tR E R E S P O N S IB L E                FOR T H E D E A T H S OF O TH ER F A N S .
                                             RESPECTS            A N *> K I N D E S T     W IS H E S    EXPRESSED           TO      THE    O F F IC E R S
                                  Ih 1   F       ,
                                             o r c e
1 0 3 1 :H A 2 1 5 4
 5 /0 8 /8 9           MR
                           ''jJ                .        _                                                                La n c s    called          to    say
                                    WHIL ST    _ Afa REttj Wl- I l
                                          T11,HE                 HH                 ITHE POi
                                                                                      HE P O LT
                                                                                              I Cf:F
                                                                                                  E BP.F
                                                                                                       E Ir
                                                                                                          NNR r-p
                                                                                                            G C RT r IiC nI Sturn
                                                                                                                  IT              Ahs Tt H
                                                                                                                              E D ON     uEc
                       -     - U fiv jiu N b           HA i   W ARRANT        IT   - TH E REPORT IS U N F A IR , AND P LAC E S

ADD COMMENTS
  6/0S/B9 22;47 HAB HAJENK

H IL S B O R O U G H   REPORT              EXTENDED          IN C ID E N T        03     (S T A R T E D     4 /0 8 /8 9 )       PAGE         16   OF
1 3 4 7 : HAMCDO

                       R E S P O N S IB IL IT Y     FOR      THE       TRAGEDY      IN    THE    W RONG        Q U A R T E R .D E A T H S   WERE
                       C A U S E D _ B Y _ T H E B E H A V IO U R OF TH O U S A N D S OF F A N S ,A N U N C O N T R O L L A B L E
                       W AVE Oh P t O P L E - N O T P O L I C E N E G L IG E N C E , A L E T T E R W I L L B E S E N T TO
                       * H t C H I E F C O N S T A B L E B Y T H fc C A L L E R I N D U E C O U R S E .
1 2 3 4 :H A 6 9 1
                       * *   P A G tS     1 - 1 3       P R IN T E D   FOR    CC’ S      STAFF     O F F IC E R **
 5 /0 8 /8 9
1 2 5 4 :HA69 J        FROM     MR
                                                                                             NORTHALLERTO N
 5 /0 8 /8 9           PLEASE        IN F O R M T H E L E A D E R       OF YOUR BRANC H BOARD T H A T
                       NOW I S       T H E fI M E TO IS S U E           A M O T IO N O F F U L L
                       C O N F ID E N C E I N YO U R C H I E F C O N S T A B L E OR S U R R E N D E R                 YOUR
                       OF F I C E A S C O N S T A T U F . __________________________________
1 4 1 2 : H A S 1 54
                       MR                                                             ESSEX C A L L E D T O E X P R E S S
 5 /0 8 /8 9
                       H1 „             ! m   „ , H t O U IC O M E O F T H E E N Q U I R Y . H E D IS A G R E E D M O ST
                       S IR u N G L Y W IT H T H E C O N C L U S IO N T H A T T H E P O L IC E C A R R IE D T H E C R E A T E S
                       BURDEN OF B L A M E ,A N D F E L T T H A T T H IS SHO ULD BE RESERVED FOR THE
                       L IV E R P O O L    FANS     -    " A N I M A L S 51 A S   HE     REFERRED         TO    TH E M , AND     RELATED
                       ' °   H lS   0W N    a d v e r s e   tx n E R iE N C E s    w it h    t h e s e    sam e    s u p p o r te r s   on


ADD COMMENTS;
                                                                                                                                                             a


                                                                                                                                                             €»



                                                                                                                                                             if
 6 /0 8 /8 9    2 2 '4 7    HAB     H A J E 'N K

H IL S B O R O U S H   REPORT             EXTENDED          IN C ID E N T         03    (S T A R T E D      4 /0 8 /8 9 )         PAGE        17   OF   18
1 3 4 7 i HAMCDO
                                           ■ B E S T W IS H E S WERE E X T E N D E D TO A L L T H E S E N IO R P O L IC E
                       O F F IC E R S U N D E R G O IN S SUC H P R E S S U R E S A T T H I S MOMENT I N T IM E
14 5 3 :H A 2 1 5 4    MR                                                             kf Y O R K S
 5 /0 8 /8 9           C A L L E D TO ENC O U RAG E T H E C H IE F C O N S T A B L E NOT TO R E S IG N .T H E
                       CALLER STATED                T H A T T H E P O L I C E WERE N O T TO B L A M E FO R T H E E V E N T S                                  ?
                       A T H IL L S B R O 7 ,       NOR MOTORW AY A C C ID E N T S , OR S I M I L I L A R T R A G E D IE S .
                       I HE P O L IC E HAD A              THANKLESS         TASK       AND     SHOULD       NOT       BE    P IL L O R IE D
                       IN T H IS F A S H IO N .                                                                                 ^
1455; F I 1340         MESSAGE       FROM          MRSj                                                                           S H E F F IE L D .
 5 /0 8 /8 9           MY   HUSBAND          IS     CALLED      D A V ID    D U C K IN F IE L D      AND    WE    HAVE       R E C E IV E D
                       MANY     PHONE        CALLS        ALL   G IV IN G       SUPPORT        AND       ENCOURAGEMENT             TO    C H .S U P T         3
                       D U C K IN F IE L D    B E L IE V IN G    H IM      TO    BE    MY    H U S B A N D .I    AM    IN    TOTAL
                       A G R EEM ENT W IT H T H E S E N T IM E N T S              P A S S E D AND W IS H I T TO                B E KNOW N
                       T H A T T H E R E A RE A LA R G E AMOUNT                   O F P E O P L E WHO S U P P O R T            TH E P O L IC E .                  5
2 0 1 3 ;HA982         MR ______________________________________                                                                      KENT:
 5 /8 8 /8 9           CALLED      TO    G IV E      H IS   SUPPORT         TO    THE       P O L IC E   AND     THAT       THE    C H IE F
                       CONSTABLE         SHOULD           NOT   BE   ALLOW ED          TO    R E S IG N .

ADD   COMMENTS




                                                                                                                                                             .3       ;
 6/08/89 22 i 47 HAB HAJENK

H IL S B O R O U G H   REPORT            EXTENDED           IN C ID E N T         03      (S T A R T E D    4 /0 8 /8 9 )         PAGE       18    OF
1 3 4 7 sHAMCDO
* * * * * * *       D A T E CHANGE        -          6 /0 8 /8 9          * * * * * * *
0 3 J 8 : H A J E N K C A L L FROM       MR                                                                   ^ T o C K S B R ID fa E .H E       ^A YS
 6 /0 8 /8 9           T H E O F F IC E R     O F T H E D A Y WAS R IG H T                I N E V E R Y T H IN G   HE D ID .T H E REPORT
                       D O E S N O T DO       T H E F O R C E , S E R V I C E OR          T H E c O M M U N IIY    ANY GOOD. IN H Ib
                       W O R D S ’ I T S A C H E A P P U B L I C A T I O N ’ A N D D I S f a U S T I N G . H E T H I N K S WE A R E
                       A L L D O I N G A F A B U L O U S J O B . S A Y S H E D O E S N O T KNOW T H E C H I E F C O N S T A B
                       L E O R CH      SU PT D U C K E N F IE L D B U T TH E Y H AV E H IS                    S U P P O R T .|H E ^ C A L L E R
                       HAD J U S T     G O T HOME F R O M y O R K A N D WAS R E A D I N G                     H IS D A IL Y      IE L E fa R A P H
                       AND    FELT     HE     MUST       R IN G    AND    EXPRESS           H IS   F E E L I N G S . __________
12 4 1 ; HA 2 15 4     MR    & MRS                                                                       F IE L Dj     ^    __l              U
                       TO    R E G IS T E R   T H E IR    PROTESTS          AT     i HE     I N T E R I M R E P O R T 'S    OONCLUSH-N
                       T H A T T H E P O L I C E WERE L A R G E L Y R E S P O N S I B L E F O R T H E T R A G E D Y .
                       T H E C A L L E R S E X P E R I E N C E . WAS T H A T A SIGNIFICANT NO. OF JIHfc FAN&
                       WERE D R U N K A N D T H I S -           C O U P L E D WITH T H E B E H A V I O U R O F fHObE S -A N b
                       WAS     THE    P R IM A R Y     C A U S A T IO N   FACTOR.




ADD COMMENTS:
REPORT OF MEETING TO DISCUSS INTERIM POLICING ARRANGEMENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH AT
THE START OF SEASON 1989/90

Meeting held in the Secretary's office, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at
10.30 am on Wednesday 19 July 1989

PERSONS PRESENT

Chief Superintendent Nesbit, F Division Commander Designate
Superintendent; Marshall, Deputy Commander, F Division
Superintendent Sleath, FI Sub Divisional Commander
Chief Inspector Bettison
Inspector Sewell, FI Sub Division Football Liaison Officer
Mr G Mackrell, Secretary SWFC
Mr K Addy, Director SWFC (with responsibility for ground structures)

The meeting began with a tour of the ground, paying particular emphasis to the
West End of the ground, Leppings Lane stand and terraces.   The Local Authority
have still to determine what parts of that section of the stadium can and cannot
be used. - However, Mr Mackrell suggested discussions on the basis that all parts
of the ground will be released for use prior to the start of the 1989/90
football season.

It was agreed that use of the West Stand (seating area) presents no problem as
far as accommodation, access, stewarding and policing arrangements are
concerned.  Use of the terracing depends to a great extent upon the findings and
recommendations of the Taylor Inquiry.

Mr Mackrell put forward a proposal on behalf of SWFC.   He suggested the use
of pens 1 and 2 for standing accommodation being serviced by turnstiles A - G.
Mr Nesbit recorded his concern about the use of pens 1 and 2: the perimeter wall
that runs alongside the entrance to pens 1 and 2 is in a dangerous condition and
presently shored up.  Furthermore, use of pens 1 and 2 present the opportunity
for supporters to climb into pens 3 and 4 which are patently unsuitable for
accommodation of spectators.  The survey of pens 3 and 4 revealed that barriers
are missing, that perimeter fencing is bent away from the stanchions and there is
some debris on the terraces themselves.  Mr Mackrell points out that it is not
envisaged that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will use pens 3 and 4 for the
forseeable future, but,for psychological reasons as much as anything, it is in
hand to have the perimeter fences repaired to the standard that existed on 15
April 1989.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated his reluctance to use pens 1
and 2 as spectator accommodation and pointed to pens 6 and 7 as being the
preferred option for standing accommodation.   Mr Mackrell suggested that a
problem exists with the present safety certificate that demands segregation of
numbers going into the North West terrace - pen 7. Chief Inspector Bettison
pointed out that the terrace in question has a capacity of 2,700 and provided
that the facility existed for counting in those 2,700 spectators then they could
be safely accommodated in that section of the ground.

Mr Mackrell suggests the philosophy upon which his considerations are being
made.  He envisages 3 phases of     planning

i     What to     do    now
ii    What to     do    when   Lord Justice Taylor's findings areknown
iii   What to     do    when   the safety certificate ispublished.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit concurred with that philosophy and pointed out that
any discussion and resolutions made today must be qualified on the basis that
                                     - 2 -

Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations may supercede the discussions and
resolutions.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit raised the question of the Everton game scheduled to
take place at Hillsborough on 30 August 1989.  Mr Mackrell interrupted saying he
envisaged no problems, he had already checked and discovered 3,000 spectators
attended from Everton for the corresponding fixture last season which was held
on a Saturday afternoon.  This year the Wednesday evening fixture should attract
fewer spectators than that.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit raised the question of
a pilgrimage from Liverpool to the fateful Leppings Lane terraces.   Mr Mackrell
disagreed.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated that any operational decisions
regarding the Everton game must be reviewed in the light of the Taylor Inquiry
recommendations.  Mr Mackrell proposed that the recommendations in Treasury
Counsel's final submission might prove to be a working guide.   Mr Nesbit felt
that this could not be taken as an authoritative document.  Mr Mackrell returned
to the subject of using pens 1 and 2. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated his
concerns regarding the wall and the accessibility of pens 3 and 4. Mr Mackrell
recorded his reticence and pointed out that if the terraces are not used in the
first few games then this might set an unwelcome precedent.   Superintendent
Marshall pointed out that if we continue the arrangements as they existed before
then we will encounter at some stage the problems of 15 April 1989.   Mr Mackrell
disagreed pointing out that Sheffield Wednesday football club is unlikely to
attract an FA Cup Semi Final game for the forseeable future and that other games
will not attract the same numbers.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit brought the
conversation back to the Everton game.  He proposed that if the game was to go
ahead particularly retaining the fixture on 30 August 1989, then the
arrangements should be as follows

Everton supporters should be restricted to tickets beforehand and should be
accommodated solely in the West Stand which has a maximum capacity of 4,400.  The
police would suggest in addition a contingency plan to cater for any ticketless
fans who might attend the game.  Mr Mackrell raised the question of pricing.  If
fans are unwilling to pay for stand tickets they can always turn up and pay a
lower price to stand on the Kop.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit assured Mr
Mackrell that that possibility could be removed by policing arrangements that
would segregate the Everton supporters to Leppings Lane.  Mr Addy agreed with
Chief Superintendent Nesbit's view and reiterated some of the problems that
might arise if fans were allowed to stand on the Leppings Lane terraces.  Mr
Mackrell agreed and suggested a review of the fixture list to see which games
would be amenable to such arrangements and which would warrant, in his view,
different arrangements.   '

Despite this suggestion the conversation centred upon the first two home games
of the season, Norwich on 19 August 1989 and Everton on 30 August 1989.   Mr
Mackrell pointed out that as far as Norwich is concerned he is expecting limited
numbers and that as far as Everton is concerned he is happy with the police
suggestions.   He proposed an agreed policy for Norwich and Everton to be
reviewed thereafter in the light of further information which might be to hand.
Mr Addy raised the question of policing arrangements in the West Stand for these
games.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit pointed out that the fans may seek to drop
wreaths down or get into pens 3 and 4 from the stand area.   No firm policy was
established.   Chief Superintendent Nesbit asked about re-arranging the Everton
fixture thr.ough the Football League to a later time in the season.  Mr Mackrell
was loathe to do that stating that it was late in the day, that he had already
rearranged one match, and that, in any event, he had written to the police
asking for their comments on the fixture list and in the police response the
Everton fixture had not been raised.

(This last point appeared to be a telling point).

Mr Mackrell proposed that any overflow from the West, tand could be accommodated
in the North Stand.    Chief Superintendent Nesbit pointed out that the police
were against that arrangement because it would be expensive in resource terms to
segregate the opposing fans in the same stand.     Discussion then took place about
who would use the North Stand and through which turnstiles they would enter the
stands.   Mr Mackrell pointed out that he was against serving the North Stand
solely from Penistone Road.    Chief Superintendent Nesbit said that for the
Everton match in particular he did not want 4,500 at Leppings Lane trying to
enter through some turnstiles and for other turnstiles in the same location to
be used by Sheffield Wednesday supporters seeking entrance to a different part of
the ground.   Mr Mackrell suggested that he had been- criticised at the Inquiry
for acquiescing to police demands for turnstile arrangements.     Chief Inspector
Bettison,who had heard that part of the evidence at the Inquiry,was able to
correct Mr Mackrell by pointing out that he was criticised for the turnstile
arrangements that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had formulated in the light
of the police segregation policy, not for acquiescing to police suggestions
 about turnstile arrangements.     The police had never made such suggestions.
 Chief Superintendent Nesbit, on a concilliatory note, pointed out that he had no
 intention of changing arrangements that have stood for a number of years
without good cause, but it was necessary to underscore what had gone before and
 to assess planned arrangements for the future.    Mr Mackrell pointed out that
 changes to the arrangements might have to be made in the light of
 recommendations resulting from the Inquiry, for example, he stated that SWFC
 were already assessing the possibility of making Leppings Lane end wholly seated
 accommodation.   Chief Superintendent Nesbit brought the conversation back to the
 Everton game.   Mr Mackrell pointed out that he had already spoken to the
 Secretary of Everton football club and they are expecting it to be a ticket only
 fixture for Everton supporters.    Mr Mackrell suggests sending them 4,000 tickets
 for the West Stand (400 below maximum).    Chief Superintendent Nesbit then
 declared the police contingency to utilise pen 7 for any ticketless fans that turn
 up over and above the 4,000.    This was met with general agreement, the Club for
 their part would maintain the confidentiality of such a contingency plan.

A general discussion took place about .access in the North Stand.  It was clear
that the Club as represented by Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy, were firmly against a
policy of serving the stand from the Penistone Road north entrances only.
During this conversation Mr Mackrell raised the spurious objection that there
were insufficient turnstiles at Penistone Road.   Superintendent Marshall made
the calculation that the 12 turnstiles that were available could accommodate
9,000 people within an hour whereas the 23 turnstiles that were available at
Leppings Lane end could not accommodate the West End plus a portion of the North
Stand within an hour.  The argument about the sufficiency of turnstiles at
Penistone Road was thought to be a 'stalking-horse' on the part its author Mr
Mackrell.  Common agreement was reached on the following matters. A policy
would exist for the first two games of the season after which the policy wou
be reviewed. The policy had to have the proviso that any recommendations of
Lord Justice Taylor would supercede any agreement. Notwithstanding this
qualification, the West Stand only would be used for 'away' supporters, whxc
had a capacity for 4,000 spectators.  Sheffield Wednesday football supporters
will be accommodated in the three remaining sections of the ground. For the
Everton game pen 7 would be utilised as an 'over-flow' for any ticketless f*»ns
that needed to be accommodated within the ground. For this purpose, Mr Mackrell
                                     - 4 -

agreed to have at least 2 turnstiles manned in case the contingency arose.

As far as the North Stand was concerned it was agreed that this would be for the
exclusive use of Sheffield Wednesday supporters, the police, for their part,
wish this to be accessed from Penistone Road only- Both Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy
wish to record their objections to such a policy and this matter remains
unresolved.

Discussion then took place about the turnstile arrangements from the West Stand.
It was agreed that turnstiles A - G would be used that; the separating wall in
the concourse would be used to prohibit movement throughout the conoourse; that
personnel barriers would be erected at the South West corner to
prevent spectators going to pens 1 and 2; that the tunnel gates would be
padlocked closed and that all spectators going into the West Stand would enter
through the entrance in the South West concourse area.  Included in this
discussion was consideration of stewarding arrangements in this area.  The
conclusion was that Mr Mackrell will draft proposals for deployment and duties
of stewards throughout the ground and forward same to F Division for police
approval.   This was agreed.

Chief Inspector Bettison made the general point that policing throughout the
ground should be a more reactive role (responding to stewards requests etc) than
it has been of late.   This was accepted by the Club.  Mr Mackrell promised to
send the draft proposals re stewards in the near future so that the final
document would be prepared in readiness for the stewards evening before the
season starts when the precise role of stewards could be 'thrashed out*.

Other aspects were then considered as follows

The game v Manchester City.  All parties agreed to a 12 noon kick off on New
Years Day.  Mr Mackrell would progress these arrangements.

PC Guest, who had been previously used in a liaison capacity in the Club Control
Room, would be withdrawn.  The Club accepted this and accepted their duty to
monitor turnstile counts themselves and inform the police where necessary.   Mr
Mackrell was asked about the provision of a similar monitor in the Police
Control Room.  He agreed to look into the matter.

Communication with Club officials was then considered.   It was established that
Mr Mackrell was the Safety Officer for the Club and that he was the point of
contact for any matters which needed Club attention.   Chief Superintendent
Nesbit asked about contact before, during and after football matches held at
Hillsborough suggesting the provision of a 'go-between' steward.   Mr Mackrell
rejected such a decision, pointing out that he had a radio set and would provide
the police control with a similar set, there is a land line to his office, and
he would provide, in writing, details of precisely where he would be during the
game.

Perimeter track gates.  Chief Superintendent Nesbit suggested that these should
really be a steward's responsibility.  This was agreed by all parties.  Chief
Superintendent Nesbit suggested that the police serial would continue to be
deployed to the perimeter track and that they would have a responsibility for
the South and North sides of the ground but that the perimeter track in front of the
West Stand-and Spion Kop would be stewarded with stewards having responsibilites
for the individual gates onto the track.
                                     - 5 -

Delaying Kick Off - Mr Mackrell agreed that he would need to be consulted before
such action and that he would be available for such consultation. It was agreed
between Mr Mackrell and Superintendent Sleath that they would talk before each
game and such considerations would form part of their liaison.

Superintendent Marshall pointed out that paragraph 46 of the Green Guide
requires the Club to have a contingency plan for accommodating supporters who
arrive and overwhelm the turnstiling arrangements.  Mr Mackrell suggested that
such a contingency would exist certainly for the first 2 games and that this
could be reviewed at the appropriate time.  This was agreed.

On the question of first aid requirements, Mr Mackrell pointed out that the
Football League had issued all Clubs with a list of requirements which Sheffield
Wednesday would comply with.  A telephone had been connected in the first aid
room and that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club would take full responsibility
for all first aid equipment.

Mr Mackrell asked that they were party to any Emergency Services contingency
plans.  This was agreed.

Superintendent Marshall asked about liaison with the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Supporters Club.  Both Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy agreed that this
would be a waste of time as the Club that exists does not represent any more
than the membership of the Club, which is very small.

Cutting Equipment - Mr Mackrell stated that this was on his agenda, but will not
be considered in advance of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.  This was
accepted by the police officers.

Inspector Sewell asked about briefing of stewards.  It was agreed that senior
stewards would be available for a full briefing before the match by police
officers who would reiterate their responsbilities and ensure that they were
fulfilled.  The question of a debriefing session was raised - it was agreed that
this would be useful and the Club supported such a move.  To be progressed by
Superintendent Sleath.

The meeting ended at 12.50 pm with a view to re-arranging a further meeting in
the early part of week commencing 31 July 1989 when Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations would be known and Mr Bownes of the Local Authority would be
available to meet with the Club and the police.
BRIEFING NOTE RE CORRUPTION ALLEGATION



The allegation was received by the force on 6 June 1989 and Superintendent

Frank Carlisle of the Greater Manchester Police appointed to investigate

it.




The incident occurred prior to 12 noon on 15 April 1989 and is fully outlined

in the attached statement.      It will be seen that there was what can only

be described as banter before the officer, having ascertained that they had

tickets, allegedly said "If you hadn't have had, I would have got you into

the ground for a tenner."




So far Superintendent Carlisle has informally interviewed some 50 officers

who were on duty at the Leppings Lane end or were part of the reserve.         He

has not identified the officer against whom the complaint is levelled and

now intends to have the witnesses view photographs of possible suspect

officers and, if necessary, then hold identification parades.




(Mr Carlisle is of the opinion that the remark was made and that it was

no more than an ill-advised attempt to ascertain that the three fans had

tickets for the m a t c h . )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Am«nd«d 8.871
                                                                                            W ait Midlands Police
                                                                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29                                                   (C.J. Act 1967, a.9; M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Bute* 1981, r.70)
23 30
2 4 31
25       N a m e ..........
26
27       Age . . . .1.6............. (yrs)                                                     Date of Birth
28
         Occupation . . S C H O O L B O Y                                        _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

22 29    Home or business address
23 30    and telephone number
2 4 31
25                                                                                                           B O L T O N
26
27
28

         This statement, consisting of    3       page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29    and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30    have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
2 4 31
25
26
27       Dated the                              4 t h                           day of                              June                                                                         19 8 9
28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G      M o r r i c e
         Signed . .                                                                                                                       Signature witnessed by

                                                                                                                                                                                                   G         M o r r i c e
                                                                                                                                          Officer's Name .

                                                                                                                                                                I N S P                                                   2 2 3 7
                                                                                                                                          Rank                                                                 No.

                   I     a m          a     5 t h           f o r m        s t u d e n t               a t                                                                                 i n         B o l t o n .                     I    l i v e
                   a t        h o m e           w i t h         m y        m o t h e r .
                   I     w o u l d              j u s t         l i k e              t o     r e f e r            t o         t h e     q u e s t i o n a i r e                        I     h a v e               j u s t         f i l l e d            i n ,         a n d
               s p e a k                  a b o u t           a n         i n c i d e n t              o u t s i d e              t h e         t u r n s t i l e s ,                      w h e r e               a     p o l i c e m a n                t o l d
               m e            t h a t           h e         c o u l d          g e t         m e       i n t o           t h e        g r o u n d          f o r      m o n e y                    i f         I       d i d n ' t            h a v e       a
                   t i c k e t .                  H e         s a i d          h e         c o u l d         a l s o           g e t      m y       f r i e n d s                 i n .
                   I     g o t            t o     t h e         t u r n s t i l e                   i n         L e p p i n g s           L a n e ,          S h e f f i e l d                         a t         a b o u t             11     a m       o n
                   t h e        m o r n i n g                 S a t u r d a y                1 5 / 4 / 8 9               a n d        s a t      d o w n       o n          t h e            f l o o r                 w a i t i n g            f o r           t h e

               g a t e s                  t o     o p e n .
               I             w a s         w i t h                                                                                                                    B O L T O N ,                      a n d
                                                                           B O L T O N .                  W e       h a d         o u r       b a c k s         t o         t h e            w a l l               b e t w e e n              t h e     W e s t
               S t a n d                  t u r n s t i l e s                  a n d         t h e        t e r r a c e s               t u r n s t i l e             a n d                w e r e            a l l        r e a d i n g , s o m e _
               n e w s p a p e r s                          t h a t        I     h a d         b o u g h t .
               A l t h o u g h                    w e        w e r e           v e r y         e a r l y            f o r         t h e       g a m e ,        w e      a l l                h a d            t i c k e t s ,                 a n d     h a d           g o n e
               t o            t h e         g r o u n d             e a r l y              b e c a u s e           w e         t h o u g h t          t h a t         t h e r e                  w a s             g o i n g         t o        b e _ s o m e ^
               p r e            m a t c h             e n t e r t a i n m e n t .                            A f t e r            a b o u t        1 5      m i n u t e s                    w e         h e a r d               t h e        c l i n k i n g             o f
               a             g a t e ,            a n d         I     s a w           a      b l u e         c o n c e r t i n a                 g a t e       i n      o u r                w a l l ,                 o p e n       s l i g h t l y
               a n d            2         p o l i c e m e n                c o m e          o u t         a n d         s t o o d         i n      f r o n t          o f          u s .
              S o m e b o d y                     e l s e           o n        t h e         i n s i d e           c l o s e d            t h e      g a t e .                I            w o u l d               d e s c r i b e              t h e
               p o i i c e m e n                      a s       o n e          b e i n g           a b o u t            4 0      y e a r s         o l d      w i t h              a         m o u s t a c h e ,                     I        t h i n k


         Signed                                                                                                                       Signature witnessed by J n s p . M o r r i c e
         *               m    (ppUcaW*.
                                                                                                              WG * 1 3
                                                                                                       (Am ended 9.8 7)
                                       West Midlands Police
                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70»


Continuation of statem en t of . . . _______________
 just a small dark moustache on _his top. lip; I t a u g h t he had .dark. h a i r ......
as well.       There was nothing different on his uniform from other.policemen
 I've seen except, that, he was wearing, a flat .cap, .which, was all .dark. with.....
a badge a t .the. front... The .other, policeman was .a. bit. younger .about. 3 6 .y.e.ars..
oldbut        I never noticed, him.much, because he .stood, slightly, behind, the......
.first one, .but. I did see he .had. a. helmet on .and.not. a. flat, cap) .and.he. was.
clean shaven.          I. think he .had dark. hair. as. w el l,..The. olde.r .one .sppke. .tp. .us..
and I thought that his accent .was. local.... He .said. to. us. ."Your .here .early...
 I've got Steye McMAHON in the sweep, stake,. what .do. you. think of .my.chances.?.",
           a i d ,'.'Very, good because.h e .score.'s. a lot.'.'..Then. the. policeman.said.,.
 "Have you got .tickets?"             We told him we had and .he. said,. .".If .you hadn.' t....
have_ had, I would_ have got you intp the. ground for. a. tenner..."...He .then.....
said,"So tell your mate.s."               He _half, started to go away. but. stopped.and. said.
 "How much did you pay for your tickets?"                               said,'.'£6 ...0.0. each." . .The.
policeman then said,"Tell your.mates its £10.00.for.sitting down and £ 5 .00.
 for standing u p ."                  said,"Are you ^going to .see the. match" and the
policeman said, "Yes".              During this time the other piplicemaii..never spoke, at..
all.     They then walked off and turned along the path by the river.                              About
2   hour later I saw the same two policemen come back from the river path and
stand at the turnstile perimeter fence with some other policemen that were,
there and some fans and then after a few minutes they came back to the blue
concertina gate they had come out of, knocked on it, the door opened and they
went back inside.            The only thing about the policeman that spoke to us, was
that he was swearing alot whilst speaking.                        I'm not sure if I could recognise
these policemen again.              Whilst these two policemen were talking to us there
were no others nearby, nor were there any fans nearby.                              Just a final point
about the two policemen, the one that spoke to us was well built without being
fat and he was quite tall.                The second one was slightly taller than the other,
and he was slimmer.




Signed                                                 Signature w itn essed by . .. JOSR .Mo.r.r.i.c.e.
                                                   \s k J ^   AziCpJS     s is tjL ^ jL ,    T
 ^ V Y        O'K^




                                                                                             >-r>^


      A/ ^"K...         i/--^''-.^sf'-"t^j

       A -\yC „..& ^'      t-ir- a—'^>      >




d j*i-r .M fiJ b l   Je^t-~»Hr,   'h ri-Jt.^J:,     /


                                                                        *L-*i               <,,^.-/v-...f.



                                         4rXJb$v                                -"' •£*~*e t,«


                                                                                                             '/
                                                    ~— ^ v At-ol('c)



INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                       Rt Hon Sir Peter Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER                                    50 Queen Anne's Gate
                                                    London SW1H 9AT


   NEWS RELEASE
XI May 1989               Press Contacts: Leeds
                                                      x2418

                                          London


OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE NOTE FOR NEWS EDITORS:


         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY t ORAL HEARINGS


On Monday 15 May at 10.30am, Lord Justice Taylor will open the
oral hearings in the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry at Sheffield
Town Hall,

On Monday only the hearings will commence at 10.30am, adjourn
for lunch at 1.00pm, reconvene at 2pm end adjourn for the day at
5pm. On subsequent days hearings will be from 10am to 1pm and
2pm to 5pm Mondays to Thursdays and 10am to 12.30pm and 1.30pm
to 3.30pm on Fridays.

An initial facility was provided for filming and photography
before the preliminary hearing began on 28 April. No further
facility can be provided either before or after the daily oral
hearings.

Representatives of the press and broadcast media who wish to
attend the oral hearings on Monday should be at Sheffield Town
Hall at 10.15am for 10.30am. What is normally the public gallery
of the chamber has been made available exclusively for the use
of reporters. This accomodation offers between 40 and 50 places
with benches for reporters covering the hearings.

No television filming or photography of any kind will be
permitted in the Town Hall building during the Inquiry. Sound
recording of the proceedings will also not be allowed.

Order of proceedings
A notice of the order of proceedings together with a list of
witnesses giving evidence that day will be available on the
morning of each day of the oral hearings.
   Approaches to witnesses
   Lord Justice Taylor has made it clear that the witnesses should
   not be interviewed in any way before they have completed their
   evidence to the inquiry, if this request is ignored it may have
   an adverse effect on the difficult task Lord Justice Taylor has
   to carry out.

   Statements
   Copies of witnesses' statements on a 'check against delivery'
   basis will be made available in the Press Hoorn as each witness
   is called to testify.

   Transcripts
   Full transcripts of proceedings will be available by
   mid-afternoon for the morning hearings and the following morning
   for the afternoon hearings. These will be available from the
   Secretariat on request at £10 per copy. News organisations will
   be billed as necessary for copies requested. Contact
                    |of COI on the Inquiry Press Room number -


   Models.plana diagrams etc.
   Where necessary, maps plans and diagrams will be displayed
   outside the chamber. There will be no objections to reporters
   viewing material inside the chamber during the lunch adjournment
   or once the day's proceedings are over.

   Technical terms
   The Secretariat and the Press Liaison Officers will be prepared
   to offer any assistance as may be required in the explanation of
   technical terms used during the hearings.

   Press room f
   In addition to the gallery, a press room in the Town Hall
   building with full telephone facilities will be provided. It
   will be possible for representatives of the media to follow the
   proceedings on a closed circuit television monitor in the press
   room. Filming or tape recording from the monitor will not be
   permitted.

   Further enquiries about the press arrangements should be made to
   either       '        in London on             or            [ in
   Sheffield/Leeds on




£/£' d                                                  Z S :8 0 1 1 - 5 0 - 6 8 ,
ACC(SS)

Just by way of a reminder - I have highlighted
the action you have undertaken to do.
                                     -           13 -

                            CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS

 8.5.89 cont.

 5.25 pm - Fax letter received by ACC(SS) from Mr Metcalf (Hammond Suddards)
 asking that final draft of Chief Constable's proof of evidence be ready in
 time for discussion at meeting with Counsel at 2.00 pm on 9.5.89.  Copy passed
 to Chief Supt Wain.


 9.5.89

ACC(SS) - Mr Woodward QC, Mr Limb, Mr Metcalf and Miss Norcliffe met at Police
Headquarters at 2.00 pm and held their own discussions with regard to intended
policy (no police involvement required at this meeting).  Prior to the
commencement of the meeting Mr Woodward had the opportunity to speak with the
Chief Constable.

At 3.30 pm Mr Metcalf received a faxed letter via his office from the
Treasury Solicitor, Mr Brummell, outlining the main general criticisms
levelled at the South Yorkshire Police from the evidence available to Lord
Justice Taylor to date.  Mr Metcalf together with his colleagues as at the
previous paragraph considered the letter and as a result Mr Woodward
instructed that a copy be passed to the Chief Constable, ACC(SS) and the South
Yorkshire enquiry team (Chief Supt Wain) for information purposes o n l y .

At 6.30 pm this date ACC(SS) discussed the day's events with Mr Metcalf.    He
indicated informally that having now received the material collated by the
South Yorkshire enquiry team it was crucial that the QC and himself (Mr
Metcalf) fully apprise themselves with the facts presented.   However, it
seemed from their discussions they were likely to submit Sections I, II, III
and IV in their present form.   Section V would be limited to factual comment
up to about 2.00 pm.   Factual items of sections VI and VII would also be
submitted.  These they intended to distil or amend on their own word processor
and the proof of evidence would then be submitted, possibly as late as Monday
morning (15.5.89).   This would follow the further meeting on Friday 12 May
when queries obviously would need to be answered after consideration of the
documents.

An important consideration for the police was the question of a liaison
officer/team to assist Mr Woodward and Mr Metcalf asked if we would consider
this in advance of 12.5.89 so as to be in a position to provide him with an
answer at that time.  He felt it would be useful to have at least one member
of the enquiry team present at all times who could give a positive response to
Mr Woodward in the event of a sudden query being raised by other Counsel.   I
promised that he would have the full backing of the South Yorkshire Force in
this regard (ACC(SS) to discuss with Chief Supt Wain).

Mr Metcalf informed me that Hammond Suddards are taking a small suite of
offices in Campo Lane - telephone and fax numbers to be notified in due
course.

Regarding the meeting on 12.5.89 it was not anticipated that the seven
principal officers would be required but he would like the following officers
to attend - ACC(SS), Chief Supt Wain, Chief Supt Mole and Chief Insp
Bettison.  He did not anticipate the meeting would be prolonged.
                           CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


Mr Metcalf on behalf of Mr Woodward said he was most appreciative and grateful
for the dedicated work and application of the members of the enquiry team and
asked that this be passed on to the officers.


9.5.89 cont.

ACC(SS) - letter received this date by the Chief Constable from Davies Arnold
Cooper (solicitors) concerning the theft of two tapes from the Sheffield
Wednesday ground.  The letter was shown to Mr Woodward QC who requested
details of what in fact occurred.  Copy of letter handed personally to
Mr Metcalf.

ACC(SS) spoke with Inspector Towell who indicated that an action was prepared
by Det Chief Supt Addis whereupon DS Oughton visited the Club and was told by
the Secretary that on the advice of his solicitors the tapes would not be
released to the South Yorkshire Police.

Subsequently that date (believed to be 17.4.89) DS Oughton received a call
from the Sheffield Wednesday Club to the effect that two tapes had been lost
but they were inconsequential (it appears that paragraphs three  and five of
Davies Arnold Cooper letter dated 4.5.89 are inaccurate).

Indeed, the records at Hammerton Road show that the theft was not reported
until 21.4.89 and then by the Secretary of the Club to a DCI Tope of the West
Midlands Police.

Det Chief Insp Brooke is obtaining details from HOLMES and DS Oughton has been
requested to submit a full report - a copy of same to be forwarded to Hammond
Suddards for the information of Mr Woodward.  ACC(SS) to speak with Chief Supt
Wain re. this to ensure correspondence is sent as above.
                                                        DCC/JEL
                                                        10 May 1991


NOTE FOR FILE;


HILLSBOROUGH - POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY


Following the letter received from the PCA dated 7 May 1991 which effectively
starts discussion between ourselves regarding the differences in the
interpretation of the Investigating Officer's report between the PCA and
ourselves, having forwarded the letter to Mr Leslie Sharp (Chief Constable,
Cumbria) I discussed its contents with him this date.    ACC(Staff Services),
Graham Moore, was present also.

Mr Sharp said he had takeoi the liberty of forwarding a copy of the letter
to Chief Superintendent M Poster (West Midlands Police) who led the enquiry.
Mr Foster is aware of its confidentiality.

Mr Sharp advances the view that he believes his recommendations are
substantiable.   He is reviewing the evidence with Mr Foster and as part
of this is planning a two-day meeting with him, after which he will
communicate with us.   This is being dealt with as a matter of some urgency
and his hope is that we can finalise discussion with the PCA, at the latest,
by the end of May.

Mr Sharp pointed out that the PCA, at paragraph 5(b) of their letter, have
taken into account the proceedings before the HM Coroner.    This means that
he, and he suggests ourselves, should look carefully at the transcripts
of the evidence given by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent
Murray to see if anything new emerged of significance.

        Action:

        a.   DCC and ACC(SS) to obtain       and read Investigating Officer's
             reports   concerning   Chief     Superintendent Duckenfield  and
             Superintendent Murray.

        b.   DCC and ACC(SS) to read and     evaluate   the   Inquest   transcripts
             (Sgt Morgan asked to obtain).

        c.   ACC(SS) to prepare letter to PCA acknowledging their letter
             of 7.5.91 and promising an expeditious response but pointing
             out the strangeness {because of his recent appointment) to the
             evidence and the need in these circumstances to consult with
             the Investigating Officer.




Deputy Chief Constable


copy to ACC(Staff Services)
                         i



       /3 5 \                    THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
       iS           Si           0»een  Anncfs Chambers
       VT W    m g !             28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS.
                                 Telephones Direct Lina 01
              — ^                              Switchboard 01-i!10 3000
                                 Telex 017564 i        GTN 210
                                 Fax No. 01 -220 6006 - 210-3488
                                 O X , No. 2318 Victoria

          Messrs Hammond Suddards

          i    S         s   r                                                                           08
         BRADFORD^ BD1 3LR                                                                    ^FCM/PAB
       •------- —— — ------------------------------------------—                               9 Mav 1989


                                                               BY FAX AND LETTF.R




         HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY                       -    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

         You will recall that at the pre-inquiry meeting on April 2&th Lord Justic i Taylor
         indicated that any body against whom any allegation was to be made would be informed
         ot it and the substance of the evidence supporting it.

        You will appreciate that the task of assembling the evidence for the Inai iry is a
        formidable one. And statements are still being taken. However, it seemed riRit to let
        E?* caV! u                  b e a „ p r e lil in in a r 5' indication of criticisms which may be !e celled at
                   ^ o r k s h i r e p ° i l c * a s S0 0n ^            possible before the commencemeni of the
        inquiry.   We suspect that you are already aware of the general thrust of c riticisms
        which have been made and that what is set out In this letter will be no surpris* : to you.

        available To^us*41"6             ^              g e n e ra l c ritic is ^ s   which so far appear from the evidence

        !•          Failure to take any adequate steps to control supporters so that the crus h, which
                      ut t up from dbout 2.20 to 2.30pm outside the Leppings Lane entranc i to the
                    ground and which led to the decision to open 'C' gate because of a c erceived
                    danger to life, did not occur. In particular, there were not proper arrar gements
                    tn                    St a far *n*u8h d i s t a n t from tho grflUn / a n d me jff iclant
                    officers were available to control the crowd outside the turnstiles, Having
                    regard to the limited space available, the disposition of mounted police may not
                    have been of any use and may have constituted a positive danger. It she uld
                    have been anticipated that many s u p p o r t e r s would a r r i v e shortly b e f o r e t ick-off
                    and that some would not have tickets. Steps should have been taken to top
                    non-ticket holders getting near the ground and adding to the congestion.


                                                                             1.




£• T
     2.
                                                                                         ound and
                                                                                        s and the
                                                                                           (if any)
                                                     - < - '« * ~ T r s                   must be
                                                                                        ivell have
                                                                                        to ensure
           th l *?. ^ Wt $- ^ n5[ Pol,ce ° r steward presence to prevent those enterins going to
           have h          u ! f 0nt0 the already overcrowded Pens 3 and 4           It ought to
                                                       presence aiJ ^ c o m i n g in he gates
           US       I       *?         the tunnei because of inadequacy of sicnine and because
           the tunnel was the only visible way to the terracing.              8 g
  3.
           ou*httef« ^ ere ,taken ^ monitor properly the state of Pens 3 and *             Officers
                   *      e       en statloned in the tunnel and/or at the rear of the pens and
           fecome t o o f c T '1 T 1 Wi't , h M e ? ‘If front have “ « ■ " *      *Vp'ri 5 did not
           it w S e s ^ n t l i ' ,n .       w" th a ,^ ere *«* likely to be a full house and that
           iL f      s ential to ensure an even distribution of spectators in all the pens on
                                              the decisi°" ^    b'      -    u      r   efpool the


          Pen™3PS
          rens        d « took too longCri'shad
                  5 and                         andto“ what
                                         to react       )05' was
                                                              theirhappening
                                                                     liv« - th« “Thev
                                                                                  dicers in front of
                                                                                      <e*nr
                                                                                            ed to be
          There"! in terms ° f Prevention of disorder and pitch invas&n rather tha i safety,
          I S ZaSw° pr0f>! r 8uidance given to the indiViduai o f f i c e s b lctu se J o proper
          Si t„ ,h be“             *o deal with overcrowding in th . p m          The „a t ' leading
          ?nlt , n f ?‘,Ch Were not °Pened ln <ime and, when they were offic >rs were
          th l^ ifc , u T     ?rev,er* peof,le Setting out. Officers seemed not to kr ow what
          SSSi , „ h a d° ?"d' al!h0u*h m‘ n>' i^ividual officers showed creat e . ence of
          was happening was                                  * '" * *                        of what

 5.
                                                                                        em ergency
                                                        v t i may n 'o ^ £ n «
                                                         t
          expeditiously as they should have been and K i d S T , ™ a n ,™ e n ts (tailed as
                                                                                  Had been
          co o r d w l ^ ^        8*ln access ,0 the ground. Help for th . injured was not
          what had                                              SyS" m     ' XPliln    Sf ectators
6.
                                                                                      vfould be
                                                                                        ing the
        t h k 3 muc^,®arli®r stage* It seems that it was not until about a .55 that
        this step was considered and by then it was thought to be too late bec-i use the
        k“ic kk -ooff                                                                   lat the
        k          ff em u ,? be
                       must   hingpostponed
                                    °m - ‘1 and
                                              shoUld  have
                                                    that    b« "
                                                         adequate  step s™were
                                                                            “ earlier
                                                                                taken
                                                                                       to giv e
       haSv i anr e V °          trying tQ fiet in that there was a postponement. Th might
       have relieved the pressure and obviated the need to open the g a te s.
Should any further specific matters which might result in c r i t i c ™
attention, we shall of course let you know of them.                   criticisms come to our




                                      DAVID BRUMMELL
                                  Assistant Treasury Solicitor

                                                2.
               TREASURY SOLICITORS LETTER RE. 'GENERAL CRITICISMS WHICH MAY BE
                LEVELLED AGAINST THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AT THE FORTHCOMING
                                    COMMITTEE OF ENQUIRY'



Failure to take adequate steps to                 1.    (a)   POLICING BY CONSENT - Crowds of sport
control supporters outside Leppings                           enthusiasts endeavouring to gain access
Lane Turnstiles, as the crush built                           to a sports event.   The task of the
from 2.20 to 2.30 pm.                                         police on this occasion was to assist and
                                                              marshal.


                                                              There are further steps that the police
                                                              could have taken at 2.20/2.30 pm - the
                                                              ultimate being dispersal of the
                                                               increasing crowd - but this is
                                                              unprecedented in South Yorkshire and
                                                              would clearly have been unacceptable to
                                                               the public.


                                                              The suggestion of 'greater control'     is
                                                               tantamount to a call for public order
                                                               tactics similar to those used in hostile
                                                              situations.    The police were not faced
                                                              with a hostile crowd (at that stage).


                                                              Much encouragement (often unheeded) to
                                                               supporters to enter the ground.     (See
                                                               statement of PC Scott who dispossesses
                                                               men of beer cans and insists that they
                                                               move towards stadium.)



No proper arrangements to check                    1.   (b)   ENABLING SUPPORTERS TO REACH THEIR
(block?) supporters at a distance from                         DESTINATION - The urban area around
 the ground.                                                  Hillsborough does not lend itself to a
                                                               perimeter cordon tactic.   By 'checking'
                                                               the approaching fans (who were,
                                                               incidentally, approaching from two
                                                              directions) the build up of crowd, and
                                                               resultant problems, would have been
                                                               transferred to residential areas.


                                                              By pushing back the 'check' as far as
                                                              Penistone Road North, one would
                                                              compromise the segregation arrangements.
                                                              Herries Road was the point of arrival for
                                                              Nottingham supporters.


                                                              Several attempts were made to establish a
                                                              cordon at the perimeter gates to the
                                                         ground, by closing the gates and placing
                                                         a row of horses behind.      The crowd
                                                         rejected this control and determinedly
                                                         forced through the cordon (graphic
                                                         accounts in mounted officers statements).
                                                         Again, dispersal tactics were the only
                                                         realistic alternatives which were quite
                                                         inappropriate for dealing with football
                                                         supporters.


                                                         There was an unprecedented and unexpected
                                                         urgency about this crowd.




(c)   Insufficient officers available for     1.   (c)   DEPLOYMENT
      control outside the turnstiles.
                                                         1 C/Insp., 2 Insp.     )
                                                         4 Sgts and 40 PC's     ) in situ throughout
                                                         5 mounted officers     ) matches 1988
                                                                                    f igu res


                                                         1 Insp., 2 Sgts and    ) accompanied
                                                         16 PC's                ) Liverpool train
                                                         + 8 mounted            ) contingent at
                                                         of f icers             ) 2.08 and stayed
                                                                                    at Leppings Lane
                                                                                    Turnstiles.


                                                         D/Supt, 6 Detective    ) Rov ing
                                                         Officers               ) commission in
                                                         2 dog handlers         ) Leppings Lane


                                                         1 Inspector            ) Desptached or
                                                         3 Sgts and 16 PC's     ) deviated from
                                                         4 mounted officers     ) other duties to
                                                                                    assist with
                                                                                    control.


(d)   Deployment of mounted police officers
      may have been ineffective and           1.   (d)   THE EFFICACY OF MOUNTED DEPLOYMENT - The
      positively dangerous.                              deployment of mounted officers is a
                                                         matter for experienced supervisors such
                                                         as Inspector Hand-Davis who will comment
                                                         upon the expediency and risks of using
                                                         horses in this situation.        See Paragraph
                                                         1.43 of ACPO     guide to policing football.


                                                         An affidavit has been previously prepared
                                                         by the South Yorkshire Police justifying
                                                         the need for, and use of, police horses
                                                         in crowd situations.       This is appended.
                                    1.    (e)    DEALING WITH NON-TICKET HOLDERS - Supt.
                                                 McKay appeals on BBC Radio Merseyside
Steps should have been taken to
                                                 14.4.89 - for non-ticket holders to stay
prevent non ticket holders adding
to the congestion near the                       away.

ground.
                                                 Similar request published in Liverpool
                                                 football programme at football match
                                                 prior to 15.4.89.


                                                 Checkpoints were installed at
                                                 Oughtibridge and Tankersley, miles from
                                                 the Stadium, whose duties include
                                                 checking for non-ticket holding groups.


                                                 However, where individual non ticket
                                                 holders are intent on pursuing their
                                                 right to pass and repass along the
                                                 highway, then there are few sanctions
                                                 available to the police.    See comments of
                                                 NCCL, quoted in 'Star' of 9.5.89 which
                                                 defend the rights of non-ticket holding
                                                 football supporters to go where they
                                                 please.


                                                 Nevertheless, there is a great deal of
                                                 evidence of police officers constantly
                                                 moving non-ticket holders away from the
                                                  turnstile area.    (For example statements
                                                  of mounted police officers).


                                     2.    (a)    LIAISON BETWEEN GROUND CONTROL AND SECTOR
                                                 COMMANDERS - Significant that all
Lack of liaison/communication
                                                  requests have been passed through ground
between internal and external
                                                  control.    Copy of PC Bichard's Log
Commanders.
                                                  appended.    Therefore, Sector Commander £S
                                                  providing information to Ground Control
                                                  on which decisions are later based.
                                                  Problems at Leppings Lane turnstiles
                                                  monitored throughout on CCTV being viewed
                                                  by Ground Commander.


                                                  Talk through facility enabled all
                                                  commanders (indeed all personnel) to
                                                  monitor all messages.



                                           (b)    COMMUNICATIONS PROBLEMS - There were,
General difficulties with
                                                  undoubtedly, communication problems and
radio communication.
                                                  these are fully documented in Part VII of
                                                  the main document.
Ineffective tannoy announcements.   (c)   PUBLIC ADDRESS ANNOUNCEMENTS - The police
                                          had previously insisted that the present
                                          public address system be installed at
                                          Leppings Lane turnstiles.


                                          PC Ryan (see statement) made several
                                          requests over the system for calm and for
                                          people to stop pushing.


                                          To supplement these announcements, Supt.
                                          Marshall requested that similar messages
                                          be passed via a mobile public address
                                          system.   Inspector Ellis (see statement)
                                          took control of the equipment which was
                                          positioned to face supporters trying to
                                          enter the turnstiles.     He claims to have
                                          shouted through the loudspeaker,
                                          demanding that people stop pushing.


                                          Given the limitations of the equipment
                                          and the cacophony of noise from the
                                          crowd, the police made every effort to
                                          communicate with the crowd.


No steps taken to steward those     (d)   STEPS TAKEN TO STEWARD THOSE ENTERING THE
entering the ground away from             GROUND AWAY FROM CENTRE ENCLOSURES -
 the already over-crowded centre          Spontaneous decision to take action by
enclosures.                               opening gates based on urgency of need.


                                          Superintendent Murray attempts, in vain,
                                          to contact S.W.F.C. safety and security
                                          officer by the club radio system.


                                          At gate 'A', a serial of officers, on
                                          their own initiative, formed a 'funnel'
                                          to prevent a stampede.


                                          Gates 'A' and 'B' did not lead directly
                                          into 'overcrowded central enclosures'.


                                          Chief Supt. Duckenfield reasoned that the
                                          large area of the concourse inside the
                                          ground would enable the pressure, caused
                                          by the crowd, to be dissipated.


                                          Police action simply compounded a problem
                                          that was already caused by bad
                                          steward ing.
3.   (a)   No monitoring of the filling of      3.    (a)      THE FILLING OF PENS 3 AND 4 - Stewards
           pens 3 and 4.                                       responsibility
                                                               i)    Legally supported - arguments in
                                                                     main report see para. 3.37
                                                               ii)   Advice of ACPO - see para 1.49
                                                                     of 'Guide to Policing Football'
                                                               iii) Policy of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                     see main report para 2.26
                                                               iv)   Stewards on the day advised by Insp.
                                                                     White - see statement.


                                                               Whilst BBC footage and others'
                                                               perceptions indicate that pens are
                                                               overcrowded, officers on the spot did not
                                                               perceive that.    (E.G. see statements of
                                                               PC's Smith & Helliwell).


                                                               No means of counting into pens.


     (b)   No attempts to evenly distribute            (b)     DISTRIBUTION OF SPECTATORS THROUGHOUT
           spectators in all the pens.                         PENS - Gates between pens locked in the
                                                               'open' position by Inspector White.


                                                               Allow supporters to 'find their own
                                                               level'.


                                                               Again stewards responsibility - if police
                                                               are responsible for routes, turnstiles,
                                                               concourse, searching, lost property etc.
                                                               What is a steward's responsibility?


                                                               [Point of interest: ex Superintendent
                                                               Locke of 'F ' Division and previously
                                                               responsible for policing Hillsborough,
                                                               who is now employed as security chief at
                                                               the Club, may claim precedent.     There
                                                               have been occasions when the police have
                                                               supervised filling the pens at League
                                                               matches which have, unlike this match,
                                                               begun with locked and fully enclosed
                                                               pens.


                                                               N.B. Locke's experience of policing
                                                               Hillsborough is pre-Popplewell and pre-
                                                               Green Guide.]


4.   (a)   Officers took too long to react to   4.     (a)
           the crushing in the centre pens.          and (b)   INITIAL REACTION TO INCIDENT - Mindframe
                                                               of police officers may well have been
                                                               atuned to crowd    disorder, they have much

     (b)   They seemed to be thinking in
           terms of prevention of disorder
           rather than safety.
experience of such incidents.     Fellow
spectators were even slower to realise
the nature of the incident.


As soon as the situation was appreciated,
the officers took immediate and positive
action, disregarding instructions to
obtain authorisation of Ground Control
before evacuating pens.


Officers were then faced with an
impregnable enclosure which was
surrounded by fences, railings and packed
supporters who were reluctant to
surrender their position on the terraces.
The emergency gates are only wide enough
to accommodate one person at a time and
quickly became blocked.     The gate only
opens to 90° thereby giving access to one
officer from one sife of the gate.


Police officers were, like other members
of the public, making futile attempts to
knock down the fencing which formed a
barrier to their assistance - Many
officers refer to a sense of helplessness
and vain rescue attempts.


There was a great deal of action, hidden
from view, at the rear of the enclosure -
officers having entered via the tunnel at
3.02 pm (see statements of Insp. Bullas,
PC Martin and PC Aitken) Supt. Murray led
the resue efforts at this location.


Also police activity via both sides of
the railings (see statements of PS
Gutcher and PS Payne) was quickly in
progress.


The police quickly formed a chain of
officers leading onto the pitch from the
emergency gate, under the direction of
the senior officer present at that
location - Chief Supt. Nesbit.     The chain
rescued and passed on the dead and
injured who were treated accordingly by
the officers who happened to be on the
end of the chain.
                                                        Supt. Greenwood was directing efforts
                                                        within the terracing by addressing the
                                                        crowd, and police officers inside the pen
                                                        via a loud hailer.


                                                        The emergency plan was almost immediately
                                                        invoked.


                                                        NO GUIDANCE, NOR PLANS FOR DEALING WITH
     (c)   No proper guidance had been given
           to individual officers regarding             OVERCROWDING - Police do have an

           overcrowding in the pens and no plan         evacuation procedure for fire and

           has been prepared for such a                 emergencies in general.

           contingency.
                                                        Overcrowding was not an expected
                                                        phenomenon.    Prevention of overcrowding
                                                        through effective stewarding has
                                                        generally been sufficient.


5.   (a)   There were inadequate contingency            CONTINGENCY PLANS FOR AN EMERGENCY - See

           plans to deal with the emergency             Appendix 44 which minutes a meeting,
                                                        chaired by Superintendent Murray, with
           which arose.
                                                        fire and ambulance authorities.


                                                        An ambulance officer was on standby, the
                                                         fire brigade declined to be represented.
                                                         In normal circumstances, together with
                                                        St. Johns Ambulance Brigade, this would
                                                         be adequate for any situation which might
                                                        arise.


                                                        The Force major incident procedure was
                                                         initiated at 3.06 pm by calling for
                                                        Operation Support.


     (b)   The emergency services were not              CONTACT WITH EMERGENCY SERVICES -
                                                         Ambulance called at 3.07 pm (although
           called as expeditiously as they
                                                         ambulance officers were on standby at the
           should have been.
                                                         ground and had responsibility - see
                                                         appendix 44 - for co-ordinating
                                                         response.)


                                                         Fire Brigade called at 3.13 pm.


                                                         ENABLING ACCESS TO EMERGENCY VEHICLES -
     (c)   Insufficient arrangements had been
                                                         Access to Hillsborough Stadium was clear.
           made for access by the emergency services.
                                                         At 3.12 pm roads around the Leppings Lane
                                                         area were closed to all but emergency
                                                         vehicles.    Motorcycle wing were mobilised
                                                         at 3.17 pm to assist the free passage of
                                                         emergency vehicles.
     (d)   Help for the injured was not           (d)   CO-ORDINATING HELP FOR INJURED - There
           co-ordinated.                                was a period of chaos which, arguably, is
                                                        to be expected in the aftermath of such
                                                        an unprecedented and unclear incident.
                                                        During this period the police, like
                                                        everyone else, did not know what they had
                                                        to co-ordinate.


                                                        When the extent of the tragedy was known
                                                        the police assisted medical staff to
                                                        prioritise the injured for treatment.
                                                        (See PC Turner).


     (e)   No use was made of the tannoy system   (e)   ADDRESSING THE PUBLIC TO MARSHAL
           to explain the incident to other             ASSISTANCE - Chief Superintendent
           spectators or to organise their              Duckenfield made the decision not to
           ass istance.                                 evacuate the ground, and not to report
                                                        the abandonment of the match, to ensure
                                                        that spectators stayed in the stadium and
                                                        kept the access roads clear for emergency
                                                        vehicles.    Relating the full extent of
                                                        the tragedy might have compromised this
                                                        plan.


                                                        Nevertheless, Supt. Greenwood went around
                                                        the ground addressing sections of the
                                                        crowd by loudhailer.    He asked for their
                                                        patience and calm whilst the emergency
                                                        services dealt with a serious incident.
                                                        Any doctors who made themselves     known
                                                        were accompanied to Leppings Lane
                                                        terraces to assist (see statement of
                                                        Chief Inspector Price).


                                                        Furthermore, the    Liverpool manager was
                                                        later invited, by Chief Superintendent
                                                        Duckenfield, to address the Liverpool
                                                        supporters by tannoy, on the nature of
                                                        the incident.


6.         Consideration should have been               CONSIDERATION OF DEFERRING KICK - OFF -

           given to deferring the kick off
           at a much earlier stage than it              2.30 pm - Considerd and rejected (see

           was.                                         Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
                                                        statement)


                                                        2.55 pm - Considered again but decided
                                                        that the opportunity had passed.
                                                         ;2 8 - 4 -8 9                5 :3 2 P M      ;                           0 2 7 4 7 3 7 5 4 7 -}                                       0 7 4 2 5 2 3 4 0 9 ;# 1
                         X    0274 737547                                     /                             flu    H A M M O N D         B R A D                                                                              01




  HAMM OND SUDDARDS                                                                                                                                            j          i        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                      _ _   ....                                   -       —   *- - - -       2—       ;
                                                                                                                                                                                           i         x
                                        S       O        L   I    C   I   T       O    R   S                                  ;            V

            a o n o ^ E r                           j O n S H 3 nfutft                         6 N A ^ t E ' t f ’f t O              COKSUI.ti.hlS:                                            EMPIRE H O W «
 o m E vO f t i Ew s                                itsR. S h u >TiC w'0*Tm                                       » O G E * w Sv0P i » 0 5 *                                                   tOPiCCAOILLV
 M O i * E L £ .C * £ G S0 N                        P E U R C ‘■ ' E i O i . F                 vnPH W . H OO ' *                     V B O E i ^ O M D “ £*.»»                                 BV 54 6 f O ft O M H JL*
                                                                                                                                                                                                 \
jO*N 0 . D E K W S                                  C«#:St0PHt* W jONt S                       P*‘JL S r/ViS&R                       iam w . iv«0 iO‘<
v i c w m t- S H £ p r f E » 0                      AMDB£Wft                                    W.»i<3-iT                                                                                      1eW   p   * 0 W £ iM J 4 (   j h j   »
PE IE F N . wi l S U ha m                           £>MONR B V E IL                            6t(j*STA vtRiTV                                                                                 " U M i f j O !
J. » ( C K A * D * f l C w E *                      S ' w O V «.iuijuw                         H O L L O S DftA*6                                                                              v u x ,v6. » r ; o
B A & 0 A 5 A w . f s a *j c e                      »ICH*A0W. WADE.JMiTH                       P C H A B O B U ' S ' . ’S
c, N o a n u n o ^                                  jOhs Q B E C K f i T T                     D a V O W . K t*utiTtG£                                                                         fAX|C*"i)T2"iJ7




 F A C S I M I L E T R A N S M I S S I O N
 O j a REP:
                    P C M / P A B
                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
TO.
                   K .   S .  A i d c r s o n l i s q . ,
                   A s s j..stai i t C h i e f   C o n s t a b l e
FAX MO:
                    0 7 4 2        5 2 3 4 0 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
OATf:                                                                                                                 TIME;                                                                                                                 ■'I
                    8 t h       M a y       ,           1 9 8 9                            5 . 2 5          p . m .

f V j M 3 = a O F P A G E S ( I H C u U MfJG* T H I S S H s F l 1
                   3                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            'P
IFTHIS T ^ V ^ i S S l O h ! I S f < > r F U l X Y O S I E G I 3 U R S C S f t ' S O , - \ £ A S S T B - E f V O N S ( f f i M ) r 3 4 ? C O
ROJ   BY:                                                                         ;2 8 — 4 -8 9               5 :3 2 P M          ;                        0 2 7 4 7 3 7 5 4 7 -)                             0742523409;# 2
                                                      X 0274 737547                                                                       flu     HAMMOND              BRAD                                                                02




      H am m ond Su d d a rd s
                                                       S O L              1C I T 0 R S
      ALAN I.BOTIOMUEV                                     JOHN .G. HELLER                                 G. N. IAN GREENFIELD                          CONSULTANTS:                            EMPIRE HOUSE
      0. TREVOR LEWIS                                      IAN R. iHUTTLEWORTH                             STEPHEN GALE                                  ROGER W, SUDDARDS c».                   10 PICOADILLY
      MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                   PETER      METCALF                              MARKW. HILTON                                 SIR DESMOND HEAR                        BRADFOIRD BD1 SLR
      JOHN D. t>E MAIN                                     CHRISlfi OPHERW. JONES                          PAUL R. MANSER                                IANW, WHITSON
      MtCHAEL L. SHEf>HKftp                                ANDRE N R. JORDAN                               JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                                                                    TELEPH 3 N E     (0 2 7 4 ) 7 3 4 7 0 0

      PETER N. WILBRAHAM                                   SIMON *. 6. STSLL                               STUART A. VERITY                                                                      TELEX '17501
      J,RICHARD ARCHER                                     SIMON H. INMAN                                  RONALD S. DRAKE
      BARBARA W. FRANCE                                    RICHAfj DW. WADE-SMITH                                                                                                                M.D.X, h0 11720
                                                                                                           RICHARD BURNS
      C. NOEL HUTTON                                       JOHN ,BECKETT                                   DAVID W. K.ARMI1ASE                                                                   FAX (02' ’4) 737547


      OUR REF                                   P C M / P A I .                          YOUR REF.               K S A                                                   date         8th      May,           1 9 8 9




       D e a r                S t u a r t ,

       H i l l s b o r o u g h                             I n q i j ir'

       T h a n k    y o u     f o r yoi; r                                        l e t t e r        o f       5 t h     M a y ,                c o n t a i n i n g                i n f o r m a t i o n           o n
       v a r i o u s     p o i n t s .

       I h a v o                         n o t i f i e        d N. r .       W o o d w a r d    o                f     t h e a r r               a   n    g e m e n      t s      f    o r a t t e n d i n g     t h e
      m a t c h     a                   n d ,    o f           c o u r s e ,      h e a n d M                   r .      L i m b w               i   l   l     b o         a t   S     n i g H i l l     t o m o r r o w
      a f t e r n o                   o n .          I         n o t e t h a t t h e C h                         i e f     C o n s t             a   b   l e w o          u l d        l i k e t o    s . p e a k t o
      M r .    W o o                   d w a r d       o      n h i s a r r i v a l          a n                 d t h i s        s h            o   u   l d     p r      e s e n     t n o d i f f i c u l t y .

       I w           o   n d e r              i f        t h e       f i n a l d             r a f t    o f   t h        e C h i e f       C o n s t a b l e ' s    p r o o f     w i l l     b e
       r e a         d   y    i n             t i m    e       f o r     t h e m             e e t i n g    t o m        o r r o w a f t e r n o o n *           I f s o ,       :.t w o u l d
       b e           h   e l p f u          l      i   f      c o p i o s       c a          n b e a v a i l             a b l e    f o r    u s e d u r i n g      o u r     i n t e n d e d
      d i s          c   u s s i o          n s        w i t h         C o u n s e          l     i n t h e     a        f t e r n o o n .

       I         h    a v     e          ,in m i        n d          t h a t         s o m e        q u i t   e     s u b     s       t a n t i      a l      e d     i t     i n g      a n d    r    e a ( r a n      g e m e n t
      m    a    y        b    o         n e e d e      d      t     o p r o        d u c e          a f i      n a l v       e        r s i o n          a n d ,         o    f     c o u r s e ,         t m e          i s
       l    i   m    i t     e d      .         O n        t h     e o t h         e r      h    a n d ,        I f u l      l        y a p p         r e c i a      t e         t h a t a d          e d     c a t    e d
      t    e    a    m        o f           O f f i    c e r      s       h a s        b o o     n w o r      k i n g         v       i r t u a       l l y      n    o n      - s t o p t o           p r c t d u c    e t h e
       f    i    n   a l         d      r a f t         a n d           i f ,       n o t w      i t h s t    a n d i n     g            t h e i     r     e f f     o r     t s ,       i t c a      n n o t b        e
      r    e    a    d y          f     o r     t o    m o r      r o w a          f t e r      n o o n ,        t h e n              s o b e            it .




                                                                                                                                                                                                        /              c o n t d .




      K .    S .  A n d e r s o n    E s
      A s s i s t a n t    C h i e f   C o n s t a b l e ,
      S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e       P o l i c e

      F A X              0 7 4 2            5 2 3 4 0 9


      LEEDS OFFICES:                          BRITANNIA CH/JiMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632)       fELEX 657202                                                                       rAX 444794/421199
                                              JOSEPHS WELL HANOVEft WALK LEEDS LS3 1A3 TELEPHONE (0532) 450645 TELEX 55365 FAX 426866
RC U     BY:                                                                          ; 2 8 - 4 -8 9                      5 :33P M ;                                          0 2 7 4 7 3 7 5 4 7 -*                                    0742523409; # 3
                                                             2    0274        737547                                                                     Fl U    HAMMOND                 BRAD                                                                           S3




       H a m m o n d S u d d a rd s                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAGE NO.                     2




         I      s     h     o u      l      d      p e    r h a p      s       x p    l a i      n          m y        r e f e r          e n c e          t o         e    d i     t i n g          a n d        r      e a r r a     n g e m      e n t     .
         1      a    m          t     r      y i n g          t o       k e £ p       c o n       s  t      a n t     l y       i n           m i n d        n   o    t         o   n l y         t h e         s u      b s t a n     s e o     f t         h e
        i     n f     o     r m       a      t i o n          w h i    c h w e           w i      s  h          t o       p u t            b e f o r      e      t    h    e          i n q u    i r y ,          b      u t a l       bo t       h e
       p     r e      s     e n       t      a t i o      n o f            t h a t         i n     f o      r m a     t i o n ,                   I a     m       v    e   r y          c o n   s c i o u      j s          t h a t       i f     w e
        p     r o     d     u c      e           t o o         l a r    g e     a      d o c      u  m      e n t         t h e n       ,        h o w    e v    e    r         m    u c h        h e l p     f u       l      i n f   a r m a    t i o      n
         i   t        m     a y               c o n t     a i n ,           i k w     i l l            n     o t        s e r v e              t h e       n e    c    e   s s      a r y         p u r p    o s       e ,       b e   c a u s    e      i    t
       w     i l     l           n   o       t      b e        r e a   d ,        T    h e         p o       i n t         I a m               m a k i    n g        i      s         t h a t        t h e    r e          m a y       b e a          n e     e d
        t    o          b    a l      a       n c e        t h e         re<jj u i     r e m      e n       t o        f c o m             p r e h e       n s   i v       e n      e s s          a g a i    n s        t t h e
        r     e q      u     i r      e       m e n t          o f       p r e s e    n t a      t i       o n ,           s o t           h a t w         e      c a       n         p u t        b e f o     r e          t h e      i n q u i r y
        a        f     i     n a     l           v e r     s i o n         wl l i c     h i       s           e a s    i l y        r       e f e r r      e d       t      o ,          a s      w e l l          a     s be.t        big
        a     u t       h     o r       i      t a t i      v e .

        N o            d o u b t                  w e        c a n         d i s c u s s               t h i s            f u r t h e r              t o m o r r o w .


         Y o u r s                        s i n c e r e l y ,




         P e t e r                        C .      M e t c a l f
ACC(SS)

Have just up-dated clipboard 11 with Chief
Supt Mole - thought you would appreciate sight
of a copy.
    *>
*
                                             - 12 -


                                    CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS

         3.5.89

         3.00 pm - Statements of ACC(O), Mr Jackson, Superintendent Greenwood and
         Inspector Hand-Davis handed over to the West Midlands enquiry team.


         4.5.89

         Chief Supt Mole - message from Miss Norcliffe re. future conferences. Tuesday
         9 May 1989 - would like facilities for Mr Woodward QC, Mr Limb, Mr Metcalf and
         Miss Norcliffe to have a room at Police Headquarters to discuss tactics and to
         have the opportunity of speaking to officers if required. Would appreciate it
         if this facility could be available at 2.00 pm following which Mr Woodward and
         Mr Limb will accompany Chief Supts Mole and Wain to SWFC ground.

         On Friday 12.5.89 - would like facilities for a full-day conference at Police
         Headquarters commencing at 10.30 am with a view to preparing the following
         Monday's presentation of evidence.  Further details re. persons to be present
         will be made available as soon as possible.

         Agreed both the above and arrangements are in hand via Chief Insp Bettison.
         (DCC's office available and could be utilised for both meetings).
Supt Marshall telephoned (11 05 am) to leave
the following dates for ACC(SS) :

Tuesday    9 May   Sheffield Wednesday   v West Ham
Saturday  13 May   Sheffield Wednesday   v Middlesb'
Wednesday 17 May   Sheffield Wednesday   v Norwich
Other Document Form                     Date and time raised .   1 %(7~ j                ■*& {                   Number        s
Titia                     i'h n * k t e .fa d p c l &s                                                              £& & .-(
(Include sauna and any document number if relevant)


                                     yn/m _____ * ' *
Receivers instructions urgent action Jfci/'No       ? £V— 11&
                                                        _ftS                ------   ~v-<. , - ^ y j ^ ------------------- -
                                                                                                                                   Receiver



Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                                            Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                                                     Statement
                                                                                                                                   Reader


Indexed as indicated                                                                                                                Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                          0/M             SID




                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Further action no(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

MIR 15
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                    POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                    SNIG HILL
                                                                    SHEFFIELD 8 3 8 L T
                                                                    •TELEPHONE   07^2
                                                                    TELEX        5^7996
                                                                    FACSIMILE    0?U2 5232*0




 ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
          • THE CHIEF CONSTABLE '
                                                                     TOUR REFERENCE

                                                                     OUR REFERENCE

                                                                     DATE




                                   FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION



 DATE                ...39flh.&pAW0..                  ^
 TO                                          ..V!.... / 3 . V .      j?. . S ,

                                                                             .

                     .                 . . . . V I i J? . i r f t           :.


 FOR THE ATTENTION OF


 COMMENTS            .                              .... Fr.Q                                       U
                                                                                              .


 raoM               ! ) & & . . . . H , . & . . . . V ^ O f t X * = , . S . ......S ; . . ^   0   £ X £ >


 TELEPHONE NUMBER    Svl

 NUMBER OF PAGES ( INCLUDING THIS PAGE                 )      ........




  IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPT PLEASE CONTACT:

                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OPERATIONS ROOM

                    TELEPHONE        Cf?k2                    EXTENSION * *9
South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                                      POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                                                      S N IG H ILL
                                                                                                                      SH E FFIE L D S 3 8LY
                                                                                                                      T E L E P H O N E (0742)
                                                                                                                      TELEX 547996




J M           J   o n e      s         M   S c                        2 9   A p r i l     1 9 8 9
A s s     i s     t a n      t         C   h i e f     C o n s t a b l e
  ( O p    e r     at i      o     n s     )
W e s     t       M i d      l     a n      d s    P o l i c e
 H e a    d q     u a r      t      e r      s
 P 0          B    o x         5    2
 L l o     y d       H o      u     s e
C o l     m o     r e         C     i r    c u s     Q u e e n s w a y
 B I R     M I    N G H        A     M
 B 4        6 N    Q "




D e a r                M r           J o n e s

1 .                    I a c k n o w l e d g e                       r e c e i p t        o f y o u r      l e t t e r d a t e d     2 9 A p r i l    1 9 8 9 ,
                       i n v i t i n g s e l f                        s e r v i c e       s t a t e m e n t s     f r o m o f f i c e r s   n a m e d    t h e r e i n .

2 .                    M a y      I     b e    i n f o r m e d    p l e a s e ,     a r e     t h e s e                       t h e    o n l y       s t a t e m e n t s    y o u
                       w i l l      r e q u i r e     f r o m  t h e s e     o f f i c e r s ,      i f                     n o t ,     w h a t      f u r t h e r    m a y   b e
                        r e q u e s t e d     f r o m t h e m ?

T h e    u r g e n c y  o f  L o r d  J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s    r e q u e s t                                            i s   a p p r e c i a t e d       a n d   t h i s
m a t t e r    i s b e i n g p r o g r e s s e d a c c o r d i n g l y .

I w i l l    r e s p o n d     f u r t h e r                                    o n     S u n d a y     3 0   A p r i l    1 9 8 9    a n d       s u g g e s t   y o u   t a k e
n o f u r t h e r    a c t i o n    u n t i l                                    t h e n .

Y o u r s                s i n c e r e l y                                      '




D e p u t y                        C h i e f          C o n s t a b l e       o n       b e h a l f
o f t h e                          C h i e f          C o n s t a b l e
                                                                                                                                                                       ttliST MIPtA.VSS POLICE;
                -           F fW          j M jy . N li                                                                                                                H'EA'lOSMSTSSS
                                          ASSISI.* "T CHiEf COhSTABLK                                                                                                  K* 3u>.5
                                                                                                                                                                              - Uoyc HOvS?
                                        ■V.t-,                                                                                                                         C o U n o r ;- C ir c uS Q ^ e a * w a y ■
 , «>:.■..                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ........ ..........
                                                                                                                                                                               *«ghirdB4 6 NQ' ,    ''
                                                                                                                                                                       Tsi           02 *|       |-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ■ .' ■'




                                                                                                                                                                           '1 tier's 'JMJ/V3'.’
                                          ? 'ft- ig in . E.--.
:- s                                     -c rn 'e f ' C.bnita&i-.fe                                                                                                    !,its:                        A-ril 1 989
                                    ^■:-otn: 'YorkSlfilre>,?o:. ioi
                                V -v SnlSg'HiTiV --
                 ' - " i / v : ' . . 4 -. . ' g b e ' t : f i e l d




                                              V■ d > ’V' : ■
                                         ;:.v
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■ ■■-.■■■ ■ ■   ■■ ■ ■ ■             ,■■ ■ ■ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  x -y
                                              vr.TTfjft                      w                                                                                                                             .   -■

                                              r ha’/ e t ' A~i c . ‘
                                              L^.r.5.
                                                                                   •    ’      -                       ‘                >
                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                              _______




                                                                                                       this                                                              tB8 R:
                                              I ..f o u l ' d .'■■l.iV'-e ' t c

           V'          -            ;

                                               :                                                    tha’’                                                                   make/
                                                                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                      \ ■-        ' ' < = •             -    i '               i; 3r- * v,,cKi;c.n
                                              C h i e f Superintend"**-- Ducksnfief-0
                                               Suiti«i*;nt.end«nt Hartal.:......
                fir                            Bupftrinfcepdant Karray
                       - ■■■"■■ t ^ S i i p e c l n t-sii'd®rft gnap^ars .                                                 .......... - ..................         ■                   .,7
                                .              s e n i o r M o u n t& d O t T i c s t - t i i        c n a rg e   at         oKe ^ p - ' i ^ - s             =-■*'■='                M 1--. ^          =>.■: =
           t/(K-Qj^n — . ^bove;;Conatatla;
                                    ^,,v-i

                                = - ^ '^ 7 :             n                   T ey lo ^ h a s       invn.::au;c so ^c                                   or. j . m e _pa: y

                           o:,:: '        ■           ------ = _ ~ ~ — .— ■
       ■.:'_■••. ^-:'J■■
       ; V ' .-. '"'r<-s




              V /. -        '




                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Cdrtfcirii
                                                                                       ,
                                          - 6 -


                              CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


1-2. ^5 ■gni - DCC opolco with -Mr Joneg" re-:-Hie above .---------------------------   :— 1


He said that Mr Dear is currently with the Judge considering our request which
will include everything in which the South Yorkshire Police have property/and
certainly include all the items referred to above at (b - 25.4.89) whic^r I
read out in detail.                                                   /

Concerning the intention to obtain self-serving statements down to/xhe rank of
inspector and from all officers involved at the Leppings Lane end'of the
ground, he saw no problem with that whatsoever, understands thac we need to be
getting on with this quickly, has no worries over this but thanked us for
informing him of our intended action.                      /

Forgot to mention liaison officer arrangement - Chief Sugft Wain to arrange
this himself.                                         /


1.30 pm - Ch Supt Wain discussed with DCC the extant of the investigation.
Advised that Chief Supt Nesbit had been asked to/review the major incident
procedures and that there was no need for Chie^r Supt Wain's investigation to
go beyond the point when the game was stopped^ Chief Supt Wain to submit his
report in that form and await any further oepresentation made by Counsel.   It
was hoped that Chief Supt Nesbit's de-bri^f into major incident procedures
would perhaps serve the post-disaster events.


2.00 pm - ACC(SS), having spoken w^xh Supts Greenwood and Chapman who were
both on duty at Hillsborough at tone time of the tragedy, advised DCC that both
of these officers feel vulnerable in terms of culpability and would like legal
advise.                      /

Mr Greenwood is   consciousy b f the fact that already press comment is suggesting
that the rescue   operation! could have been handled more effectively and the
overcrowding in   the pear should have been dealt with perhaps even before the
match started.    He was ground commander responsible for this area of activity.

Mr Chapman was orynuty at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground - far end
away from Leppings Lane.- and stopped police resources being deployed to
Leppings Lane JJecause he was concerned about a problem of serious potential
disorder at feas end of the ground.


5.10 pm/- DCC spoke with Miss Norcliffe.  She agreed Mr Metcalf would          see both
these/officers on 26.4.89-  She will arrange for Mr Metcalf to attend          at
Police Headquarters at 10.15 am when it may be appropriate for him to          see both
officers before seeing the original four at 11.00 am. ACC(SS) making
arrangements .............                              ;-------------         --------- -



26.4.89

Proof of Evidence - meeting this date with Counsel.  Persons present -
Mr Woodward QC, Mr Limb (barrister), Mr Metcalf (solicitor), Miss Norcliffe
(solicitor), Deputy Chief Constable, ACC(SS), Chief Supts Wain and Mole, and
Chief Inspector Bettison (took notes).  Meeting lasted between 2.00/7.00pm.
                                     - 7 -


                           CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


Chief Supts Wain and Mole outlined in reasonable detail the work completed so
far in compiling background information on which the eventual proof of
evidence will be based.

Mr Woodward expressed his thanks for that done and said we had achieved more
in two days than some organisations in similar circumstances had achieved in a
month.

Nevertheless there is much more to do and Mr Woodward outlined what further
enquiries he needed and also what points of clarification and expansion on the
information already to hand is required.

Briefly, the evidence gathering mechanism previously agreed is still relevant,
namely the collection and urgent collation of self-service statements from all
ranks down to inspector involved at Hillsborough whether initially on duty in
relation to the match, summoned there by Operation Support or achieved by
voluntary attendance.

Similar statements to be obtained from all ranks known to have been involved
at the Leppings Lane end who attended in any or all of the three categories
above.

Statements to include all relevant information up to the time those officers
eventually retired their duty on this first day.

In relation to the after-math (recovery phase) statements to be obtained from
circa a dozen people so involved and Mr Woodward will then advise if anything
further in this connection is needed.

The aim is to complete all actions currently outstanding together with
additional further instructions likely to be received after the lawyers have
had time to consider the information supplied to them by Wednesday 10 May.

Chief Supts Wain and Mole to continue with this and because of the priority to
use - through DCC or in his absence ACC(SS^ - whatever resources they require.

It was agreed that the notes of the meetings taken by Chief Insp Bettison and
those taken by Miss Norcliffe would be exchanged between the parties as soon
as possible.
                       MEETING WITH COUNSEL 26. 4. 89

                AREAS WHICH MAY BE OF PARTICULAR RELEVANCE:


PARAGRAPH
2.6   -      CAPACITY AT LEPPINGS LANE TERRACES

2.8      -   TURNSTILE FLOW

2.9      -   COMPUTERISED MONITORING OF NUMBERS ENTERING DIFFERENT AREAS
             OF GROUND

2.24 and
2.25  -      LEPPINGS LANE STAND/TERRACE ACCESS

3.2.3 -        POLICE/STEWARD RELATIONSHIP
  to 3.3.2
 and 3.8.1
 and 3.12 . 8 & 9
 and 3.19.2 & 3

3.7.1    -   BIRMINGHAM RESEARCH GROUP - REPORT ON SOCCER HOOLIGANISM
              1968

3.10.1-      SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

3.11.3-      McELHONE REPORT   1976 - NEED TO ERECTFENCING

3.12.5-      INTRODUCTION OF 'GREEN GUIDE'

3.12.10      POPPLEWELL RECOMMENDATION RE EVACUATION PROCEDURE

3.13.2       RECOMMENDATIONS OF H.O. CIRC 54/1985

3.22     -   SUMMARY OF HISTORY OF POLICE INVOLVEMENT   IN FOOTBALL MATCHES

4.5      -   STANDING INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE POLICING OFFOOTBALL MATCHES.

4.7      -   PREVIOUS SEMI-FINAL POLICING

4.11     -   DEBRIEF OF 1988 SEMI-FINAL

4.12     -   ALLOCATION OF TICKETS

4.16     -   REQUEST TO ALTERNATE 'ENDS' OF GROUND - i.e.LIVERPOOL    F.C.
              WANTED THE KOP

4.17     -   PLANNING (3 Pages)
              (Page 10 will be produced as a separate schedule).
4.20       -   DETERMINATION OF MANPOWER REQUIRED

4.21       -   EXPLANATION OF CUTS IN MANPOWER

4.22       -   (see 3rd line up from bottom of p.13)
               DEPLOYMENT OF OFFICERS AT LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE.

4.30   -       POPPLEWELL REPORT AND GREEN GUIDE - EFFECTS ON POLICING AT
               HILLSBOROUGH

4.33       -   POTENTIAL TICKETING PROBLEMS

4.37       -   EVACUATION PROCEDURES

4.39       -   BRIEFING OF ALL OFFICERS

4.40       -   DUTY OF STEWARDS

4.41 to
4.45    -      CHANGES BETWEEN 1988 and 1989 PLANS

All PART 5     EVENTS WHICH OCCURRED ON THE DAY

6.4        -   RADIO COVERAGE

6.26 to
6.31    -      COMMUNICATION DIFFICULTIES

7 .1       -   EVACUATION PROCEDURE IN RESPONSE TO POPPLEWELL REPORT

7 . 6 and
7.8       -    TRAINING OF STEWARDS

7.7        -   MANNING OF EXIT GATES

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS
GROUNDS 1986        AMENDMENTS TO PROCEDURES AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                    FOOTBALL GROUND
             INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND 15. 4. 89

                           DEVELOPMENT OF EVENTS




    1400
@   1415             POLICE ESCORT OF LIVERPOOL FANS (500?) FROM WADSLEY
                     BRIDGE


    1415 Onwards     BUILD UP OF SUPPORTERS IN LEPPINGS LANE


    1425             CLOSURE OF LEPPINGS LANE


@   1430             PRESSURE AT TURNSTILES AND GATE   CRUSH DEVELOPING -
                     GATE OPENS - TICKETS PASSED OUT


    1430 - 1445      CONTINUED PROBLEM WITH RADIO COMMUNICATION


    1430 Onwards     LARGE NUMBER OF FANS OUTSIDE - CLIMBING WALLS AND
                     PARAPETS - DIFFICULTY IN CONTROLLING CROWD


    1448             IMMENSE PRESSURE AGAINST GATE - CROWD TOLD NOT TO
                     PUSH BY VARIOUS MEANS - GATE OPENED - FANS ENTER ■
                     GATE CLOSED (1450)


    1450             FURTHER INCREASE OF FANS - CLIMBING - SEVERE
                     CONGESTION


                     DIFFICULTY IN CONTROLLING CROWD


    1452 Onwards     PROBLEMS AT TURNSTILES - GATE(S) OPENED - FANS
                     ADMITTED


to 1502              FANS IN ENCLOSURE TO TERRACES


    1500 ?           SURGE OF CROWD COINCIDING WITH ANY EVENT


                     POLICE/DEPLOYMENT AT LEPPINGS LANE
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - FUND RAISING



MEETING HELD AT 11 OOAM FRIDAY 21 APRIL 1989
IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS




PERSONS PRESENT :




Assistant Chief Constable Anderson (Staff Services)
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson (Operations)
Chief Superintendents Ball, Broomhead, Owen and Thompson
Superintendents Bennett, Burdis, Greenwood, Lowe, Seller and Stuart
Chief Inspector Young
Mr J Richardson - Principal Personnel Officer




Assistant Chief Constable Anderson opened the meeting and explained that
following discussions on the aspect of fund raising for the Hillsborough
Disaster it had been deemed necessary to ascertain what policy should be
adopted by the Force.

He said that at the present it is thought that the Force should make a one
block donation and that would bring the matter of fund-raising to a quick
conclusion, because if police organized fund-raising events are allowed to
take place over several months it could have a detrimental psychological
effect on some officers who had experienced at first hand the events that
took place at Hillsborough on Saturday.

Mr Anderson suggested a possible way forward was for invitations to be
made through Divisional Commanders and Departmental Heads to each officer
to make a donation of a suggested minimum amount and then the proceeds be
paid into Headquarters Finance for a cheque to be forwarded from the Force
to the Lord Mayor's Appeal Fund.

Mr Anderson explained that deductions from police officers pay at source
had been considered but there were difficulties which prevented this
action being taken at short notice.

He then invited comments from members   of the meeting.

Superintendent Greenwood said that he had spoken to many officers involved
at Hillsborough and he believed that a donation in the manner suggested
by Mr Anderson could be seen as some form of compromise and officers feel
donations should be personal as opposed to official.
                                   -   2   -




Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that there is a feeling within his
Division that officers want to make donations on a personal basis. He
suggested that monies from Divisional Sports & Social Funds could be used
as this belongs to officers and civilian members of the Force.

Superintendent Seller informed the meeting that a collection was already
taking place at *C * Division and it had been decided to close the
collection on the 30 April and the proceeds be forwarded direct to the
Lord Mayor's Fund.

Superintendent Stuart stated that it was a good idea to set a date when
collections will be closed.

Chief Superintendent Thompson said that the feeling at 'A' Division was
that.it should be seen that the Force as a whole was making a donation.

Assistant Chief Constable Mr Anderson reminded members of the meeting that
it was important to consider this aspect with regards to the image
projected by the Force to members of the public.

Chief Superintendent Ball said he was concerned that if we did have a
collection on a Force   basis and the donations did not achieve   an
acceptable target the   image of the Force could suffer.

Mr Richardson said that he considered the suggestion could amount to
"shooting ourselves in the foot" because if the donation is not enough
the public will say "is that all they could donate".   He suggested a
better way would be to simply remind officers of the Appeal Fund and urge
them to make personal contributions direct.

Superintendent Greenwood again said it should be personal not official
because if the donation was low or high it could give the wrong
impression.

Mr Richardson said it  would be a no win situation because the   presswould
some how find an angle from which they would be able to criticise,whether
the amount be low or high.

Chief Superintendent ’Broomhead said that he did not think that the South
Yorkshire Police ought to make a donation as a body.

Chief Inspector Young agreed with Superintendent Greenwood's comments.

Detective Superintendent Burdis said that he had come across two schools
of thought. One was from officers who had attended the incident after
the tragic event had taken place and they had intimated that they would
donate their overtime payment to the Fund. The other was from the
officers who experienced the event at first hand and they had said they
would not donate anything.
                                  - 3 -




Superintendent Anderson said that he was of the opinion donations should
be on a personal basis.

Superintendent Stuart said that if the donation was done on an official
basis it is inevitable that someone will use it against the Force.

Superintendent Lowe said that he believed the image of the Force could
suffer because it is a somewhat Catch 22 situation, a low amount would
invite comment from many sources and a high amount similarly.

Chief Superintendent Ball said there is also a problem that if we do not
make a formal contribution this could also invite comment from the press
and media.

Superintendent Greenwood said that after the enquiry had been completed
he would then feel able to make an official contribution.

Detective Superintendent Burdis asked if the Chief Constable intended to
publish a message on General Orders because it could be appropriate to
mention the Lord Mayor's Appeal Fund in that message.

Superintendent Seller said that the official donation would create a
Catch 22 situation and it would probably be best to release to the press
and media that there has been an immediate response from officers of South
Yorkshire Police and there has been spontaneous donations on a personal
basis.

Superintendent Stuart said that where Divisional collections were taking
place the amount can be paid into the fund by one officer.   This would
prevent any misrepresentation of the Force, because as it is in the case
of the Force as a whole, comments could be made about the amounts donated
by Divisions.

Assistant Chief Constable Anderson said that he recognized the points
being made, but there was still the issue of detrimental effect on some
officers with long term fund-raising events.

Superintendent Seller said we would be treading on broken glass if we said
to any individual within the Force "do not organize them".

Assistant Chief Constable Anderson thanked the members for their comments
and said that it was a unanimous decision that officers and civilian
members of the Force should be left to make personal donations without any
obvious prompting from the Force. He urged Divisional Commanders and
Departmental Heads to bear in mind the problems long-term fund-raising
events could have with some individuals under their command.
                                  - 4 -



Mr Anderson then promoted a discussion concerning the management and
deployment of officers including members of the Special Constabulary, who
had been involved at Hillsborough last Saturday for the remaining fixtures
at that ground. After discussion it was agreed that it was a decision for
individual officers who had been involved, whether they should or should
not work match duties. Any request from officers wishing to withdraw from
such duties should be respected, at least in the next four weeks.




DISTRIBUTION :

The Chief Constable
Deputy Chief Constable
Assistant Chief Constable (Management Services)
Assistant Chief Constable (Staff Services)
Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Chief Superintendents - 'A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E', 'F
Chief Superintendent - Operations & Traffic
Chief Superintendent - C.I.D.
Chief Superintendent - Management Services
Chief Superintendent - Staff Services
Chief Superintendent - Complaints & Discipline
Mr J Richardson - Personnel Officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                           y    ^      C        C                    ■ / 9 n      ^ c C          ‘2 ~ r S           < ^ n
          THE SUNDAY TIM ES 23 APRIL 1989


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Phil Ortwwi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                                 Polka monitor




                                                                                                                                                    w m          m         m     t




                                                                                                                                                        3pm. M att* suns.




                     TRUTH
                                                                                                                                                        Huet s ar|( onto alnndy m n im M to rm .
                                                                                                                                                        A erali btrrtor i t ttw front k it M M ,                                                                                                      Police control room
                                                                                                                                                        cnntai dottu. Is fans M l hrward tM r                                                                                                         between stan ds
                                                                                                                                                        ptam ir> M        frm      b M tlM rM



                                                                                                                                                     ■BBSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        crowded
            IM H IC -iH T                 • A chance decision- openinga leftorright-hand gate atSheffield_____
                                          Wednesday's stadium - turned an afternoon'ssport Intoa nationaltragedy
                                          lastSaturday. But long beforethewrong pte was opened, the seeds of
                                          disasterhad already been sown. The stadium’sturnstilecomputer system
                                          made no distinctionbetween thenumber offansenteringmain standsand
                                          thecrowded, fenced sectionswithinthem; vitalpolicecommunications                                          Less crowded pen
                                          linkshad broken down; and Englishfootball'ssorrytraditionof________
                                          drunken hooliganism created confusionjust
                                          when claritywas essential                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIGHT HAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fins sprint lor
      ROGER MARSHALL was                  supporters had been drink­
      standing amid thousands of          ing heavily and the at­
      Liverpool supporters jos­           mosphere was becoming                                                                                                                                                      -LEPPINGS LANE
      tling to get into the               increasingly frenzied as the                                                                                                               Where the fans
                                                                                                                                                                                      should have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ENTRANCE left hand
      Hillsborough ground last            kick-off approached. Al­                                                                                                                                                  Sealing stiles
                                          though many were queuing                                                                                                                     been led                                                        ■ gate
      Saturday when he realised
      football was on the brink o f       in an orderly fashion, oth­                                                                                                                                                                                                Standing stiles
      another disaster unless he          ers were hindering police
      took drastic action.                efforts; some were seen
          The FA Cup semi-final           stubbing cigarette ends on a
      between Liverpool and               police horse.
      Nottingham Forest was                  But what was an urgent
      about to kick off and 4,000         request from Marshall to
      fans were still clamouring          the police control room
      to get in. Many were in             inside the ground — and                                                                                                                                                              2.40pm.^up^»rtarijammad outside turnstiles
      distress, some were scream­         overlooking the crammed            •
      ing and it was apparent             Leppings Lane Stand — was
      people would die unless the         passed on to other officers
      crush was eased. Shortly            at the ground as no more     o f his predecessor, Chief                   hooligans pushing, shoving Countdown to disaster. II the left-hand gate had been opened, 85 football supporters’ lives might have been spared
      before 3pm, the police              than “ a problem a t the     Superintendent Brian Mole,                   and screaming from the
      superintendent made a de­           Leppings Lane end".          who had been posted to                       central pens in the west through the tunnel into the race. As cheers and shouts disaster involving that city s Hillsborough, clubs are tak­
      cision that will haunt him             A Nottinghamshire jour­   another job in Barnsley.                     stand. As fans began climb­ centre, but around the sides filled the stadium, the fans, it is clear that many of ing down their fencing. Hut
      for the rest o f his life: he       nalist who spent the day     Mole had led the policing of                 ing the 12ft perimeter fence o f the stand. A Liverpool crowds on the Liverpool the claims are true.                  that fencing was put up in
      opened a gate.                      with the police at the       cup semi-finals two years                    between them and the pitch fan said that when he came terraces surged forward and         There is no doubt that the first place because of
          Until today it was as­          opposite end o f the ground
                                          said M arshall's1request ap­
                                                                       before and had provided an                   to escape the chaos, police through the turnstiles in a crush barrier broke under the English disease, which football hooliganism. More                                                                                " t
      sumed he had no choice.                                          exemplary blueprint of                       tried to push them back.      1988, the entrance to the the incredible pressure. eventually resulted in the constructively, Liverpool is
      But Insight can reveal that         peared to have been granted  what to do in the event of                      Even banks o f video tunnel leading to the mid­ Hundreds tumbled down humiliating ban of all clubs to make its stadium nil
      Marshall had another op­            at 2.53pm, when a message    an emergency.                                screens in the police mon­ dle section, was blocked. A the terraces, tram pling from European competition seating. It could be the only
      tion: he could have ordered         crackled over a sergeant’s       Duckenfleld’s operational                itoring room that relayed line of stewards and police those beneath them. At the after the Heysd disaster, is foolproof way to ensure
      the opening o f a gate on the       radio that the match had     plan centred on what all                     pictures from closed-circuit officers prevented people front, people were wedged still embedded in the nat­ that never again does the
      Jell o f the crowded turn-          been delayed for 15 m in-    i 'oi ^ s in Britain attem pt Iq             cameras around the ground ; going through and directed hard against the wire ional game. Although the behaviour of several thou
      stile*, which wasi ob  obscured     “ “ ?•    . . . . .        'd o tb ro u g h o a rth e leawiti:           4 (d not alert police to the them to other parts o f the fences, choking and gasping lo u tis h    b e h a v io u r al sa n d  L iv e rp o o l fa n s
      f r o it hi* view by the; <
                                crowd,       Two mminutes  later, how-
                                                    inuteslater,       kccp rival
                                                                      .keep     riva( supporters seg-,              fact that they were w itness ierrace, ■                   for breath                   Hillsborough was confined contribute to the deaths o f
                                  have                                 regatedi stop, fans -bringing,              :,in*more than th e hooligan-    This year, although about   The {death and injury toll to fewer than at Heysel, the 95 o f them.
      surged into aa open coun-           radios that this bad been a n ic ^ o i into th e stadium                  Ism ’ that has becoht® a 50 pom e were stationed in must have been mounting idea that Liverpool’s fans
                        ‘ ‘ "■ 1st
•mn                                             Mw                               JreSKTWM.. ___ ,-f„                                                                                                                                 weenena s tragedy is u
      into terrace* that were far         their      from the dressing                                                                            were not ordered to block                people behind Marshall's                  likely to survive the scru­                        Davis,   David       Leppard,
                                                                                 urge Urns to arrive in good the turnstiles at ?Leppings                                                                                                                                                C harles    O u lto n , M ax
      from fun. T he disaster             room to th e tunnel and the            time.                       Lane also gave no hint of            its entrance and did nothing             gate came sweeping down                   tiny o f the inquest.
                                          match would go ahead as                                                                                 to stop the tide that surged             the tunnel to multiply the                   In    the    wake     of                        Prangnell, Kowena Webster
      would alm ost certainly not                                                   With more than 1,000     impending calamity. As
      have happened.                      planned. Glen Kirton, FA               officers on match duty at   each person filtered through         through the open gate.                   death toll and turn a
          Marshall opted for the          assistant secretary, who was           the ground and in the city, the B turnstiles, their entry           The lack o f co-ordination            tragedy into unimaginable
      wrong gate when he chose            in the players’ tunnel at the          everything seemed to be     was lagged, alerting police          between police inside the                calamity.
      to open one on the right o f        time, said later. “ We never           running to plan as the      and ground staff to poten­           ground, outside Leppings                    Even after the surge,
      the turnstiles. The result          received any request. I f we           tu r n s tile s opened      tial overcrowding problems.
                                                                                                            at                                    Lane and in tije'flionitpring            police inside the ground
             explosive. Thousands         had. we wouldn’t have                   1.30pm. For another hour,     But the computer re-              and c o n tro lf'rp o i^ - 'last*        seemed oblivious to the fact
      swept into the open court-          dreamed o f turning it                 there was no suggestion of  corded only the number of            Saturday is even more                    that people were dying a
      yard an d headed for the            down.”                                 the horror which would      fans* entering the main              perplexing given that fear               few feet from where they
      only obvious access to the  "          The failure o f Marshall’s          shortly unfold before the   stand; crucially, it did not         was ^ re ^ A m p u n tm g , on           stood. Some officers clearly
      terraces a tunnel through           attempt to postpone the                eyes o f the 54,000 crowd   monitor the numbers enter­           the tettacSviajiseafly "■'»*             believed they were dealing
      which they could see the            kick-off and the subsequent            and the millions who        ing each o f the fenced              2.20pm, 40 minutes'before                with a “ pitch invaiion" as
      players wanning up on the           fatal mistake were un­                 watched on TV.              sections within it. Officers         kick-off and 20 minutes                  late as 3.06, as fans scram­
      pitch.                              doubtedly the prim ary                    At about 2.30pm, 30      could see from the com­              before Marshall requested a              bled over the fence to
         They crammed into the            causes, o f Britain's biggest          minutes before kick-off, theputer that there was room            postponement,                            escape the frenzy.
      narrow confines o f the             and perhaps most shameful              police cameras focusing on  for .several thousand people            At that time, fins behind                The reality of what was
      tunnel and burst out onto a         sporting tragedy. But the              the Leppings Lane end       in the west stand terraces.          the goal ^ o f Liverpool's               happening dawned on offi­
      terrace already heaving with        seeds o f disaster were sown           started showing pictures    W hat the Hillsborough               Bruce Grobbelaar were al­                cers only then and they
      supporters, some o f whom           long before the panic set-in.          that should have alerted    computer could not tell              ready suffering and the                  began their desperate strug­
      were being crushed un­                                                     Duckenfield and his officersthem was that the extra              discomfort should have                   gle to pull people out. But it
      conscious even before the           EARLY         last S aturday                                       *00 m was only in the, outer
                                                                                 to the growing crisis. It was                                    been obvious to officers                 was too^latji: t^gdo much
      gate was opened.                .   morning, Chief Inspector               clear that there was already ‘pens” The middle pens              stationed on the touchline               more tH*n Retrieve limp,
      : O u ts id e . . M a rs h a ll     David Duckenfield was                  serious overcrowding in th ewere already tightly packed          and facing the crowd. When               bruised bodies from the still
      watched the surge ebb,              looking forward with con-              central fection 'of           ,
                                                                                                             with fans who had arrived            the teams came out to                    surging crowd.
      oblivious to the mayhem             fidenee to hi* first big                                                                                                                                                                                           FLY IN STYLE
                                                                                                             earlier for the coveted              warm up at 2.40pm, un­
      his mistake had unleashed           match.                                   It appears that from this places behind the goal,              controllable surges were                 WHEN Lord Justice Taylor                                A T TWICE THE SPEED OF SO U N D
      within. A decision intended            Although he had been                moment onwards; there was                                        making people struggle and               completes his inquiry ” 'to                    CoiKdtie b the ultimate experience In travel th e unbelievable sui«e olpow er
      to preserve life and limb           in v o lv e d   in  p o lic in g       a breakdown in commun­ W H EN                                    scream for help.                         the disaster, he will give his                 on take-oll. The <le*»r d e e p blu e s»>y ten miles above the earth The       in ihe
                                                                                                                           H ills b o ro u g h                                                                                            back as the alter-burners accelerate th e alru a lt through the sound barrier The
      had triggered the, m ost            matches a t Sheffield Uni­             ications between officers hosted an FA cup semi­                    The teams returned to                 judgment on whether and                        suprem e cabin service and inclusively create d cuisine The atm osphere o(
      appalling tragedy.                  ted, he had little experience          inside and outside the final last year, police used              the dressing room for a last-            how it could have been                         opule nce and sneer quality. Hying at twite the s p e e d ol sound at 1s‘;0 miles v a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hour.
          In -the seething crush,                                                                                                                 minute pep-talk and came                 avoided. Police procedures
                                          o f football and had been              ground and their chief, the same computer to                                                                                                             To that experience we a d d the finest, excitln# and exclusive arrangement* at
      fans fought for their lives.        appointed as the officer in            tucked away in the control control the flow o f the              back out on to the pitch a               and the behaviour o f the                      your destination to perfectly comple ment Concorde, a nd to com ple te >imr

      M any disappeared under                                                                                                                     few minutes before kick-off:             supporters will be minutely                    "Flight ol F a n t a s y " . ____________________________ ________
                                          charge only three weeks                unit between the south and crowd into the Leppings
      piles o f scrambling bodies,                                                                                                                still nothing had been done              scrutinised by the 500 West                    C O N C O K D iC t H E O R I E N T -E X P R E S S A N D S A L Z B U R G
                                          earlier.                               west stands (see diagram). Lane end. But then a                                                           Midlands detectives inter­
      their last act a desperate                                                   The officers o,n duty similar crush o f fans was               to alleviate the growing                                                                T h e G re a t K o m an tk A dventure
                                             This did not worry him,                                                                                                                       viewing 10,000 potential
      hand-hold on the legs o f                                                  thought they had seen it aU safely dispersed along the           crisis in the middle ?pens”                                                             M ay 21-24 a n d M ay 22-25              £ 1595
                                          however, as he attempted to                                                                                                                      witnesses.
      those still standing. Others                                               before: row dy,« drunken te rra c e , ’ fu n e lle d < n o t     of the Leppings Lane ter-                                                               • The OrlenM:*piess Qv<;rnt#l>t London to.
                                          emulate the excellent record                                                                                                                         W hat is already known,
      had their - life’s breath                                                                                                                                                                                                           Innsbruck • Two nt#ln* at the five-star Sai/butg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sheraton Hotel * ‘Sound of Music' tout a n d visit
      drained against the wire                                                                                                                                                             however, is this: no matter                    to Mozart's birthplace • Horse-drawn carriages
      mesh fence surrounding the                                                                                                                                                           how culpable particular in­                    to or lion' the Resldeni Palace for a private
      pitch. Ninety-four died,                                                                                                                                                             dividuals may ultimately                       Mo/arl concert am! Six-course Gala Banquet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          • Heiurn at Math 2 by supersonic Concorde
      another died in hospital                                                                                                                                                             prove to have been, the                        Itoiti Austria
      later, 1 7 0 were injured, and                                                                                                                                                       police at the match cannot                     (Above applies to May 21-24 tour May 22-iS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lour is by Concorde to Austila, leturnlng by
      the recriminations began.                                                                                                                                                            be held solely responsible                     Orlen»-fc*prcM*l
                                                                                                                                                                                           for the disaster.
      O NE man who knew                                                                                                                                                                        Undoubtedly a section of                   CONCORDES                      ’ 1001           ARABIAN                  NIGHTS
      immediately th at a disas­                                                                                                                                                           the football-following frater­                 Four M tfic a l day* In th a Kingdom of
      trous decision had been                                                                                                                                                               nity last Saturday regarded                   Iordan
      taken was Jack Stone, the                                                                                                                                                             the event as a good excuse                    May 28-31                                    £2195
      gateman responsible for the                                                                                                                                                           for a pub-crawl and an                        • Supersonic (lights by British Airway* Concorde
      entrance Marshall had de­                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                         ,y.- .                                             opportunity to pursue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lo m lo n to Aqaba an d Amman to London
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          • Subsonic Concord* lllght Aqaba to Ammon
      cided to open. Asked by                                                                                                                                                               h o o lig a n is m      in   the              • V.I.P. Welcome Reception In Aqaba • Visit to
       police to open it to let the                                                                                                                                                         anonymity o f the crowd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ttie ‘row-red city' of Petia * Visit to th e Roman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          city of | m s h • Sunset barbecue by th e l>ead
       crowd through, he refused,                                                                                                                                                           Taylor's inquiry will likely                  Sea • '1001 Atabian Nifthu' le a s t • Ride on
       handing the keys to an                                                                                                                                                               conclude that it was this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lawrence's train, steam -hauled, through the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d e w r t for lunch a t the iw kish Port at Dabaa
       o ffice r. “ T h a t’s y o u r                                                                                                                                                       clement that spearheaded                      • One night, ar the Petra Forum Hotel • JVw)
       responsibility,” he said.                                                                                                                                                            the surge into the tunnel                     nights at the Amman Marriott Hotei.
       . Colin Milton, who was                                                                                                                                                              and on to the terraces.
       Operating the turnstile                                                                                                                                                                                                            THE            LAND          OF         THE           M IDNIGHT               SUN
       nearest to Stone's gate, was                                                                                                                                                             Whatever his findings, it                 A M idsum m er Night*’ D ream In U p l a n d
       sim ilarly horrified. He                                                                                                                                                             would be an injustice to                       J u n e 2 0 - 2 1 unci i u n e 24-25

       asked police: "W hat have                           *                                                                                                                                single out Marshall for his                    • Supt:iM)nl< nights by British Aliwjy* I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cotde London lo Rovanleml and return • Arctic I
       you done that fo rT and                                                                                                                                                              decision to open the gate. It                  Click visit and Crossing Ccienxiny • Longboat |
       was told: “There arc a lot                                                                                                                                                           was Marshall, after all, who                   ride to a Midsummer I"east and celebrations <«

       more going to get killed                                                                                                                                        ,             I*     appeared to realise the                        traditional Lapp Farmhouse* Midnight Cocktail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Party* Float plune r id e * One nigh W at tomr»v>
       outside if we do not.”                                                                                                                                                               extent o f the danger and                      da bon at the flm-clas* Hotel t^hjanhovl with |

          The disaster could have                                                                                                                                                           attempted to prevent                           lunch and breakfast.

       been averted if action                                                                                                                                                                tragedy by requesting                                    SUPERSONIC CHAMPAGNE FLIGHTS
       proposed by Marshall 20                                                                                              . ’ -V t'K                                                       postponem ent. By that                            I h our 40 m inute C oncorde Exp erien ce Flights from London
       minutes before the kick-off                                                                                                                                                           time, the seeds of disaster                                              H eathrow £3ft9
       had been taken. At 2.40, he                                                                                                                                                          at Hillsborough had already                                            l u n e ' M , 10. H . 17, IS, 2'i. 2V
       made an urgent request for                                                                                                                                                            been sown.                                                           luly l , a . 4 , i , 9 . H , 16. 22. 21. 29

       the kick-off to be delayed                                                                                                                                                               The fans at Hillsborough                                                                                                                     <L*
       by 15 minutes.                                                                                                                                                                       were the victims of
          He had watched the                                                                                                                                                                 terrible accident and claims                          For each tour we produce a fully d etailed colour brochure,
                                                                                                                                                                                             by some police officers that                           To obtain those o f your choice please CALL US NOW on
       crowd outside grow bigger,
       more anxious and more                                                                                                                                                                 th e ir    b e h a v io u r w as
       dangerous by the minute.
       He needed tim e to get them
                                                                                                                                                                                             drunken and unruly have
                                                                                                                                                                                            added salt to the wounds.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |            0227-763336
      all into the ground safely.                                                                                                                                                           However, hard as Liverpool                             o r w rite to; Flights of Fantasy’ GOODWOOD TRAVF.L LTD,
                                                                                                                                                                                            finds them to stomach in                               St |am e* House, Castle Street, Canterbury. Kent, CTI 2QZ
       Another thing was worrying
      V>;<•>. mnnti a? tk* I tv*nvw\l      Th« funaral* hwriR                                                         •. a cotteMue. Into Liverpool's St Maroar«t-M«iy church               the aftermath of yet another
f a        H F S&
       m

      CwV?)
      2 8 / 0 - 9 ^
                                       - 3 -


                     CLIPBOARD ONE - ORGANISATIONAL HEALTH

Factors to take into account are the possible powerful negative effect on
those concerned if removed from these duties, their credibility with their
peers and the media reaction, but these are peripheral in relation to the
importance of perceived operational effectiveness especially if problems occur
re. public safety.

ACC(MS) will consider this and report back to Chief Constable.



ACC(SS) - at a morning meeting with Chief Constable this date, the question as
to whether or not we had sufficient stress counsellors to deal with officers
suffering PTSD was raised.

ACC(SS) indicated that his information from the Welfare Dept was that the
numbers seeking guidance were being dealt with adequately but he would seek
further information and if necessary ask for assistance from the West
Yorkshire and Metropolitan Forces.        Subsequent enquiries f r o m |
__________ and the Force welfare officer indicated that available appointments
are clearly evident and there was no real indication the department could not
cope.   However, ACC(SS) decided that a further counsellor from West Yorkshire
would attend on Thursday 2 0 . 4 . 8 9 and be supplemented by another counsellor
from the same Force the following day.

Arrangements made for spouses/partners/parents to attend a group meeting at
Niagara Sports Ground, 1 1 . 0 0 am Saturday 2 2 . 4 . 8 9 when they will also be
addressed by the Chief Constable.

Metropolitan Police informed at this time their services wej?e still not
required.



21.4.89

Clive Betts has again offered the services of their Social Services Department
(trained counsellors) and has expressed deep concern as Committee member that
we don't minimise the importance of such after care.

Yesterday we received a letter from the Probation Service offering similar
facilities - passed to ACC(SS).

Chief Officers' p.m. meeting - ACC(SS) reports we are well on top of the
current situation.  Helpers from West Yorkshire under employed.      Fully aware
of additional resources W . Y . , Probation Service, and Sheffield City Council.



22.4.89

Wives and families meeting held at Niagara this date.     Chief Constable opened,
              H f i H e d in and ACC(SS) concluded. Went well.

Need to repeat elsewhere.  ACC(SS) arranging 'A', 'B' and 'C' Divisions.
Chief Constable intending to visit all (DCC will if time allows).

                                                                                    I
From informally speaking with wives two further suggestions (a) letter to all       s';
wives and (b) helpline telephone number where wives or officers can receive
advice re. trauma problems.  ACC(SS) consider!
         €51 B . NO s * 8 2 0 3 L O C . N O . H A l » W >  DAT E A* I ME s2 4 « 4 « < 7 / 1 JMJ U P s H A C R E S   T E K 'M s H A J      PAGE 5 0 J
         O R I G I N A T O R ACC HR A N D E R S O N •* RE COUNSEL,! t.NG SCHEME                           P R IO R IT Y L
         D E S T I N A T I O N A l l . B J 1 €11. )JJ ) E l l FI 1                       " -                                   *
         A U T H O R I S E D * AC C STAFF SERVICES - M R AMDERSi'Bd—                                    <

          FROM A C C        S IA F F ^E R V IC F S
fill t    1 0 C H IE F      C O N S T A B L E 'T m W F & a i J E P g D N S j A f l L ^ A S S I S T A N T   CUTZf      CONSTABLES
          c h x e e s u p e r i n t e n d e n t s a b c f> e & f        mvs
          O P E N A T I O N S & T R A F F I C * €li>„ DI S C 3P E I NF. AND C O M P L A I N T S
          S F A F F S E R V I C E S AND MANAGEMENT SK t?V iC £8
          S P E C I A L CONSTABULARY S T A F F O F F I C E R
          P R I NO XP A L P E R S O N N E L O F F I C E R

           C O N K ID E N T IAi.
                               . COUNSEL!.... XN tt SCI SEME

           ALL     O F F IC E R S       W Xt.F . lib AWARE I HAT A C0UNSHLLXN6 S E S S I O N FOR SPOUSES/PARTNERS
           P A R E N T S W A S HELD            A t THE N IAGARA S P O R T S GROUND Af 11AM ON SATURDAY            APRIL.
           A L L WHO A T T E N D E D           WE RE MOST A P P R E C I A L I V E OF THE ARRANGEMENT F3 M A D E »

           C O N S E Q U E N F I .Y ,
                                   I T 1.S I N 'F E N D E D TO H O LD S I M I L A R       S E S S IO N S   IN     ’ A ’ , 7 8 ' AND ’ C ’
           D IV IS IO N S      WHEN T H E C H I E F C O N S '! A B L E AND M R S |                                  | f H t F O R C E WEI F A R E
           OFF CCER, Will.I... ATTEND, DIVISIONAL. COMMANDERS MUSI ENSURE !HA 1' THESE

                                                                                                                                        PA 6Fs«2
§01        A R R A N G E M E N T S ARE BROUGHT TO FHE A I TEN 11 ON OF A L L P O L I C E P E R S O N E L , SPECIAL
           CO NST A B E E S AND C I V I L I A N S WBU,     XN ANY WAY WE HI             I N V O L V F D I N TMF. H I Li BB O R O UG H
           TRAGEDY.            H IE R E WOULD 5M- NO O B J E C T I O N Tt> P E R S O N E * . FROM       S H E F E IG F D A ! T E N D I N G
           ANY     Of    THr: T 'H R E L           DIVISIONS,,

           AG A IN, IT IS ANT 1CX LA'S h D THAT           IHF. S L S B * ON WXLI I...A S I F OR A P P R O X XHAT EL Y ONE
           HOUR ■ AND L XGHT R E F R E S H M E N T S W I L L BE S E R V E D ,

           D O N C A S T E R DXV XS I ON                             APM* TUESDAY 25 APRIL
                                                                     D I V t S I O N A L HEADQUARTERS             CONFERENCE ROOM
                                                                     first f t o o r ,

           BARNSLEY           OIV TS I ON                            /.JMPM, FRIDAY 2BTH A P R I L
                                                                     i) I V I B I'ONAI. HF AIKJi IAH'IE R S
m                                                                    BAR AREA
in
           ROTHERHAM DIVISION                                        4 , 3 0 P M . FRIDAY 2l;i APRIL
                                                                     DX V I S I O N A L H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                     BAR AREA



         **EN1> OE         M ESSAGE**
mi£   /ho"bE?P S o
        (   CoPy
5L B .N O ; 0 1 6 0 L O C .N O .H E 1 0 0 3                      :1 9 0 4 8 9 /1 3 4 9
                                                   D A T E /T IM E                        O P : HADMAR      TERM :H A G        P A G £ :0 1
ORIGINATOR A S S I S T A N T C H I E F        CONSTABLE        STA FF SE R V IC E S               PR IO R IT Y L
D ESTIN A TIO N ALL                                                                              *
U T H O R I S E D : A C C MR A N N D E R S O N

                     SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E      CO N FID EN TIA L      COUN SELLIN G        SCHEME


 ALL O F F I C E R S  W I L L NO B E I N R E C E I P T O F MY MEMORANDUM D A T 4 E D 1 7 A P R I L 1 9 8 9 W H IC H
 IN C L U D E D A SH O R T D E S C R I P T I O N OF SYMPTOMS A F T E R T H t D I S A S T E R AT H I L L i j B u R u U G t i
F O O T B A L L GROUND ON S A T U R D A Y 1 5 A P R I L 1 9 8 9
F O L L O W I N G T H E C O U N S E L L I N G O F MEMB ERS Oh T H E h O R C E , T H E P R I N C I P A L w t L r A R E
O F F I C E R A D V I S E S ME T H A T MANY S P O U S E S / P A R T N E R S / P A R E N i S Wo U l D A P P R t C I A i E T H E
O P P O R T U N I T Y TO R E C E I V E G U I D A N C E BY H E R S E L F AT T H I S T I M E
A C C O R D I N G L Y , S P 0 U S E S / P A R T N E R S / P A R E N T 3 ARE I N V I T E D TO T H E N I A G A R A S P O R T S C L U B ^
 AT 11 A M ON S A T U R D A Y 2 2 A P R I L TO R E C E I V E NOT ONLY d                                  _          _            „
 B U T WORDS O F E N C O U R A G E M E N T FROM T H E C H I E F C O N S T A B L E . I T l a h.X PtC' T^JD i HA i           f'H iij
 S E S S IO N W ILL         L A S T F O R A P P R O X I M A T E L Y ONE H O U R . C O F F E E W I L L B E S f c R V E D .
              E N S U R E T H A T T H I S I N F O R M A T I O N I S B R O U G H T TO THiz. A I i t N i I O N O f A L L P O L I ^ c
 P E R S O N N E L ' S P E C I A L C O N S T A B L E S AND C I V I L I A N S W H O , I N ANY WAY, WERE I N V O L V E D I N
 THE H ILLSB O R O U G H TRAGEDY.
 A S YOU W I L L A P P R E C I A T E T H E R E      IS   AMPLE       PARKING     AT N I A G R A & S P O R T S    CLUB.

                                                                                                                         *     PAGE; 0 2




          Or   M tSSA SE-s-*
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                       REF:                       WEL/PAG/GM
        F RO M :   Assistant Chief Constable, Staff Services
                                                                       S T A T IO N /D E P T .:   Headquarters
        JO:        See below
                                                                       DATE:                      17 April 1989

                      SU B JEC T:   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE CONFIDENTIAL COUNSELLING SCHEME



                          Following the events at Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday
                          15 April 1989, I am advised jointly by the Force Consulting
                          Occupational Psychologist and the Principal Welfare Officer that
                          there may be a real need for officers to seek their services.

                          Accordingly a short description of symptoms has been prepared,
                          together with other information. To speed the distribution it
                          would be appreciated if you could reproduce the attached document
                          for circulation to every officer in your division/department within
                          the next 24 hours.

                          No officer should hesitate in seeking advice. The two principal
                          senior officers in 'F' Division have already availed themselves
                          of the counselling services.




                      .                   f Constable
                      Staff ^ervice-s




                          Distribution:
                          All Chief Superintendents
                          Heads of Departments




GEN/2
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE CONFIDENTIAL COUNSELLING SCHEME




As you may know, your Force started to operate this Confidential
Counselling Scheme last November.     It was intended to provide a
wide-ranging, personal problem-solving service, to help with everything
from purely practical problems, through to reactions to some of the more
extreme aspects of police work such as the recent disaster.      Two
'counsellors' are available to you.     Mrs                  Force Welfare
Officer), and                         (Consulting Occupational Psychologist,
based in Leeds).


Just as in the Bradford City Football Stadium fire of May 1985, some police
officers on duty during/after the disaster at Hillsborough on Saturday
had some very unpleasant experiences.     Strong reactions to such experiences
are perfectly normal.     Usually, they tend to quieten down after two or
three weeks, but they can be very distressing in the meantime.         If
something goes on 'bugging' a person, though, the reactions can go on for
much   longer. If you feel that something about the incident is bothering
you,   or that your reactions are not settling down, you can help yourself
by making use of the Counselling Scheme.      Expert advice and help is
available, and experience after the Bradford fire shows that such support
can help officers adjust to their experiences much more quickly.            If you
discover that another officer is suffering, you will be doing them a good
turn   if you give them a nudge in this direction.


What   sort of persistent reactions are we talking about?   Common examples
would be: remaining over-alert and unable to calm-down; being unable to
stop thinking about aspects of your experiences; having recurrent
nightmares; sleeping poorly; having disturbed concentration; finding that
you are more irritable and/or aggressive; feeling generally more emotional
and weepy; feeling 'detached' from friends and loved ones; and feeling
listless, de-motivated and uninterested in things.


Who should you contact.if you want to avail yourself of the Confidential
counselling Scheme?     The best thing is to go to the Welfare Officer, in
the first instance.     Alternatively, your Staff Association can make
arrangements, or any supervisory officer.
                                                                                      e \^ i c v ^ « ^ v ;                                                   Tf~~
 j   C4_x A s          U ^ A ^ U ^ -r                           ✓ £   £   «   ✓       ^    »    v   - ^   c   -      •




     A ^ - ’O - O K ^ o        *“^(                                                                               . s ^ -£ /     /& & -iz *-3 -x >




  i/^C*-"                  </K ~X >sk/                                        s fc        S Q A £s                >/4 a *^ *^ L A ~

                                      trjv/                 /*s-oCx-£^-v .



                I ft                                                                 ^ ^ ^ & ~ *A £ » S                     *^-*— A < l*~ y S & £ A jL * v




I J U ^ C      aa^     M   ^ Q ^                            j U ^                 sC 4U v< ^              A              /* * .* >     y 6 *j    'th -A -^

* -~                       w                  v z i m       S     z j .




                                                                                                                                       n    / f M     -

                                                                                                                  S < U -* y * ^        jp y     ifjs.




                ^t^^fe^WUn                              i L           c       - a - d /^ * c ^ ' - ^ ' ‘

                                                                ^ W V ^ C

                                                            L r ^ ^ U ^ U




     ( j a                       ■■     j/&   C & < Z jZs             £       ~& JU            ^ J ^ ^ A r P \,
GLB.N O :0249 LOC.NO.HA2043   DATE/TIME:210489/1503 OP:HAWHIT TERMsHAF    PAGE:01
ORIGINATOR CHIEF CONSTABLE                                PRIORITY L
DESTINATION ALL                                                    *
AUTHORISED: CHIEF CONSTABLE

FROM THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
TO ALL MEMBERS OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

THE FOLLOWING IS THE TEXT OF MY REPORT TO THE POLICE AUTHORITY THIS MORNING,
FRIDAY 21 APRIL 1989, REGARDING THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

MEMBERS WILL BE AWARE OF THE MAJOR TRAGEDY WHICH OCCURRED AT HILLSBOROUGH
FOOTBALL GROUND ON SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989, AS A RESULT OF WHICH 95 PEOPLE
DIED, 140 WERE TREATED AT LOCAL HOSPITALS AND FIVE ARE STILL IN INTENSIVE
CARE.
BECAUSE THIS FORCE HAS A RESPONSIBILITY FOR LAW AND ORDER IN THE AREA AND
ASSISTED THE SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB WITH THE CONTROL OF THE EVENT,
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN WRONG FOR THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE TO HAVE GATHERED
THE EVIDENCE AND COME TO CONCLUSIONS ABOUT THE CAUSE.  THEREFORE I ASKED
MR. GEOFFREY DEAR, CHIEF CONSTABLE OF WEST MIDLANDS, TO CARRY OUT THIS TASK
AND HE AGREED.
THE HOME SECRETARY HAS ANNOUNCED THAT THERE WILL BE AN INQUIRY LED BY LORD

                                                                      *    PAGE:02
JUSTICE TAYLOR.   THE TERMS OF REFERENCE ARE:-
           "TO INQUIRE INTO THE EVENTS AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
            FOOTBALL GROUND ON 15 APRIL 1989 AND TO MAKE
            RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT THE NEEDS OF CROWD CONTROL AND
            SAFETY AT SPORTS EVENTS".
MR GEOFFREY DEAR WILL BE SUBMITTING THE EVIDENCE HE GATHERS TO THE HEARINGS
TO BE HELD BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR.    THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE WILL GIVE ALL
INFORMATION IN THEIR POSSESSION TO THOSE CONDUCTING THE INQUIRY.
I CAN INFORM MEMBERS THAT THE PLANNING PREPARATORY TO THE EVENT WAS ON THE
BASIS OF THAT APPLIED TO PREVIOUS SIMILAR MATCHES.    THE NUMBER OF POLICE
OFFICERS ON DUTY IN CONNECTION WITH THE EVENT BOTH INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE
GROUND WAS 1,111 OF WHOM 257 WERE AT THE GROUND.
IT IS UNDERSTANDABLE THAT THIS EVENT HAS ATTRACTED IMMENSE MEDIA ATTENTION
AND I MUST INFORM MEMBERS THAT MUCH OF WHAT HAS BEEN SAID BY THE MEDIA IS
INCORRECT.
ATTENTION HAS BEEN FOCUSED ON THE ACTIONS AND DECISIONS OF INDIVIDUAL
OFFICERS.   THOSE INVOLVED AT THE MATCH FOUND THEMSELVES FACING THE POSSIBILITY
OF A DISASTER OUTSIDE THE GROUND AND TOOK ACTION WHICH THEY CONSIDERED
APPROPRIATE TO RESOLVE THAT SITUATION.
I MUST SAY THAT THOSE OFFICERS WERE APPOINTED BY ME TO MAKE THOSE DECISIONS
AND IT FOLLOWS THAT I ACCEPT FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE POLICE ACTION




CONNECTED WITH THE EVENT.                                            *     PAGE:03
I WELCOME THE INQUIRY WHICH IS ABOUT TO TAKE PLACE AND WHICH WILL
UNDOUBTEDLY REVEAL THE TRUE NATURE AND CAUSE OF THIS TERRIBLE TRAGEDY.
I BELIEVE THAT WHEN IT IS COMPLETED THE ACTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE
POLICE WILL BE SEEN IN A VERY DIFFERENT LIGHT.
I WOULD LIKE TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE TREMENDOUS
SUPPORT AND ASSISTANCE PROVIDED DURING AND AFTER THIS TERRIBLE TRAGEDY
BY CHURCHMEN, THE STATUTORY AND VOLUNTARY AGENCIES AND MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO THE VICTIMS, THE FAMILIES OF THE VICTIMS AND TO THE POLICE
                                      CHIEF OFFICERS' MEETING
                                     P.M. FRIDAY 21 APRIL 1989

                                            ITEMS FOR DISCUSSION



              PolicIe'Tvuthority lire^Tfing - Bob Jomrs^on^lscomments




              Account for Club              %_



 J f.         Account for West Midlands Police


              Offers o f ^ J i e l p ^ ' - ^ h e f f i e l d . P r o b a t i o n e r West Yorkshire,
              Metropolitan


              Historical analysis of Hillsborough policing - position
              statement ACC(O)


     7.        'Thank y o u s '         k     k

                                                                   /L
     8.       PCA - position statement ACC(SS)                                                              A. L.

     9-       Proofs of evidence:- J                             .a<                -"i-   '   a   {-t ■.

              a.       position statement - ACC(SS)
              b.       Peter Metcalf letter 20.4.89 re. availability - DCC
              c.       Peter Metcalf letter 20.4.89 re. public enquiry - DCC
              d.       Conference in May - DCC


 10.          Weekend:-

                       Events,XChief^<jT ficer,.,-involvement
                       Chip^ Suptjf6le -
                         Ipt P r p £ t - Nev^'istle
                         /

          1        ,
IK        JX..-
Mr Anderson



Dr                                      fit Johns Ambulance,
would like to speak wi t h you please.      He can be
contacted at the Ha ll am shi re Hospital, by bleep No
                             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
              CHIEF CONSTABLE'S STATEMENT TO THE POLICE AUTHORITY

 Members will be aware of the major tragedy which occurred at Hillsborough
 Football Ground on Saturday 15 April I9 8 9 , as a result of which 95 people
 died, 140 were treated at local hospitals and five are still in intensive
 care.

 Because this Force has a responsibility for law and order in the area and
 assisted the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the control of the event,
 it would have been wrong for the South Yorkshire Police to have gathered the
 evidence and come to conclusions about the cause.  Therefore I asked
 Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West Midlands, to carry out this task and
 he agreed.

 The Home Secretary has announced that there will be an Inquiry led by Lord
 Justice Taylor.  The terms of reference are:-



           'to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Ground on 15 April I989 and to make
           recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
           safety at sports events'.



 Mr Geoffrey Dear will be submitting the evidence he gathers to the hearings to
 be held by Lord Justice Taylor.  The South Yorkshire Police will give all
 information in their possession to those conducting the Inquiry.

 I can inform members that the planning preparatory to the event was on the
 basis of that applied to previous similar matches.  The number of police
 officers on duty in connection with the event both inside and outside the
 ground was 1,111 of whom 257 were at the ground.

It is understandable that this event has attracted immense media attention and
I must inform members that much of what has been said by the media .is
incorrect.

 Attention has been focused on the actions and decisions of individual
-officers.  Those involved at the match found themselves facing the possibility
 of a disaster outside the ground and took action which they considered
 appropriate to resolve that situation.

I must say that those officers were appointed by me to make those
decisions and it follows that I accept full responsibility for the police
action connected with the event.

I welcome the Inquiry which is about to take place and which will undoubtedly
reveal the true nature and cause of this terrible tragedy.  I believe that
when it is completed-the actions of the South Yorkshire Police will be seen in
a very different light.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the tremendous support
and assistance provided during and after this terrible tragedy by churchmen,
the statutory and voluntary agencies and members of the public to the victims,
the families of the victims and to the police.
                                                           aUGK-.N'^i'-iA^;                         A -   ■. A . : . .




                                                           >,    ,.!           , ,                  ,                                    „        ■




                                                                                             < ?!



                                                    1 U'r               3*           .                      A                                                   -     -

                                      t:       t.           p            *.•




v >      „

             2A' I ’iS u t& r ig n T - C c -S ri -t: ai;:;« a

Ttr® p r t o v s and ? r u s c t . - i o f                             a a a   ;
      by f j it-, t o r e Av.:                                                                                                          ■ ■■■■■•7...

The           . ■? -                                                                                                                         ...a
             by vskp t a i n           i i l V i i e S ! fnC1. (£&r.                                                                     '■ ' ' ; a

Tr6 Oukt o f sient.. P r e s i a e m i a                                        in n :-o o u ) « a                       a ^ d o a 'a
             fcy h r .        f a s c f f r s y T h G K itA :

                                                                                                                                                 A-"'AA A ;.
                                                                                                                                                           ■AV ■■'■
                                                                                                                                                             :?A
                   a i t h e f f e l r i - m o r o f tn e ;A ;.;;eov\
                   pA^:.r;sj w a l k e d a c r o s s tAvu- i a : , - ; ;

0 .2 5       |l,ft,                   AA ,      (jSCTf'-ev                i;KAv'i             O r                                             .■■'■?. V; A ' ■            .■

                                      Ca p t o'; n H A ■ ?A- ^...-.eA                                                                                  '

                                      ' A.          .             •                                                                                        A/'/'-

                                      L *euteiiasit--Co 1ont-

uec<&A.'«ct           ' e y   t   m     P    r o v o s t        r;f    S ' * a " 11 s i : .




p!'3.S«s$is;' >a




                                                           « r , Of'o-T-yv

      Captain wi'Inan: hclcsr                                                            a


                      T*'fc Provost                                                                                 ieutinufii A A !crsc
                      of S h e f f i e l d
                                                                               ■■■■■■:■■r^spt a-i              j
                                                                                v.'.:';XJ n l j ' i c a        ;
                                                                                                              ,J.


                                                                                                          "     :


                                                                                 A:-;■■j Tht:?K'S!i

                                                                                 ... . ....... . ..




                                                                       :         frt H ' ;            imCS-SW'
                    V’:;; 1C'-'v 5.'‘j,v'C^



                                                                                    Sns.n =^ '*
                                   W""     •




                                                         ..... .,f;»0. ; , , f ifill J.'i tV> .,
              !!:-• -r                         itv rr-

                ,;-u ;           -C?5^Cn®'1 vr-W::..'

                      .,;>.•    !r;j m'W

                               w i n 3 am ■Hci/i*;

               f^r. QeOTfr’ffV '*hOn:;JV' ■'




l o r d c n a m b e H a i n ' s Off ict*
Mr Anderson

Supt Thompson, Bedfordshire, rang on behalf of CC
Mr Dyer.     (Tel:              Ext 345)

Mr Dyer has asked him to contact you in connection
with the ACPO Standing Sub-Committee on Emergency
Procedures.  Supt Thompson works for that committee
on a full time basis, and would like to visit the
Force re Hillsbro disaster - with special emphasis on
the casualty bureau, identification, etc.

They may also be able to help with enquiries from
other forces as the Unit is a national one and the
enquiries could be directed to them.

They are thinking of visiting   on either Friday   or
Monday.  I said we would ring   back.




Mr Dyer also asked him to pass on his condolences and
best wishes.
Mr Anderson


Supt Thompson, Bedfordshire, rang.  He appreciates how
busy you must be but wonders if his offer of help may
be of any use.

He asked me to explain that he contacted you in the
first instance because Mr Dyer had asked him to.  His
natural reaction would have been to contact our
Operations Dept.

I said we would ring him back and let him know the
position.  (Before 11.00 am if possible, as after then
he will be away from the office for the rest of the
day.)
TELEPHONE:
SHEFFIELD ( 0 7 4 2 )

                         S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE
                               SNIG HILL
                                   SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P. HAYES, LL.B., M.A.
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
s £ \r7 A ^ \J
Mr Anderson


Ch Supt Anne Donald rang from the R U C . She asked me
to say that their thoughts are with you at this
traumatic time.
L^ A ^ / j u b
     4
     >
                            Police and Criminal Evidence A ct 1984           c. 60


omplaint I         (b) is sent to the appropriate authority under section 84(3)      P art IX
n officer I             above,
              it shall be the appropriate authority’s duty to record it and,
              subject to subsection (2) below, to investigate it.
                 (2) The appropriate authority may deal with the complaint
              according to the appropriate authority’s discretion, if satisfied
              that the conduct complained of, even if proved, would not
              justify a criminal or disciplinary charge.
                (3) In any other case the appropriate authority shall appoint
              an officer from the appropriate authority’s force or from some
              other force to investigate the complaint.
                 (4) A chief officer shall provide an officer to be appointed, if
              a request is made to him for one to be appointed under sub­
              section (3) above.
                (5) N o officer may be appointed unless he is of at least the
              rank of the officer against whom the complaint is made.
                (6) Unless an investigation under this section is supervised
              by the Authority under section 89 below, the investigating officer
              shall submit his report on it to the appropriate authority.

                87.— (1) The appropriate authority—
                                                                                 References of
                   (a) shall refer- to the Authority—                            complaints to
                                                                                 Authority.
                              (i) any complaint alleging that the conduct com­
                           plained of resulted in the death of or serious injury
                           to some other person ; and
                              (ii) any complaint of a description specified for
                          the purposes of this section in regulations made by
                          the Secretary of State; and
                  (b) may refer to the Authority any complaint which is not
                        required to be referred to them.
             (2) The Authority may require the submission to them for
          consideration of any complaint not referred to them by the
          appropriate authority ; and it shall be the appropriate authority’s
          duty to comply with any such requirement not later than the end
          of a period specified in regulations made by the Secretary of
          State.
            (3) Where a complaint falls to be referred to the Authority
         under subsection (1){a) above, it shall be the appropriate autho­
         rity's duty to refer it to them not later than the end of a period
         specified in such regulations.
           (4) In this Part of this Act “ serious injury ” means a fracture,
         damage to an internal organ, impairment of bodily function, a
         deep cut or a deep laceration.
>       IX
    P art            .
                   88 The appropriate authority may refer to the Authority any             (5)
                                                                                        tions
References of    matter which—
other matters          (a) appears to the appropriate authority to indicate that an     any r
to Authority.                  officer may have committed a criminal offence or an      impor
                               offence against discipline ; and                         to an
                                                                                        and i
                       ( b ) is not the subject of a complaint,
                                                                                        requii
                 if it appears to the appropriate authority that it ought to be
                 referred by reason—                                                      (6)
                                                                                        super
                       (i) of its gravity ; or
                       (ii) of exceptional circumstances.                                     (.


                                                                                              (
Supervision
                   89 .__(1) The Authority shall supervise the investigation—
of                    (a) of any complaint alleging that the conduct of a police           (7)
investigations             officer resulted in the death of or serious injury to some   sectic
by Authority.              other person; and                                            stater
                      (b) of any other description of complaint specified for the          (8 )
                           purposes of this section in regulations made by the          the £
                           Secretary of State.                                          send <
                    (2) The Authority shall supervise the investigation—                   (9)
                       (a) of any complaint the investigation of which they are                   (
                            not required to supervise under subsection (1) ab ove;
                                                                                                  <

                            and
                       (b) of any matter referred to them under section 88 above,       the A
                                                                                        to the
                 if they consider that it is desirable in the public interest that
                 they should supervise that investigation.                                 (1C
                                                                                        a sta
                    (3) Where the Authority have made a determination under
                 this section, it shall be their duty to notify it to the appropriate
                 authority.
                    (4) Where an investigation is to be supervised by the Auth­
                 ority they may require—
                       (a) that no appointment shall be made under section 85(3)
                             or 86 (3) above unless they have given notice to the
                             appropriate authority that they approve the officer           (i:
                             whom that authority propose to appoint; or                 powe
                       (,b) if such an appointment has already been made and the        nary
                             Authority are not satisfied with the officer appointed,
                                                                                           (i:
                             that—                                                      priat
                                   (i) the appropriate authority shall, as soon as is
                                reasonably practicable, select another officer and         (11
                                notify the Authority that they propose to appoint       auth
                                h im ; and                                              crim
                                                                                        mittc
                                   (ii) the appointment shall not be made unless the
                                Authority give notice to the appropriate authority         (1*
                                that they approve that officer.                          appl;
A
                                                                     Sections 6.1-6.3

                                        SECTION 6

                      FUNCTIONS OF THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

    A   SUPERVISION OF INVESTIGATIONS

    MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONARY REFERRAL

    6.1  Once a complaint has been recorded it will be necessary to refer it to the
    Police Complaints Authority if it alleges conduct by a police officer falling
    within either section 87(1)(a)(i) of the 1984 Act or Regulation 4(1) of the
    Police (Complaints) (Mandatory Referrals Etc.) Regulations 1985; in the case of
    the former the Authority will have no alternative but to supervise the
    investigation.  Chief officers (or police authorities where they constitute the
    'appropriate authority' as defined by Section 84(4)) will also wish to bear in
    mind that the Authority are empowered to supervise the investigation of any
    other complaint not falling within those criteria and of other inatters (not the
    subject of a complaint) where the public interest makes it appropriate for them
    to do'so.  It may therefore be desirable to invite the Authority to consider
    becoming involved in any case likely to undermine confidence in the police,
    locally or nationally, where independent testimony to the thoroughness of the
    investigation could help to meet that concern.  Where matters of this kind are
    referred to the Authority for their consideration, it will usually be
    appropriate to give an indication of the reason for doing so.  Under section
    87(2) of the 1984 Act the Authority may also require the submission to them of
    any complaint which does not meet the criteria for mandatory referral:   where
    such a requirement is made it will be the duty of the appropriate authority to
    comply with it.

    6.2   If there is uncertainty over whether a particular complaint should be
    referred to the Authority, it will generally be appropriate to let the Authority
    decide the issue.   It is likely to become clear, as experience of the new
    arrangements (and of the Authority's policy in applying them) develops, which
    are the cases in which the Authority will probably wish to maintain an interest.
    Where there is doubt whether an allegation of injury constitutes "serious
    injury” as defined in section 87(4) of the Act (but there is no doubt that it
    would amount to actual bodily harm) the appropriate authority should either seek
    the view of the Complaints Authority on the question of referral or simply refer
    it under section 87(1)(a).   In considering whether an injury amounts to, or
    falls short of, actual bodily harm, it is the opinion of the Secretary of State
    that forces should be guided by the judgement in the case R v Miller (2 QB 282)
    (1954) which defines actual bodily harm as "hurt or injury calculated to
    interfere with a person's health or comfort".

    6.3 The appropriate authority is required by Regulation 4(2) of the Police
    (Complaints) (Mandatory Referrals Etc) and by Regulation 10(1) of the Police
    (Complaints) (General) Regulations 1985 to submit mandatory referral cases to
    the Complaints Authority by the end of the day after the day on which it became
    clear to the appropriate authority that the complaint fell within the criteria
    for referral.  (It should be recognised that there may be cases where it is not-
    immediately apparent that the complaint falls within these criteria.  Such a
    situation would arise if, for instance, medical reports showed that an injury
    originally thought to be minor was in fact of greater significance.)  Because
    the fact of referral has to take place within so short a time scale it will be
    imperative for forces to be ready to respond quickly to indications that a
    complaint may fall into one of these categories.  Referral will be deemed to
    have taken place when the Authority have received the information constituting



                                           27
p*
"    Sections 6.4-6.8

     the record of complaint.  Referral should therefore be made by telex or
     telephone and, if by telephone, the call and its contents should be confirmed
     immediately in writing.  There is no time limit in regard to voluntary referrals
     to the Authority;  but it will be borne in mind that the value of the
     Authority's independent supervision may in large measure depend upon its being
     involved from a very early stage.

     6.4 Where a complainant makes several complaints about the same incident, not
     all of which fall within the criteria for mandatory referral, it is recommended
     that the Authority should be told of all the complaints which have been made.
     This will give the Authority a full sense of the complainant's case, while
     leaving them free to decide whether they need be involved in the investigation
     of the full set of circumstances.  (Very often these peripheral matters will not
     be separable from the main matter under investigation: but occasionally it may
     happen that other matters are involved which do not call for the Authority's
     special role.)

     COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

     6.5 When a complaint sent directly to the Complaints Authority is sent on to
     the appropriate authority under Regulation 3 of the Police (Complaints)
     (General) Regulations 1985 the Authority may at the same time indicate whether
     they intend to supervise the investigations.   In such cases it will still be
     necessary for the complaint to -be referred to the Authority formally in
     accordance with the procedure for mandatory referral (where this applies) or for
     cases "called in" by the Authority under section 87(2).    In doing so, reference
     should be made to any previous correspondence with the Complaints Authority.
     The fact that the Authority have passed on a complaint which does not have to be
     referred, without signifying in so doing an intention of supervising, does not
     preclude the appropriate authority from inviting them to supervise if it wishes
     to do so.

     MATTERS ALREADY THE SUBJECT OF CRIMINAL OR DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

     6.6 Section 84(6) of the Act of 1984 indicates that the provisions of Part IX
     of the Act in regard to the recording or investigation of complaints, shall not
     be applicable to complaints about matters which are or have been the subject of
     criminal or disciplinary proceedings.  The effect of this is to remove any
     obligation to refer such complaints to the Complaints Authority, even where the
     conduct in question would otherwise meet the criteria for such a reference.
     (There would in theory be nothing to prevent the appropriate authority, at its
     discretion, from referring such matters under section 88 - though there is
     unlikely to be any point in involving the Authority in matters which, by
     definition, have already been investigated.)

     APPROVAL OF INVESTIGATING OFFICER

     6.7  It will be for the Authority to decide whether to exercise their powers
     under section 89 of the 1984 Act to require their approval of the appointment of
     the investigating officer.  To assist them in this task, the appropriate
     authority should at the time of referring a complaint or other matter provide
     the information indicated in paragraph 4.15.

     CONDUCT OF INVESTIGATION

     6.8 Where the Authority supervise an investigation they will have power to
     impose reasonable requirements affecting its conduct (which includes the
     resources employed to carry it out).  This power is subject to the following
     restrictions:

                                            28
                                     ANNEX A

       vy NOTES ON PAST IX OF THE POLICE AMD CRIMINAL EVIDENCE ACT 1984

Section 83 abolishes the Police Complaints Board and establishes the Police
Complaints Authority.  Schedule 4 to the Act sets out the Authority's
constitution and membership and makes administrative and other provisions.

Section 84 defines the terms "complaint" and "appropriate authority" and imposes
on the chief officer of a force a duty to take preliminary steps when he
receives a complaint.

Section 85 sets out a procedure to be followed to establish an investigation
into a complaint about the conduct of an officer of the rank of chief
superintendent or below.  The chief officer is first required to consider
whether the complaint is capable of resolution under the informal resolution
procedure.  Only if it is not or if the informal resolution procedures fail does
he have to appoint an officer to investigate the complaint formally.  The
section permits the officer appointed to achieve formal resolution or to
investigate the complaint formally to be of the rank of chief inspector or
above.

Section 86 sets out the procedure to be followed by a police authority to deal
with complaints against officers of above the rank of chief superintendent.
Whilst no provision is made for an informal resolution procedure, it is open to
a police authority to deal at its discretion with a complaint if it is satisfied
that the conduct complained of, even if proved, would justify neither
disciplinary nor criminal proceedings against the officer concerned.

Section 87 provides that complaints alleging that the conduct in question
resulted in the death of, or serous injury to some person, and certain other
complaints defined in regulations (see the Police (Complaints) (Mandatory
Referrals Etc) Regulations 1985) must be referred to the Police Complaints
Authority. In addition, it is open to the appropriate authority to refer any
other complaint to the Authority; it is also open to the Authority to require
the submission of a complaint to them. The section defines "serious injury" as
"a fracture, damage to an internal organ, impairment of bodily function, a deep
cut or a deep laceration".

Section 88 permits the appropriate authority to refer to the Police Complaints
Authority any matter which is not a complaint but which appears to indicate that
an officer may have committed a criminal offence or an offence against
discipline if it appears to the appropriate authority that the matter ought to
be referred by reason of its gravity or of any other exceptional circumstances.

Section 89 requires the Police Complaints Authority to supervise the
investigation of certain serious complaints and permits the Authority to
supervise the investigation of other matters if they consider that it is
desirable in the public interest that they should do so. It allows the
Authority to approve the appointment of an investigating officer and, in
accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State, to impose
restrictions or conditions in respect of particular investigations. Where the
investigation is supervised by the Authority, the investigating officer must
submit his report to the Authority and send a copy to. the appropriate authority.
The Authority, having received .the report, submit to the appropriate authority
an 'appropriate statement'. This statement will indicate whether the
investigation was carried out to the Authority's satisfaction and will be copied
to the person by, or on behalf of, whom the complaint was made. No disciplinary



                                        1
Incident         105            151289    OP931                CATEGORY      RECORD   PRINT

  CATEGORY HEADER                                          CATEGORY NAME
  P O L I C E S E RIALS ON DUTY                            S E R I A L 19
      LEPPINGS LANE OUTSIDE                   -    S E C T O R IB
      SUB-CATEGORIES

       CROSS     REFERENCES

N27                 •c IN      CHARGE       SYKES                            GORDON
N284                 r   M E M B ER         THORPE                           ANDREW
N7 8                r SERGEANT              PROCTOR                          LIONEL
N86                 F MEMBER                BOOTH                            PETER
N87                  r MEMBER               SINGH
N88                 f MEMBER                PRATT                             ANDREW
N89                 p MEMBER                ROBERTS                           MICHAEL         JAMES
N9             ^ is5'!'• IN C H A R G E     PURDY                             ROBERT
                         ABSENT
N92                 f MEMBER                ENGLISH
N93                 r- M E M B E R          ROBINSON                          MICHAEL         B
N95                 r MEMBER                LOCKLEY                           JOHN            REGINALD
N96
N97
                  r      MEMBER
                   13 E M B E R
                         M
                                            BURNLEES
                                            GLAVES
                                                                              JANE
                                                                              G               H




                    II ^f
                       I    ^     I)      l i 1^

                       j    V




                                                      E N D OF R E P O R T
Incident        105       151289        OP931              CATEGORY       RECORD     PRINT

    CATEGORY HEADER                                 CATEGORY NAME
    POLICE SERIALS ON DUTY                          S E R I A L 18
      LEPPINGS LANE OUTSIDE                - S E C T O R IB, B R I E F I N G   BY   INSP   SYKES
      S U B - C A T E G O R I E S :-

       CROSS    REFERENCES         :-

N27                P IN C H A R G E       SYKES                            GORDON
N354                P MEMBER              BRADSHAW                         STEVEN
N434               p SERGEANT             MORGAN                           JOHN
N67                F MEMBER               JENKINSON                        PAUL                     HUGH
N68                f   MEMBER             CROOKES                          ANNE                     MARIE
N69                P MEMBER               MCINTOSH                         DUNCAN                   CHARLES
N7 0               f   MEMBER             HORSFIELD                        KENNETH                  EDWARD
N72                f MEMBER               FRANCIS                          DAVID
N7 4                 ? MEMBER             MARSH                            KEITH                    RAYMOND
N77                  f MEMBER             SCHOLEY                          DAVID
N81                 f MEMBER              ALEXANDER                         JEFFREY                 CHRISTOPHER
N84               T- M E M B E R          BLOUNT                           ELIZABETH                V
N9             ^ ■C - IN C H A R G E      PURDY                            ROBERT
R267                   MORGAN             N 1 3 M N T S S E R I A L 18   RESPONSIBLE       FOR   T/STILE   DUTIES   -16
                                          OF E N T R A N C E S GATES     ’A ’ & ’C ’ .




                                                  END   OF R E P O R T


@
Incident         105           151289 OP931              C A T E G O R Y R E C O R D PRINT

    CATEGORY HEADER                                  CATEGORY NAME
    POLICE S ER I A L S ON DUTY                      S E R I A L 17
      LEPPINGS LANE OUTSIDE                 - S E C T O R IB
      SUB-CATEGORIES

         CROSS   REFERENCES

Nl 29            F        MEMBER           AUCKLAND                     JOHN                 PHILIP
N130             F        MEMBER           WADSWORTH                    PAUL                 CARL
N 131            p        MEMBER           TAGG                         ALISON
Nl 3 2           f        MEMBER           PULFREY
N133                      MEMBER           ELS A M                      MARK                 CONRAD
                  F
N134              r       MEMBER           WHITTON                      CHRISTIAN            SEARLE
N135             f        MEMBER           WILSON                       JOHN                 STEVEN
Nl 36             %-      MEMBER           KIRBY
                                           MOORE                        CHRISTOPHER
N137              f       MEMBER
Nl 3 8             P      MEMBER           THOMPSON                     ANDREW
N27               r       IN C H A R G E   SYKES                        GORDON
N79              i        SERGEANT         WHITLAM                      PHILLIP              KENNETH
N9                        IN C H A R G E   PURDY                        ROBERT




            II       v'   F     'bW
             \       r i>
             1        v T ^ c.




                                                 END OF R E P O R T




©
Incident       105        151289 OP931                      CA T E G O R Y R E C O R D PRINT

  CATEGORY HEADER                                   CATEGORY NAME
  P O L I C E S E R I A L S ON D U T Y              S E R I A L 14
      L E P P I N G S LANE T E RR A C E     - S C E T O R IB
      SUB-CATEGORIES

       CROSS REFERENCES            :-

N29             F IN C H A R G E          WHITE                                 HARRY
N33             T> S E R G E A N T        CRAWFORD                              WILLIAM                       CAMERON
N372 .              MEMBER                GRANT
N373             t MEMBER                 MCMANUS
N374             S. M E M B E R           SMALLMAN                              KEVIN                         ANTHONY
N37 5            & MEMBER                 BRANSTON                              A                             PAUL
N37 6           ?, M E M B E R            BUTLER                                DAVID
N377           ?*/ M E M B E R            THOMAS                                BEVERLEY
N378            % MEMBER                  WILD                                  KEITH
N379            6   MEMBER                WASHINGTON                            MALCOLM
N381            v: M E M B E R            BURTON                                JACQUELINE
N384           & MEMBER                   LANG                                  ANTHONY                       GORDON
R19                 AITKIN                1115 150489 N116 M NTS W E N T TO FRONT W E S T S T A N D . S E R I A L S
                                          14 & 15 B R I E F E D BY N 2 9 W H I T E . M N T S D U T I E S E N T A I L E D
Rl 9                 AITKIN               S E A R C H I N G F A N S E N T E R I N G L E P P I N G S LN E N D OF G R O U N D BY
                                          T U R N S T I L E S 1 - 1 6 . IN P O S I T I O N 1 1 3 0 . G A T E S T O O P E N 12 N O O N



                     °l   X    2> b w
                      1 X b             hW
                          X    p        bW




                                                  END OF R E P O R T




 ©
Incident          105         151289 OP931                  C A T E G O R Y R E C O R D PRINT

   CATEGORY HEADER                                        CATEGORY NAME
   P OLICE S E R I A L S ON DUTY                          S E R I A L 15
      LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE                       S E C T O R IB
      SUB-CATEGORIES

         CROSS   REFERENCES

Nl 15              £> M E M B E R         BEARD                              GEOFFREY
N l 16           8   MEMBER               AITKIN                             ALEXANDER                    AITKEN
                      ABSENT
Nl 20             f3 M E M B E R          BURKE                              PETER                        DUNCAN
Nl. 22               MEMBER               LLEWELLYN                          MARK                         I
N123               £> M E M B E R         RICHARDSON                         STEVEN
N l 25             g MEMBER               BOOTH                              G                            R
N l 27      ' flotw M E M B E R           FORD                               BARRY                        GEORGE
          |          ABSENT
NZ9                f IN C H A R G E       WHITE                                 HARRY
N30                C: S E R G E A N T     BURNS                                 ROBERT
N347              j> M E M B E R          PEARSON                               HELEN                         KAY
N355               ft M E M B E R         MARTIN                                BEVERLEY
N8             UsS-p M E M B E R          RICH                                  KEVIN                         LAURENCE
R19                  AITKIN               1 1 1 5 1 5 0 4 8 9 N 1 1 6 M N T S W E N T T O F R O N T W E S T S T A N D .S E R I A L S
                                          14 & 15 B R I E F E D B Y N 2 9 W H I T E . M N T S D U T I E S E N T A I L E D
R19                  AITKIN               S E A R C H I N G F A N S E N T E R I N G L E P P I N G S LN E N D OF G R O U N D BY
                                          T U R N S T I L E S 1 - 1 6 . IN P O S I T I O N 1 1 3 0 . G A T E S T O O P E N 12 N O O N




                        °j      }<8         ]i
                         I      X F      b\\J

                        oi.     .x m L           n iM -'C




                                                     END OF RE P O R T
Incident       105        151289 OP931                  C A T E G O R Y R E C O R D PRINT

  CATEGORY HEADER                                 CATEGORY NAME
  POLICE SER I A L S ON DUTY                      S E R I A L 13
    ON D U T Y L E P P I N G S L A N E      INSIDE GROUND - SECTOR           IB,   BR I E F ED BY    INSP    BULLAS
    S U B - C A T E G O R I E S :-

       CROSS   REFERENCES            :-

N31                  IN C H A R G E        BULLAS                      DAVID
N3 2            in   SERGEANT              BURMAN                      PAUL
N49            V     MEMBER                SHIMWELL                    RICHARD
N50            Q     MEMBER                COUPLAND
N51            'Tf   MEMBER                NAYLOR                      RICHARD                      ANTHONY
N52              C   MEMBER                SCHOLEY                     PETER
N53             ^    MEMBER                FROST                       DAVID
N55            *     MEMBER                FAIRCLOUGH                  SANDRA
N56             C    MEMBER                SHEARWOOD                   STEVEN                       ANDREW
N57            ef    MEMBER                MERCER                      STEPHEN                      JOHN
N58             £    MEMBER                SAVOURY                     MICHAEL                      THOMAS
N5 9             £   MEMBER                PARKIN                      NEIL                         ANTONY
N60             fe   MEMBER                NEWBOULD                    ROGER                        ALBERT




               II Y        E.
                I     x     £    1    >H




                                                END OF REP O R T
                                            Z'i                                o f         o ' & \ u s g £   ^Jt+o    cou&tt
C J D u i4 s e r u ^ th i&                   /h fr ^ f< L        r w               h -» l u q Qo CLo ’


    A        ,'D x V iS 'O iJ                                             2 3        o ^ ite & s

                                                                                           It            h      i r      *1
$                  Z ) i S / S / o /'i                                    10


C.            ut>!^|£/^|N/                                                /S                                              14


J>          C E n ^ / C X ^


              2>w/i$,r'otJ                                                2   .£


p            2   > fv/’
                      »3 f o a /                                              *f *r




        Pl-IAS i                 /O      ©V' W o t / 1       QjfiUZsJS kouM t^fu^ Q<XLM                      /^Ytrv^ h f 6?
          ^<XCHA>UU_«                    £>Cla^          (yO I \J<^   t       CA^ ^Li CLA^ tS      ^
S ^ - o d c^JM, %w



                 o £ & cM r£ £                    s n u ,       £ & N &                 zen = rr4 .



    A"           2>\\J\£>i 0                         h
    £                      "                             /
                          i>                         1
    >>                      -                        o
    (gr                                              S
    ^                       ••                      /S.
                         isL^<zja*fckejiA             i^^ote^*-> cw>^ ^X^cis*   ^   ^k-«l

La'j'H-*',‘<*'V   0   »j^-     -b stk ^     ij   <2                     &**»
§cuuC                   dL Jfot^   a^v. ^    AJs^l      W      ^    ~
                                         'TefTfVc       ~5>\




                                      u z m * t < ,s   J J h S & fl£ X & m e * g Z t   -            ISH C jl^   a,   ^

 Pi      13>u-(       c£A*~>fo£&

 P c\    |X 7S r      U A t-ia

        2-S^          (5^ A ^ r ___

                      M   c   /Ka W    mlS

           (7 <o      £mA\a_*v^

        _l711

                      ^ixTL-cf^’

         /o o T -     i_ilc_t>

         e)75~        uiPrSWnrvic,-rarvi

         2 >1   T L       Su^rb<rJ

         S3(T7            Tfrofvi/tS




 Sig€*4u        i*"       U3ftt«*ss             DWtf    r & u tte jft       -   j&**e      «rwct_os**£^

Ps      r?^7          GuQajs



        £cf3>         rivrrt^stfA-t-^



        |v*<S             P t r i u f s ........

        2 0   ?^          fVVCX-cr^

        S.* 8 5 "         CooPe^-
              IZ          T^Mco/t

         1 3 ^            ^*T^i£NZx^
W g & T                       S g RUVt,

fs.     2 .1 ,7       ^     S w ift
Pc>     1+-1      —          hf©Obo/-4



                            A^£<?b

                            Pt+iu.iPs

            2    c%3 >

            ZiS'if           C ooP eK

                i.V        n ^ i^ d

                \Z ^k       rwfcXt*jzi£ .




S & h # c i~              (=>0 _ . _ 6 a & u c            &N*i7TW«3>       £ 0


                U>SrZ-       Lo\Ag

            2    i o-L.      CUSrto-




  C ^ F T e^ i                   Or*    G 0 O ^   J& & T JX b         r-Jesroan *-**-      M * * fO +
  P c                                                                          -S g/foJ            r d-          ^1     /^ flr^ io v )

  Pc                                                  — ------------------- — --------------      r t      I j o Z 'i

  Pc.

   'P c .                                            k.   | ^auCgpA    V>a .                   foi-i r c                Tl-Vo^Arf
      H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s
                                     SOLICITORS
      ALAN I. BOTTOM LEY                JO H N H . G . H ELLER                6 . N . IAN G REEN FIELD    CONSULTANTS:                 EMPIRE HOUSE
      D . TREVO R LEW IS                IAN R. SHUTTLEW ORTH                  ST E P H E N GALE           ROGER W . SUD D ARD S cee
                                                                                                                                       10 PICCADILLY
      M ICHAEL E .G R E G S O N         PE T E R C . METCALF                  MARK W . HILTON             SfR D ESM O N D H EA P
                                                                                                                                       BRADFORD BD1 3LR
      JO H N D . D E MAIN               CH RISTO PH ER W . J O N E S          PAU L R . M AN SER          IAN W . W HITSON
                                                                                                                                       TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
      M ICHAEL L. SW EPH ER D           ANDREW R . JO RD A N                  JO N A TH A N H . W RIGHT

      P E T E R N . WILBRAHAM           SIMON R. B .S T E L L                 STUART A . VERITY                                        TELEX 517201
      J . RICHARD A RC H ER             SIMON R. INMAN                        R O N A L D S . DRAKE
                                                                                                                                       M .D .X . N O . 1 1 7 2 0
      BARBARA W . FRAN CE               RICHARD W . W ADE-SM fTH              RICHARD B U R N S
      C.   N O E L HUTTO N              JO H N G . BECKETT                    DAVID W . K. ARMITAGE                                    RAX (0 2 7 4 ) 7 3 7 5 4 7




      O U R REF.            PCM/PAB                             Y OU R REF.                                           da te        21st April, 1989

                                                                                                                                   Second Letter


      Dear Sir,

      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

      We have now had the opportunity of telephone consultation with
      Mr. Bill Woodward Q.C. in connection with the forthcoming public
      inquiry.

      Leading Counsel approves the headings which we suggested in our
      letter of 20th April as being appropriate for the proof of evidence
      to be submitted to the inquiry by the Chief Constable.

       So far as preparation of the proof is concerned, Leading Counsel has
       raised the following points:


                   1.         Were any copies retained of the video film and
                   ■fiJU photographs which were handed over to the West
                              Midlands inquiry? If so, it would be greatly
                              appreciated if further copies, perhaps four of
                              each item, could be prepared, as soon as possible
                              and delivered to us.

                              On the assumption that statements in connection
                              with the events have been made and perhaps are
                              still being made by South Yorkshire Policy
                              Officers to the inquiry conducted by the West
.A                            Midlands Police, have copies of those statements
                              been retained?  If so, we would again appreciate
                              copies, so as to avoid unnecessary duplication.
>4;                           If it were thought appropriate for the permission


                                                                                                                                              /.,, contd.

      The Deputy Chief Constable,
      South Yorkshire Police,
      Police Headquarters,
      Snig Hill,
      SHEFFIELD S3 8LY.

      LEEDS OFFICES:              BffTANMA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEBJSLS1 SAX TRJffHONE (0632)       O EX 567202 FAX 444794/421199
                                  JOSEPHS \ASX HANOVER MMLK LEESS LS3 1AB THJEPH0NE (0632)      taExssaee FAX4»8ee

                                             1HS M H 6 WQUIATH) 8 t THE UWf SOCWV N WE 00WUCT OF MCSIMBff OJ8MBSS
HAiViMOND S u d d a r d s                                                f*GENO.   2




              of the Chief Constable of the West Midlands to be
              obtained, we would hope very much that such
              permission would be forthcoming, bearing in mind
              that the purpose of providing the copies is to
              enable the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire
              Police to prepare a proper proof of evidence to
              present to the public inquiry.  The circumstances
              are thus rather different from those .which might
              apply if the request for copies appertained
              merely to civil proceedings brought against the
              South Yorkshire Police.  In this case, the
              provision of copies will assist the Chief Constable
              in the proper performance of a necessary public
              function, i.e. the presentation of evidence to the
              public inquiry.

       3.    Although this point is effectively raised by our
             letter of 20th April, Leading Counsel has stressed
             the need for him to see any manuals, standing
             orders, operational orders or other documents
             having any bearing on the organisation and
             operation of the policing at Hillsborough on
             15th April.  This would apply equally to documents
             which apply generally, as to documents which apply
             to that specific event.

      4.         With a view to being thoroughly prepared for the
                 inquiry, Mr. Woodward would like the opportunity
                 of attending a football game, with a guide from
                 che South Yorkshire Police and for the
                Organisation of the policing to be explained to
       r \ '/ :         Jtacl«ding_ 'obviously a visit to the relevant
     • r-:
    ■ .V
                -'.dontroi. room.   It is appreciated that there will
                f e no opportunity for such a visit at Hillsborough,
                but if this can be arranged at any ground within
                the South Yorkshire area, he considers that it
                would be most helpful.        Whether or not this is
                   >ssible, he would like to be able to attend a
                     snstration of the communications and surveyance
                    lipment normally used in crowd control.

                is suggested that, as the South Yorkshire
               lice strictly have, no investigative role to play
             in relation to the events of 15th April, this firm
             should organise enquiries amongst potential lay
             witnesses, not so much to cover the events of
             15th April itself, which will no doubt be fully
             dealt with by the West Midlands inquiry, but to
Jia m m o n d Suddards                                       m GENO   3




         establish a more general background picture of
         the type of problems experienced at and in the
         vicinity of Hillsborough when football games take
         place.


In the absence of Mr. Metcalf, either Miss Norcliffe or Mrs. Hall
from this firm will be in touch with Mr. Anderson early next week
with a view to establishing what sort of evidence may be ■available
under points 1 and 2 above and also with a view to making
arrangements for Leading Counsel's visit to a football gajne and/or
a demonstration of the communications equipment used.

Yours faithfully,
                                        I
                                        1
                                        i




H am m ond S udd a rd s
                           S O L            I C I T 0 R S
ALAN I. BOTTOMUY               JOHN I- G. HELLER                   G.N. IAN GREENFIELD   CO NSU LTA N TS:        EMPtRS(HOUSE
D. TREVOR LEWIS                IANR.   ShUTTL£wCRTH                STEPHEN GALE          ROGER W. SUDDARDS css   10 P   ic c a d illy

MICHAEL E.GREGSON              PETER C, METCALF                    MARK W. HILTON        SIR DESMOND HEAP        bra d fc     RD 0 01 SLR
JOHN D.OE MAIN                 CHRISTOI PHERW. JONES               PAUL R. MANSE5        IAN W. WHITSON
                                                                   JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                            T E L E P H O N E (0 2 7 4 )
MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD            ANDRE’       R, JORDAN
PETER N. WIL6RAHAM             SIMON        B. STELL               STUART A. VERITY                              TELEX 5 7201
J. RICHARD ARCHER              SIMON    INMAN                      RONALDS, DRAKE
                                                                                                                 M .D .X . NO. 11720
BARBARA W. FRANCE              RICHAR !pW.WADE-SMITH               RICHARD BURNS
C. NOEL HUTTON                 JOHNG BECKETT                       DAVID W.K. ARMITASe                           FAX (027i» 737547



OUR REF.               PCM/PAB                         YOUR REF.                                   date     21st Aprijl, 1989




 Dear Peter,

 Police Committee- Meeting

 It may be helpful                          for the Chief Constable to have available the
 attached extracts                          from the final report of Mr. Justice Pop glewell
 in respect of the                          1985 committee of inquiry into crowd safe ty in
 control at sports                          grounds.

You will see that the extract makes some very clear, and T think
helpful, points a Dout the responsibilities of the Police in relation
to crowd control at sporting events.

It is fair to say that the Popplewell report focused very ir|uch on
events occurring Inside the ground, but I do not think that that
substantially les ens the force of the conclusions.


Yours sincerely,




Poter C. Metcalf




               U R G EN            T
P» Hayes E s q .,
Deputy Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police
FAX 0742 523409

LEEDS O F F IC E S :    BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLA C E LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632)        j fELSX £57202 ^AX 444794/421199
                        JOSEPHS WELL H A N O V ER WALK LEH3S L$3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) |  | TcLHX 55365 FAX 426S58
                            “I ant aaxlo
                            the repetftioiT *°have **« vJewa of the Clubs about what steps can be taken or fecoA11 mended to prevent' : • •’•'
                            from the FA and^ A F o o S l l BIrmi”8haTm*1 sf* U’ of coursejt getting t h e ^  S S
           V                                   Football League when I meet them again.      6     s         - H ;Wewsoftbeaub$^ "i
                           I would tlso
                           would like to c ? £ 7 J Z yV ie* i 0 f ) ’T CIub ab° ut ^thtr       of my Inquiry, In addition, Sf you
                           your conntnli scome and hare a discussion with me I shall be happy to see yorof^any’ ofyour Board at
                           Oliver Popph-well (sgd)

                       4.11 I am glad
                                           o say that a number of dubs helped me by riving me tf» KtfJt                            iC


                    the SZLeagie Qut^ did not e «
     i
                    How can the problem be controlled?

                    h M llg a iilr l° d':al W’'h :'he eta"“ “ which                     < * * * , for coping'wi.1: the problem of
                                                                                                                »v

                    A. The Police
                      4.13 I made it d«
                    therein is not the re ar in my Interim Report that the state of the nremlses and the «vw uct of the event
                    and its legal status ?Htlle S e r em hfoP° iiS!!,iA f t ’* 8 comnierciaI organisation, which 5is run for profit,
                    or many other priv, . tie different from that of the person who organises a dod conceri a garden party,
                   large numbers at fop- i S T            ^C3USt ’ 3S 3 matter of practice, police officers have reeu: arly attended in
                   control of what goe:i          1 g ounds, it has somehow been assumed by the clubs that the r:sponsibility for
                   to assist in the enfor‘- i e m e T ' n   &A U° i Im$ paS5Cd fr° m lhem t0 the PoIi<*- A police presence is there
                   have the primary a.,foment of law and order. Those responsible for organising a orivate f,Xiction, however,
                   are invited onto thei p r e m S ng ° bl,gati0n and resP°nsi'Wlity to ensure reasonable safett for those who
         t ’i
j;
                    4.14 This responsj
                  they have invited ont ?!‘2 i,WillCh !? a le£al             continues throughout the time tthat those whom
                                        > the,r ground nanam there. It does not, for instance'cease when™.inergency arises.
                    4.15 The police's r
                  to be the only body t :sponsibility is to preserve law and order. When an emercencv arise* they are likely
                  have the authority, fi s l ' j K    of         ™<h '<• Th=y h!"'C the facilities. They have tfo training. They
                  organising the crowd with all th,” ey„!a“ "m           “* P°'iC' haV' “ Uke lh'               ' sponsibility of
                    4.16 This has give
                 implications? Does it n rise to a certain apprehension amongst police officers What *r the resource
                 the presence at a gro.I ndU'ah? h0    pr*scnce at a Sround which hitherto has noVhad one'> Does it require
                 case an emergency ari;tnd, which presently has three or four constables, of a sentr office^ r more men in

                    4.17 it was never in
                 Police training and fori n'wrt o*f l mh r i ^ ? menlf ati0« that: “E'^uation procedure should be * matter of
                 increase of resources c. I f ?     ™e     fi"8           officers before a football match’” shoid result in an
                 to assist in the prcserv ition oflaw^nd'ordw* '* ^                   “ * 6ro“"d'                  a stn d “

                of pre8pIanniSn ^                           procedures, at major grounds at any rale, should be the subject
                « ^cond "o S i r a n ^ h e n o S ^ usfstewar^ * e local fire service (whose experience in evacuation
                "Hius at a ground whe-ethm t I f ‘I* * ^ exlcnt of poIice mannin8 will vary from club to club.
         p*.
                system from that wh.ch cxis^atTern,L ^ ° r u™ P°liCC officerS therc wilJ undoubtedly ?e a different
                officer.
                officer,                   S at d £r0u,ld wI,cre there are Present 300 officers in the charge oi a very senior

                   419 Thus, whilst it is
                and briefing, they do tha  Tin S        hC        Sh0uId ,reat cvacuation procedure as a matte r for training
                jggponsibilitics. as thrv at n order more readily to assist the owners of the private club to a5rry out their
                                          wguld any other private organisation in an emergency, and not as 1result of any                        i
                 nferim ^ cP°ft: Recommenc ation 1,                  "         ~
                                                                                         rl' i ’




                                                                                                                            ■ .i-
                                                                                                                                  i*
                                                                                                                            ,   *4$




 [ llt t f responsibility resting upon the police. It cannot be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club,
                      of the ground who is putting-on the function, that the primary and continuing obligation

                   .           .    .
  (ij Stewards and Policing
  .. 4.20 A number of clubs have been impressed by the presence of stewards ;from visiting clubs who look
' after tbeir own supporters. This is a practice which has much to commend it. One witness reported that at
  Osfcnd a serious confrontation between the Belgian police and Liverpool supporters was defused by the
  presence of Liverpool stewards.                                     ;
      ••■^^      *
       .4.21 In some police forces it has been possible for one or two officers to travel with fans when they go
     away and thus assist the “home police” in identifying trouble-makers. In other cases home stewards have
     been able, at away matches, to stand at the home turnstile and ensure that their own supporters do not
     infiltrate the opposition terraces.
       4.22 A number of clubs have shown me the handbooks which have been          issued
                                                                                       t to their stewards. I have
     seen also cards issued to police officers with instructions as to their duties in the ground. The handbook
     for Bristol Rovers, for instance, was written pursuant to the conditions of their Safety Certificate and was
     approved by the police. It is a thoroughly comprehensive and sensible docun ent dealing both with genera!
     matters of stewarding and with the question of evacuation in the event of ar emergency. It is to be hoped
     that all other clubs will have done the same.
        4.23 In my Interim Report I recommended that the Green Guide should jse amended to read: “AH exit
     gates should be manned at ail times while the ground is used by the public and be capable of being opened
     immediately from inside by anyone in an emergency.’11 Leicester City Football Club have a system of exit
     doors worked on a magnet system which are automatically controlled from a central office. Ipswich have
     a similar sort of system. Understandably there is concern that if my Recommendation were applied to
     them they would be required to have a steward at each gate and that this would vitiate the whole scheme.
     It was not my intention that this Recommendation should apply to exits which are automatically controlled,
     if these types of mcchanisms are acceptable the responsible local authorities.

     (ii) Powers o f Search
        4.24 Tn my Interim Report I said that I was minded to recommend that, in England and Wales, the
     police be given the unfettered right of search before entry into football grounds, by statute.2 1 there set
     out the problems relating to police powers of search which are contained in the Police and Criminal                        ■u.
     Evidence Act 1984 which comes into effect on 1 January 1986.
                                                                                                                                .'f.
        4.25      The disquiet arose because, by Section 1(3) of the Act, a constable ic only has power to search a
      person or a vehicle, or anything in or on a vehicle, if he has reasonable grai;tiuls fo r suspecting that he will
                                                                                      >( apon.
     fin d stolen or prohibited articles. A prohibited article includes an offensive w>

        4.26 The passage of the Bill through Parliament gave rise to considerable controversy about the extent
     and nature of police powers. On the one hand there were those who expressed disquiet about what were
     called colloquially the “sus laws” and those who wanted to give the police a(more effective weapon against
     crimc. It is not part of my function to comment on the arguments nor on the result. Nor do I wish to
     make any observation about the Act, save in relation to sports grounds (and particularly football grounds)
     with which I am concerned. The wider implications are not for me to consicer.
        4 . 2 7 Football grounds are in their way unique in that they are a regular place for very large n u m b e r s of

     people to meet. Some of those who attend football do so intending to causc trouble. Every S a t u r d a y , for
     about three-quarters of the year, about half a million people go to football matches. Thus football is
     different in kind, nature and purpose from any other activity of the community.
      >x4-28 The “reasonable ground for suspicion” safeguard in the Act, which is there for the general protection
 ^                                                       needs to be reconsidered in the light of what actually
                 S A j L £M fL S ^ <l N O W U bH J B A t > 8 8 £ £ ^ - W Z 0   S   £3i60            6 8   .
 H am m ond Su d d a rd s
                                   S O L           I C I T 0 R S
ALAN I. BOTTCMLEY                       JOHNW.G. HELLER                      e. N. IAN GREENFlfcLf)                CONSULTANTS:                           EMPIRE HOUSE
 D. TREVOR LEWS                         IAN R SHUTTLEWORTH                   STEPHEN GALE                          ROGER W. SUDDARDS n»                   10 PICCADILLY
 MlCl IAfc'1. 6. SRffGSON               PftlER! C- METCALF                   MARK W. HILTON                        SIR DESMOND HEAP                       BRADFORD BD1 3LR
JOHN D. DE MAIN                         CHRIS'■ cipher w . jo n h s          I’ AIJL K. MANSCR                     IAN W. WHITSON                                   i
                                                                                                                                                          TELEPHONE (0274) Q
m ic h a e l l . s h e p h e r d        ANDREW ft. JORDAN                    j On a ih a n i j, wrx -shi
PfrTEfV N. W1LBRAHAM                    SIMON iR. B. STELL                   StUARl A. VERITY                                                             TELEX 517901
J.   RlCHAk’O ARCHER                    SIMON R. INMAN                       RONALD 5. DRAKE
                                                                                                                                                          M.D.X. NO. 11750
 BARBARA w . FRANCE                     RICHAf :D VV. WADE-SMHH              RlCl W D BURNS
C. NOtLHUtTON                           jomn <keecKEtt                       DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                                                         FAX (C274) 73754V



                                                                             U R G E N T
 F A C S IM IL E T R A N S M IS S IO N
 oun    r ef.

                PCM/PAB

 TO                                                                                                F A .0
                P. Hayes,                 Deputy Chief Constable,                                           South Yorkshire Poli ce

 FAX NO:

                0742 523409
 DATE:                                                                                             TIME:
                21st April,                     1989                                                                9.15 a.m.

 NUM3ER OF PAGES (INCLUDING TH S SHEET):

                4

 IF THIS TRANSMISSION IS NOT FULL f OR LEGIULY RECEIVED, PLEASE TELEPHONE (0274) 734700




LEEDS OFFICES                BRITANNIA C H A M B E R S 4 /5 O X F O R D PL A C E LEEDS LS1 3AX T E LEPH O N E (0 5 3 2 )                            ifcLEX 557202 FAX 444794.'421199
                             J O S E P H S W E LlJ H A N O V E R W ALK L E ED S L S 3 1AB T E LEPH O N E <0532) I-                TELEX 5 5 3 6 5 FAX 4 2 6 8 6 8

                                            TkiiS C t& ti   be^i a    ti>/      » AuU ««Vri*TV    TWP ftrSfcjTX iftT f tp tNVFSTMEVT ftS IKINiPSS
 H am m ond Sijd d a rd s
                                s o l i            C I T 0 R S
                                                                                                                                                                                         JT
 ALAN I.SCm OMlEY                    JOHN H. B. HELLER                      Q. N. IAN S ft£ £ N riE L D            CO NSU LTA N TS:                              E M P IR E H O U S E
 D.    TREVOR LEWIS                  IAN R. SHU TLEWORTH                    STEPHEN GALE                                                                         1 0 P IC C A D IL L Y
                                                                                                                   ROGER W. SUDDARDS a<s
 MICHAEL 6. GREGSON                  PETER C.M     JTCALP                   MARK W. HILTON                                                                       B R A D F O R D B D 1 SLR
                                                                                                                    SIR DESMOND HEAP
 JO) iN 0 . D£ MAIN                  CHRISTOPH!i£SW. JONES                  PAUL R. MANSER                         IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L. SHEf’ HfcRD              ANDREW R. JORDAN                       JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                                                                   TE LEPH O N E <0274) [
 PUTERN. WlLBRAHAV                   SIMON R. B STELL                       STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                                                                                 !ELEX5t7?01
 J. RICHARD ARCHER                   SIMON R. If' MAN                       RONALD S. DRAKE
 BARBARA      W. TRANCE              Ric h a r d w WADE-SMtTH               RICHARD BU RNS                                                                       M.D.X. NO 11720
 C. NOEL HUTTON                      JOHNS. BiBCKI  <ETT                    DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                                                                 FAX (0274) 737647


 OUR REF.                 PCM/PAB                          YOUR RE
                                                                           ’fjAjL-A                                 -                lwl            20th April,                          1989




  Dear Sir,
                                                                   biAJtj                                 — &L/'


  Hi.1 Isborouqh;                      Publ O JC Inquiry

 Further to our meet ing yesterday, we send herewith, fcr reference,
 a copy of the. proof of evidence submitted to the Cleveland Public
 Inquiry by the Chie f Constable of Cleveland.  There will follow by
 post copie s of the rather bulky Appendices and we will also send
 you, again by way c f example of the format adopted for such proofs,
 a copy of the evide nee submitted by our clients Hargreaves
 Clearwaste Limited to the inquiry into the gas explosion at Loscoe
 in 1986    Wo shoulc perhaps make the point that all of this
 documentst ion is wi thin the public domain.

               revi'ciendc, usually has to be submitted some slvin to
 fourteen’days before the inquiry opens for full hearing and may
 then be expected tcj be supplemented by oral evidence.      For example,
 in the Cleveland inquiry oral evidence was given by the Chief
 Constable and five other Officers, ranging in rank from Inspector
 to -Assistant Chief Constable.        -?-;

Whilst this matter             only Tin the very early stages and »»*-
                                                                   weVV.--— "=n....
                                                                             shall t
                                                        I   ,
                 l<3e d .h y.T.eounsel, our own feeling is that Ldr.d ..Justice
T&!£lor_Will be.expecting the„.South-Yorkshire-Police to put in a.’
formal proof of evijdence and .will also be expecting Officers
pr jn c ipally c o ncernjed.. in the events which occurred on Saturday,
l5th~Aprf] to give joral evidence.           It should be noted that the                                                                                                                        1
inquiry has the power to compel any person to attend and give



                                                                                                                                                                      /...           contd.



The Deputy Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire^ Poliice

FAX 0742 523409


L E E D S O FF IC E S :    BRITA N NIA C H A M BP ^ S 4 /5 O X F O R D PLA C E L E E D S L S I 3A X TE LEPH O N E (0 5 3 2 )                       [TELEX S 5 7 2 0 2 F A * -M 4 7 9 4 /4 2 1
                           JO S E PH S Wl=i i H/il
                                                ‘.Mf*to/PQ \WAI   \t   i        I ^*4 1 « D   TCi            tr \ t O   k   JEAC4E   Ttri f*\> e e w e   er^'w
H a m m on d S u d d a r d s                                               I'AGENO




 evidence under Subpoena and, obviously, if that is a possibility
 then we would advisi that such evidence be properly prepared and
 given voluntarily.

 Our preliminary view of the appropriate-'headings for a formal "'proof
 of evidence are as follows:


            ].       The South Yorkshire Police:  history,   geographical ///>
                     area, manning and organisation.

            2   .    The policing of sporting events:  the statutory
fyW'-j '
                     and common law background to Police involvement. ,3^                  -
     \
            3        The approi.ich of the South Yorkshire Police to the
                     policing of major sporting events;                              Ljt
                                                           the history
                     of such operations and the current standing
                     operational orders.

                     The speci ic background to Police involvement in
                     the match to be piayed at Hillsborough on
                     15th April.
                               |
                     .Details of the manpower and organisation for the
      • v           " match.

           !6        The event 3 which occurred.
   ^/C'1


 .Tn our view,          it will be necessary to"have' statements from as’ many as
                                     ’       ' ‘     '             “    that
                                                                                 so
                                          may well be helpful to have
 statements indicating when they came on duty, to whom they were
 responsible, where they were, what they observed and what they did.

We do not underestimate the size of the task indicated, but the
quality of the proof of evidence submitted by the Chief Constable
will depend very much on the accuracy and quality of the information
provided by the Officers who were on duty.

As the statements concerned are no t required f o r .the pur po s e s of any
criminal investigation, there is no reason for them to be prepared
on ..CJA -forms and indeed many can, in our vicv/J!_bo. self-taken, in the
sense of simply forming a record of the recollections of the Off icier
concerned on the points raised above.




                                                                      /... contd.
  H a m m o n d S udd►a
                      , r Ids
                                                                                                            t-’ACf NO.




                                 W     feVtroct-.L.adia,- Counsel to advise on
   L                    t r ° Pu b l j c inquiry and we anticipate that it w i l l
  ’two'.weeis^ intM a‘
                     y ?V<f *" <®*l*-e°n««ei>c, probably during the first ^

   Much will depend ori the timing of the inquiry, as to w h i c h WP * r,=
   making contact with the Treasury Solicitor.    Ey way of example      thp
             3n? uirY V 35 announced by the Minister on" 9th July '1 9 87* a
   K e  f S u % V r t n l l a L l°. ^           W&£ h e i d ^ th A u                                       ^ s J    fn d
   won 1n n 'vj-       ^ commenced seven days later on 11th August                                             We
  wo think + h - ? 1fipa^ ? 7t^ at SOrt 0f timc scale in this c a s e ' because
           i     f     w      be ^neral.ly accepted that the extent of the
  great"? th?n inC? J f ' r ^ d    t0 the °PGnin9 ^ th^ inquiry is far
  llttT*l          theJ-leveland case.   However, as we indicated at our
  meeting yesterday, there will be strong political pressure, for an
  early start and we
                       would expect the inquiry.to open for a full
  hearing within two
                       or three months.  Obviously, we shall advise just
  cts soon as we have any further information.


  ®
  i-ui leers
       c o ^ rw i t h n an
              w.it.h    ^b^motive..
                            r - - ° “ oueraf
                                      —    -il?surance
                                              1nna t   clients,
                                                            u ; n „that  iflsenior
                                                                   i ______ ^ n




  other-Off icers!nSUr0rS W °Uld consTdTr 'syra>;t.he£rcally3‘equert^ from


  bec^us?0pifhShaSiSe t0° strony 1y that this offer has not been made
  because either insurers or ourselves think it desirable for there to
  f t   h ^ r l1 I ' n a ^ T r e £ ^   ta t i0 n -   - In   ° Ur   V ie w '   th e   ° ®   o s ite   i«   t h f c a L
 disun-'tv Anri      roP resGn     x°n m a y create a needless impression of
 south J n r K h - V ? f ve to lsolate- the Officers concerned from the
 off or of
 ou.cr                  *LC® a ® f Wh° l eto
        of separate representation        * WS  W ° uld
                                             these      su^ est
                                                     Officers   th^ be
                                                              could  oven the
                                        it may be better n ^ C p u t ^ t S s ?o the
/  f X i c ^ ^ s^ ^ i c e r ' n e d , unless they raise the. point themselves.
/ ^.JXicftio-Cohcerned.                                                             Having
  sn.td that, we shall be more than happy to discuss the situation with
  these Officers indi /idually, if either or. both of them would
  appreciate such a discussion.

 .We understand that /ou. will be contacting us when you have had a
 chance t.o consider  he contents of this letter and we ]00k forward
  to hearing from you .in early course.


 Yours faithfully,
                                                                           A



                     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - MEETING TO DISCUSS
                          INSURANCE AND LEGAL IMPLICATIONS

                     held at 2.15 pm on Wednesday 19 April 1989
                       in the Deputy Chief Constable's Office

Present:

Peter Hayes                   Deputy Chief Constable
Stuart Anderson               Assistant Chief Constable (Disc & Comps)
Peter Owen                    Chief Superintendent (Disc & Comps)
Donald Denton                 Chief Superintendent (Man Services)
Stephen Walker (JS)           Solicitor, Joint Secretariat
                              Paymaster, Joint Secretariat
                              Regional Manager, Municipal Mutual
               ](MM)          Claims Manager, Municipal Mutual
                              Regional Claims Manager, Municipal Mutual
Peter Metcalf                 Solicitor, Hammond Suddards
Belinda Nortcliffe            Hammond Suddards




Mr Hayes opened the meeting and made the necessary introductions.

Mr           Said he had instigated the meeting in order that the Insurers and
Police Authority could map out a plan of campaign to deal with obvious claims
that could arise out of this specific incident.

Mr|       |(JS)   Said there was the public enquiry aspect as well to ascertain
what is needed and what our views are about that as well as the claims.

Mr        (MM)    Our interest is primarily a financial interest. We are
providing an indemnity in relation to any liability that is going to be found
to have been incurred by the Police Authority. Having said that, I would like
to put on record very early that we are not looking to protect our financial
interests at the expense of either the PR interest or any other interest of the
Authority. We really want to hear what you want us to do in relation to
protecting our common financial interest in the short term.  In the long term I
think things will evolve and there will be things to be done to which we will
have no option, but that might be 3/4/5 years. All of us are going to be under
a lot of pressure short term. We are not pretending to be independent and we
are certainly not against you we are quite literally on your side.

Mr Hayes    To set the scene, a match occurred on Saturday (15.4.89), it had
been running for a short time when the match was stopped because of this
obvious problem in the Leppings Lane terrace area, and that was caused by
crushing injuries to members of the crowd.  95 people died on the terraces as a
result of injuries caused because of crowd pressure, and approximately 2 0 0 were
injured, about half of those went to hospital.  I cannot really say much more
about it.

We have an inquiry. Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the Home Secretary as
head of the Judicial Inquiry.  (Then referred to terms of reference - which are
very brief). Because the policing of the event, in terms of prior planning,
management on the day, are going to be central to the enquiry, Mr Wright made
the decision, quite early and publicly, that he must ask that the investigation
into what occurred, which is coupled to the investigation on behalf of the
Coroner, should properly be undertaken by another police force, and Mr Dear,
t
                                                                                    2.


    Chief Constable of West Midlands has undertaken to do that. What is of
    significance is that we do not have two inquiries, because Mr Dear is reporting
    direct to, and working under the direction of and in co-operation with the
    Judge. He is obtaining evidence and information for the Judicial Inquiry. He
    is not reporting to the Chief Constable or the Home Secretary but to Lord
    Justice Taylor.

    Mr|        'S)   Asked about the investigation initiated by Mr Wright.

    Mr Hayes   Because the seizure or capturing of evidence which, if positive
    steps in that direction are not taken disappears, we started off a limited
    inquiry. We have not obtained statements of evidence deliberately. We did set
    up a sizeable inquiry team to work through the logistics of the event, to sort
    out where people were and to sort out as objectively as we can what happened
    sequentially from approx 2.00 pm until 3.30 pm. The purpose of this is to
    ensure that any video footage, photographs, state of crash barriers, things
    which people could very easily interfere with, was retained in that state. The
    purpose of that was to set the inquiry going as early as possible knowing that
    we would hand it over to someone else, which has now taken place. We were
    doing essentially what they would have done.

    Mr           Will Mr Dear's report be along the same lines as if it was
    straight forward discipline and complaints involved?

    Mr Anderson    No - he will feed that back into the inquiry and then it will be
    for Lord Justice Taylor to decide how he is going to receive evidence.  It may
    be that we will have a similar situation to the Cleveland Inquiry, where people
    will go a give 'evidence', as in a court of law. But he will decide that.

    Mr Hayes    There is the Judge who is liaising with the Coroner, because this
    inquiry by West Midlands is now the Coroner's Inquiry. We started that off as
    we must so that we have identified bodies, and taken that inquiry to the extent
    where the Coroner agreed that the bodies can be released to relatives. That is
    a first step.  In terms of the report which must go to the Coroner as to how
    those people died, he would rely on the West Midlands inquiry for that purpose,
    and they will be reporting to him in that way, and that perhaps would lead to
    the sort of report that you are interested in.

    The Coroner, when he has finished with identification inquests, is going to
    adjourn the inquest until after the Judicial Inquiry reports.

    Mr Hayes    There will be an interim statement, albeit on safety, by August
    (before the football season starts), it is now April so I wonder how long this
    will run before we get a definitive report which would be of value to
    ourselves.  I think what     is saying is that the Judge is going to take
    evidence and publish a report and it is going to be very far reaching, talking
    about safety, sports ground legislation, all sorts of recommendations, etc.   I
    think you are also saying that a report to the Coroner, which is done for the
    purposes of the Coroner's Inquiry into deaths, if it was a complaint there
    would be complaints.  If it was a complaint then we are used to handling
    complaint files. You know how they are compiled, how the indexes work, you are
    familiar with that. What sort of document is likely to.emerge from West
    Midlands Police which will be helpful to you is I think the question you are
    asking.

    Mr|          And also how public it will become. Because a normal complaints
    and discipline inquiry which goes to the PCA and then comes back to you is an
!




    undisclosed document. Whereas this is an inquiry which is being made on
    entirely different lines because it is going to be available by production of
    public evidence to a public inquiry which will then be made public knowledge.

    Mr Denton    It will probably be by way of an appendix to the Judge's report.
    The sequence of events is something we do not know.

    Proof of evidence

    Mr Hayes    The Judicial Inquiry will not be the sort of report prepared for
    the sort of needs that we have to defend the many writs that we are going to
    receive. Mr Dear and his team will interview thousands of people, will obtain
    thousands of statements and will be doing this in Merseyside, Nottingham and
    South Yorkshire.  This will all be computer linked by way of the HOLMES system.
    All those statements and masses of evidence, which we need access to, will not
    be at our disposal. We need, on your behalf, if you wish, to think this
    through talk to Mr Dear about it and our problems and then we will discuss it
    again.

    Mr Metcalf    There is a more urgent and immediate point concerning the public
    inquiry, and as I understand it, there is going to be’political pressure to get
    this going quickly.

    The Judge will start his work quickly but will not receive evidence.  In
    general terms he would have a preliminary hearing perhaps 4 weeks from his
    appointment, and then a month after that the thing opens, like Cleveland as you
    rightly said. The Chief Constable or in his absence the Deputy Chief Constable
    will be expected to put in a statement. To prepare that statement, and it will
    be a long document, we who are doing it are going to need access to statements.
    There is going to have to be that input to make it the measured document that
    it should be.

    Mr Hayes    Will the Chief Constable be required to produce an introductory
    statement at the early even initial stages of the public inquiry?

    Mr Metcalf    Not necessarily so.  If there is a preliminary hearing it will be
    to find out who is to be represented, who wants to speak, etc. What we will
    then have is pressure from solicitors asking for proof of evidence at least 7
    days before the inquiry opens, and that will be the formal document.  One will
    go in on behalf of the Club, one on Behalf of the Chief, City Council, Health
    Authorities possibly, Ambulance Service, Fire Brigade, and those will have to
    be lodged, and they will represent in effect the evidence which would be given
    in chief to the public inquiry on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police.

    Mr Anderson    This is crucial, because we are in a dilemma here in terms of
    how much research we can do honourably to present a case, because here we have
    the independent body looking at what has happened.  I would like some guidance
    on this.

    Mr Hayes    Because of the public safety element under this, which continues
    because there are other matches going to take place at Hillsborough, and in
    terms of getting an understanding of how we hit problems on this day, we are
    endeavouring internally to make sense of what occurred. At the same time we
    are not trying to duplicate this inquiry. But we are not enquiring into this
    in the way that we would in certain circumstances because West Midlands are
    doing this.
Mr Metcalf    I wonder if a line might be, which you pointed the way to, that
this is sub judice and therefore the evidence may have to be very limited. But
there may be some very public criticism if that line is taken, and before we go
down that line we might have to have a fairly urgent conference with Counsel to
try and settle whether we can do it that way and whether you want to do it that
way. There may be very good reasons for saying that.

Mr Anderson    I think we can do a limited amount without crossing over the
enquiry team but   there is going to come a point where it  willbe duplicated.

Mr Denton    There is nothing wrong in us presenting a case with the planning
for the policing of that match. Our knowledge of the deployment of resources
there and from within our men's knowledge now what actually happened. And that
is all it should be. Mr Dear will be doing the same thing but taking it
further, he will be seeing other people, going wider. What we have not done so
far is, in a detailed way, got evidence from other witnesses. What we do have
is the evidence of our policemen, the whole planning exercise.  I do not see
that there is anything wrong with us obtaining that from our people.

Mr Hayes    I have grave reservations about that.   Perhaps it should be in
terms of saying that on this day, at this time, an FA Semi Final was arranged
at this ground between these two teams. This was an all ticket match, 54,000
tickets sold and   the police were involved in that, etc. That in terms of the
logistics of thematch it is significant and interesting that an identical
match between the same teams was held in Sheffield just about a year ago when
everything went well and the police received a lot of congratulations, etc.

Mr Metcalf    That is the sort of thing.  It is entirely from the police point
of view that it is presented, we are not trying to make an investigation.

Mr Hayes    An operational order was prepared which deployed 800 police
officers, so many mounted men, dog men, etc, attach copy of order perhaps.    I
see that as a very anodyne sort of statement, it is factual.

Mr Metcalf    That is probably all that we need, I can let you have by fax
tomorrow a copy of the Chief Constable's statement on Cleveland.  I know it is
different but it may give you some idea of the sort of thing to put in.

Include a brief note about force itself, size, area it covers. Then a history
of football policing so far as it has developed.  Then coming on to the match,
how we were officially notified of it, whether we should have had any possible
reason to do anything different to what we did successfully last year, and
setting out logistics.  It is preferable that it does not go beyond that,
doesn't get to the realm of the operational decisions then made at the time of
the cricis and afterwards.  That goes outside the evidence which the South
Yorkshire Police as a police force can give. Maybe then individuals can give
further evidence and may be called to do so.

Time-Scales

Mr Hayes    I think the way to do this is for you to fax us some broad
headings, suggestions, etc, and let us have a look at them and come back to you
quite quickly.

Can I ask about the time-scale - you are saying that this might be required
                                                                                5.

fairly soon.   We have all got a problem, nobody produces it that quickly do
they?

Mr Metcalf    It is the   political pressure.   If Justice Taylor had his own way
he probably would not     open this for about four months which would give us
plenty of time. But he    is going to come under pressure to get onwith it and
people will be asking     for solutions for next season, etc.

Mr Hayes    What sort   of time-scale do you envisage at worst, theworst case to
produce this proof of evidence?

Mr Metcalf    I cannot believe that this could start earlier than two months
from today (19.4.89), and I feel that that must be a worst case.  I am not
saying that there will not be things going on between now and then, and there
will probably be a preliminary hearing at which only advocates are present
simply saying I am whoever representing whoever.

Mr Hayes     In terms of the proof of evidence I think we have gone as far as we
can on that.

Mr Metcalf    Yes, if we do what you have asked us t o ‘do and then leave it with
you we would probably be looking to try and organise a conference with Counsel
quickly once you'd come back to us with observations.

Legal Representation for the two
officers primarily concerned

Mr Hayes    Counsel will be appointed to represent the South Yorkshire Police
interests (the Chief Constable as titular head). We have two senior officers,
one who is the Divisional Commander Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, and the
other is the Deputy Divisional Commander Superintendent Marshall - who is the
man who made the decision to open the gate. Those two people are in a very
exposed position.  In terms of their protection, to ensure they are properly
represented, where do we stand?

Mr Metcalf   You must start with the men themselves.   If they said they didn't
want it they want to be represented by the Police Superintendents' Association,
for example, because they feel the force may not do them proper justice, then
that is their decision.  I would doubt they would want to do that.

Mr         (MM)   There is no problem in so far as they might personally incur
a liability, it is unlikely to happen but there will be an indemnity under our
policy anyway to cover them provided the Chief Constable requested - that would
be the sole requirement.

Mr Metcalf    I like the line that we present perhaps not so much an anodyne
but a fairly neutral statement of facts leading up to the events, but the point
that worries me is that if we don't say the evidence stops there, we cannot go
beyond that, and then Superintendent Marshall or Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield are subpoenaed to give evidence, then they go unprepared because we
have taken the view that that is not part of it but then they are made to speak
anyway. There may be good grounds for at least preparing something including
them and including their part of it, even if we then take the view that we can
take a stand and not put it in and not use it and hopefully avoid any problems.

Mr Hayes    Our anticipation is that they will be called and be submitted to
cross examination.
                                                                                6.



Mr Metcalf    But it takes us over the line that we have been talking about.
It is what we are going to say in chief in effect.

Mr Hayes   So if they are going to say things in chief then we should submit
that as proof of evidence?

Mr Metcalf    Either as their separate proof of evidence or as part   of an
overall submission on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police, perhaps   in a
different section from the neutral introduction.  This is all to be   planned in
much greater detail, we have got to look at that as a possibility.    We will be
giving you advice on that assuming you want it.

Mr|        MM)    We are not looking to give external advice to override your
own in-house legal advice either. We are not laying down the law in doing
this, we are offering advice and no more.  There may be other ways of doing
this and you have got to listen to your own people as well, and I think the
senior officers who may feel particularly exposed may want to get entirely
independent advice if it is available to them, particularly through their
professional Association. They have got to be offered that option.

Mr           We assume that we have already reserved a Counsel, QC, do we take
it that you would wish the same QC to appear on your behalf as well as on our
behalf, or do you feel that we should have some separate involvement.

Mr |       |
           MM)    Municipal Mutual are not a party to the inquiry. We
obviously have a vested interest. We will provide the wherewithal to provide
Peter to brief Counsel or for your own in-house lawyers, you may prefer to do
it that way round, our recommendation would be that you use Peter.

Individual officers - separate legal advice

Mr Hayes   You are going to fund the appointment of Counsel and legal
assistance as required to represent the South Yorkshire Police. You are then
drawing a line. We have got three people, the Chief Constable and these two
senior officers. We seem to have separate legal representation for separate
interests.

Mr Metcalf    We wanted to make the point that if these senior men themselves
feel the solicitors acting for the Chief Constable may not be the men for them
because the force's overall policy and its needs may not be the same as the two
Superintendents.  If they would like to seek separate advice they can but they
do not need to.

Mr         M)     Can I illustrate this with the worst possible scenario - one
or other of them might think that the force was looking to use one of them as a
scapegoat, and they must be offered the chance to have the protection in their
own name.

Mr _______ |(JS)  Could I clarify that with Steve. When you said that you
would underwrite their representation, I assumed you would be saying that they
wanted separate representation, ie they did not want Hammond Suddards to
represent them, then you would underwrite that.  So if they want to go to
someone else and instruct them you will foot the bill?

Mr       |(MM)   Yes.
                                                                                 7.

Mr Anderson    Can we reassure them that they could be legally represented
through our insurers?

Mr        (MM)    Yes.

Mr Anderson      And that would apply to anybody?

Mr ___    (MM)    I think at this stage you can say that we will listen to any
overtures.

Mr Hayes    Just to clarify that, if it emerges that the opening of the gates
at this particular time was clearly significant to the tragedy that occured,
etc, and these two senior officers could say, "well I was never asked about the
opening of that gate, I never authorised the opening of that gate, I was not
there when the gate was opened ...", and officer 'X' appeared who says, "well I
saw the wall moving, I was terrified and I opened the gate," then he might be
one of the individuals who might become the Duckenfield/Marshall extension.   If
there are other people who significantly come into the picture you would
consider them?

Mr         :MM)   I think officers at a lower level would probably, from my
experience with police claims, go to the Police Federation anyway and feel more
comfortable with that representation, but other individuals would be
considered.

Mr Anderson    Would you make available someone to be able to talk to either
officer if they felt the need. They may then say, "I am very happy for you to
represent the Chief Constable and the Police Authority but it might be better
now, having talked to you, to go and seek a separate Counsel."

Mr Metcalf    I do not think that they will need or want to do that, but I
would be very happy to talk to either or both of them.

Mr|       |(MM)    Whilst we are at that point, it is important, in case there
is any doubt, that what we are talking about here is representation at the
inquiry.   In so far as either or any of them might be sued as private
individuals in their own name, with or without their police rank in front of
it, there is no doubt at all about an indemnity. This would go up to £ 8 ^m.

Mr Anderson      They are all insured by the Superintendents' Association as well
- I think for    a figure of    about £500,000.

Mr I      |(MM)    What they would require from that fund would be the cost of
private representation if they chose to go down that route, which is nothing to
do really with the question of paying compensation to the bereaved or the
injured. That is down to us.    If one of them was found to be personally liable
for a decision he made or an action he took it is not a problem, he is sued in
his own name, the Chief Constable is going to be liable for that, our policy
provides an indemnity.   The only way that there would be a question mark would
be if he was acting outside the scope of his duty, and the Chief Constable
would have to say to us that he was acting outside the scope of his duty so we
would not provide an indemnity. As you say, it is not going to apply here..

Mr Hayes    Can I just ask, does that apply automatically, if I sue a policeman
is his Chief Constable joint?
Mr Metcalf    No you can sue the policeman. He is automatically liable under
Section 48, providing you are acting in the exercise of your duties. That
would bring in the Chief Constable, you would not need to actually join them.
Most people do in fact, but it is not legally necessary.

Brief discussion then took place on Counsel.

Sub judice

M r ________ ^JS) There are two writs. Makin (solicitor) is making the point
that matters are now sub judice and, therefore, he does not expect the Chief
Constable to issue any kind of statement. There is a Police Authority meeting
on Friday (21.4.89) at which the Chief Constable is going to tell them
something about what happened last Saturday. He has said that he will only
make statements about information which is already known to the public, and I
have no doubt that members will want a little more. What are you views on sub
judice?

Mr Metcalf    It is a well known tactic to issue a writ and say the whole
matter is sub judice so that no one else can say anything else about it. I do
not think it operates like that.   I think obviously you have to be careful, so
if he starts saying it is all the fault of the Club because there were no gates
in the barriers, that would not do.   It would have to be more a question of the
observations which were made were these, this happened there, etc, very
factual.   I do not think he should start talking about 'the cause'.

Mr Hayes    I think we are seizing on the notion of neutrality here. That the
match started, that there was an influx of fans, a barrier collapsed and that
so many people died, and that is neutral.  So for example all this business
about the bad behaviour of the fans when we hear of the worst case - a
policewoman bent down giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to dying or dead fan
and another fan simply standing behind her and urinating all over her. He is
making no statements about drunkenness, or about crowd behaviour because he is
strictly neutral. But I would like some advice in terms of the sub judice
aspect. Are we saying that Mr Wright should no longer have press conferences?

Mr Metcalf   I am certainly not saying that, no.

Mr Hayes    To help Mr Wright where do we stand in terms of sub judice now we
have received a writ?

Mr Metcalf    I will let you have some written advice tomorrow by fax.

The bill

Mr Anderson    Could we also have some advice about a matter raised in our
meeting this morning. Normally we service an account to Sheffield Wednesday
for a sum of money in terms of the attendance of police officers. We
immediately feel that this is extremely delicate, but we did still provide a
service.

Mr Hayes    We have entered into a contract with the football club. Clearly we
switched modes and stopped policing a football match and started policing a
major disaster at some point. A lot of the officers came on duty long before
this occurred so we have had people in the ground from 1 0 / 1 1 . 0 0 am.
Mr Anderson    Have we still a duty to service that club with an account for
police services or would this seem insensitive?

Mr Walker (JS)     You do not have to send them a bill immediately, it would be
quite insensitive.   If in time the Authority decides to pursue the debt, we
could do this in the future.

Mr Anderson    The point I am making is that if we do not service them with an
account we could look as though we are saying that we feel responsible.

Mr Denton    We would normally send them an account within the next 4 weeks,
and we would send the account to the football club. That would be paid by them
but repaid to the club by the FA. Before we start taking a decision should we
have discussions with the FA first.

Discussion then took place on the charging agreement.

Mr Hayes    To sum up, we have reached agreements with the club that we
categorize matches according to potential problems, and that is between
ourselves and the club. We then police the match accordingly.

Mr Denton    In the normal way, in the contract which we have with clubs for
league matches, we charge them on a scale according to the actual crowd
attending.

Mr Anderson    The reason I brought this up is because Peter said he was going
to give us some written advice tomorrow to help the Chief. Now it may well be
a topic for discussion on Friday and therefore I wonder whether or not you
could give us any advice from the legal responsibility.

Mr Metcalf    I take your point but I think Steve knows much more about this
aspect than I do.

Mr        (JS)    This may be something that we ought to discuss at F & GP on
Friday (21.4.89).

Mr Hayes    To sum up discussion today, we have talked about proof of evidence,
headings, and time-scales should be two months at least; about the bond and
legal representation apropos South Yorkshire Police picking the officers; about
you talking to the two officers primarily concerned; the need for independent
officers to be given the option of separate legal advice if they wish; the sub
judice comment and the bill.

(Mr Hayes then left the meeting.)


Mr Wood    With regard to the people who issued the writs, what sort of action
will we be taking in respect of those writs at this stage, if they insist on
pursuing them?

Mr Metcalf    We either just go along with it or we go to the Court and say it
is farcical to have these matters being pursued to trial at a time when a
Public Inquiry is about to start which will have a material bearing this and
therefore this action should be stayed until the report of the public inquiry
is out. Whether we get quite that long a stay or whether we get half a stay I
do not know, but I feel reasonably confident that we will get a good stay.
                                                                                 10.


Mr |       What happens if, when the public inquiry is published,
responsibility is not pinpointed one way or the other?

Mr Metcalf   It will not be pinpointed in the inquiry. Whatever he says,
whatever the facts are and the recommendations it will not say, "this was all
the fault of the club, or whoever."

Mr       |    When the public enquiry is finished what happens then with the
writs?

Mr Metcalf    They serve a statement of claim, setting out in detail why they
say we are responsible and anyone else they blame is responsible, we serve the
defence saying we are not responsible, and then in effect it goes on to trial.

(At this point Mr Hayes rejoined the meeting)

Mr Denton    Do you think we ourselves should be looking particularly at that
false imprisonment part of it, should we be preparing ourselves for it.

Mr Metcalf    I think so, because although it is not a statement of claim and
we do not strictly need to answer it, we ought to try' and find out if we can,
if there are no records of the people arrested as there might not be.

Mr Owen    In the event of complaints under Section 85, would you say it is the
same sort of thing, that it is really sub judice?

Mr Metcalf   You can record it as a complaint and I think I would then notify
the PCA and say we propose to write back to this complainant saying that we can
do nothing until the public inquiry report and we will then investigate it, do
you agree to this course of action.  I am sure they will.

Mr Hayes    We can refer this to the PCA on enquiry.  I spoke to Sir Cecil
Clothier about it and I read to him the Home Secretary's announcement in the
House in terms of the terms of reference for the inquiry, and I was able to
tell him that included in the Home Secretary's paper was an answer if questions
were asked about the extent and perameter of the West Midlands police inquiry,
and the answer would have been, and I was present when the Judge spoke to
Mr Dear so I can now reinforce this, that the West Midlands Police Inquiry is
working to the Judge, and Sir Cecil said he would now say that as the police
inquiry is subject to immediate judicial review I certainly would not expect a
separate review at referral and I would not expect the Chief Constable to ask
for on e .

Mr        |    What -are the chances of getting this moved from Liverpool to say
Manchester?

Mr Metcalf    The answer is not a lot according to the authority that we
presently have. Whether it is worth our while making a real fight of it this
time and taking it to the Court of Appeal is a matter for you. No case on
transfer has ever gone to the Court of Appeal.   Plaintiff can start where he
wants to and that is for the convenience of his solicitors.   I am not saying
that we cannot think of some way of getting round that,, we might be able to.

Mr Holmes       It would be difficult to pick a jury in Liverpool who would be
impartial.
Mr          (MM)   To put in for a transfer to Manchester or Sheffield, would I
think, reflect adversely, not so much on Municipal Mutual as on South Yorkshire.
They will say why do these poor working people have to think about going to
Court in Manchester, Sheffield or anywhere else, its a Liverpool issue and the
city will unite. But there will not be jury trials.

Mr Metcalf    I suppose where the actual trial takes place is a different issue
to where these interlocutory matters come up. The actual trial, we may have
more success, if we wanted it, to have it in Sheffield because the obvious
thing is the Judge is going to make a view and he is not going to make a view
from Liverpool.  I would expect that if we wanted it by then we could probably
get it in Sheffield but whether we could transfer these out of the Liverpool
registry when the solicitors and plaintiffs are in Liverpool I very much doubt,
but I am willing to have a go.

Mr         (MM)   I share the opinion and I think the adverse PR would not be
worth it. South Yorkshire as the defenders might be criticised for trying to
seek to gain an advantage.

Mr Hayes    This has been a very useful meeting.  I have found it immensely
informative and very reassuring and I would like to thank everyone because a
lot of things have emerged today which have been very helpful to us all.  Is
there anything else that we need to talk about?

Mr Metcalf    In due course we shall need to discuss logistics and contact
points, there will be a lot of work in preparing for this inquiry, assuming I
am right in the way that it goes.

Mr Hayes    Can I suggest, everybody, that your first contact point is Stuart
who might refer it to Peter, but just so that we have a contact point.




The meeting concluded at 3.40 pm.
