Michael Gillott P.C. 8 M                                                   c^O(? 2 8
ȣ* DHQ
South Yorkshire Police


At 0845hrs. Saturday 15th. April 1989, Iattended Woodseats Police Station for duly in respect
of the F.A. Cup semi - final at the Hillsborough football ground between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest.

In company with other officers I was conveyed to the football ground and informed I would be
working on the Spion Kop in serial 7. Police Sergeant 752 Batty was the officer in charge and
after a general briefing from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in the North Stand when our
instructions were to Police fairly but firmly we made our way to the Spion Kop.

At approximately 1130hrs. the two serials working inside this part of the ground were briefed
further by Superintendent Greenwood, Inspector Calvert, Sergeant Batty and Sergeant Harpies.
Serial 7 was to be present in the main bo^y of the Spion Kop to observe public order and as a
back up unit to the other serial who would form a barrier on a wing of the Spian Kop separating
the majority of supporters being from Nottingham from any Liverpool supporters which may have
ti^^ts for that side of the ground.

At approximately l4l5hrs. the segregated wing of Liverpool supporters which numbered about
200 to 300 was being verbally abused by a number of Nottingham supporters and the serial I
was working in joined the barrier as officers were ejecting some supporters. Shortly before
the kick off Nottingham supporters were pressurising the barrier which remained stable and
about 5 minutes after kick off they became more agitated when it appeared that Liverpool
supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the ground were invading the pitch. When it was
evident that supporters at the Ijeppings lane end of the ground were seriously injured the
pressure eased.

At approximately 15^5hrs. many Liverpool supporters on the Spion Kop expressed their wish
to leave the ground and I escorted two batches of supporters to the exit gate. About 15
mantes later the match was officially abandoned and the two serials on the Spion Kop cleared
the terraces of supporters. When this was finalised we were on stand by until the serials
were stood down at l830hrs.

I was conveyed back to Woodseats Police Station and concluded my duty at 1700hrs.


M. Gillott P.C. 841           17th. Hay 1989   ^
