4
                                                                                                                             M IR .15



    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                         Date and time raised           **


    T itle                ^vonn      S .                    -fro C O                 jo#   rye. C jU L o o J OSa^JL-^tr c r j            t^ jo v v -ir v a j^ c ^
    (Include source and any document number i f relevant)

                                                                                                     <D                                    OC2«=tj©.
    Receiver's instructions -- urgent action — Yes/N                                 m &j&sw
                                                                                                                                                                    Receiver
                               c jU ^ C to S U - J - ^ r         l^ v ^ k n ry y *                  i*£> ) -p p Y c fl-C -iS^3rg=» J h
                                                                                                                                                              IS 3 1
    t* \ U 2a^/     C X jrcu n    \ y y / 2D‘B i ^ a l r   B > e e ^ > u 2 .*-j r - r v ^ ^ g ^ k     vv-«-*± a-*3 r e j
                                                                                                                                                                    Indexer
    Document reg
              e d a § r e d /ir daxed
                                J     as ’indicated
                                            J !--------1

    No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                                                            Statement Reader
    Statement reader's instructions
                                                 y d j & L UAr-r

                        Z-
                                                                                                                                                                    Indexer
    Indexed assipdfci
               indicated
              2^
    No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                                                9 6 3 6

    Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                                                 SIO




    Further action No(s)                                                                                                                                            Indexer


    When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                              OFFICE O F H.M. CO RONER FOR
                                                                          M EDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                          WATERY STREET,
                                            (West District)               SHEFFIELD
                                                                          S 3 7ET
STEFAN   L   POPPER.   LL B ., B.MED. Sci., B.M., B.S., M R.C G P
                                                    CORONER

                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD       C O M 2) 7 3 8 7 2 1                        19
                                                                                 31st Aug. 1990



  Your Ref: CC/BMT


  Mr. L. Sharp Q.P.M. LL.B.                                    F.B.I.M.
  Chief Constable,
  Cumbria Constabulary,
  Police Headquarters,
  Carleton Hall,
  Penrith,
  Cumbria,
  CA10 2AU.


  Dear M r . Sharp,

                                           Hillsborough Inquiry

  Thank you for your letter of 30th August following my telephone
  conversation with you earlier that date.

  I was aware of the matters mentioned in your second paragraph except
  for the PCA statement which you refer to.

   I am aware of the complex and intertwined relationships between the
   various investigations that have been carried our on behalf of Lord
   Justice Taylor, myself, the PCA and the DPP. I am also conscious of
   the need to minimise delay in sorting out the disciplinary aspects for
   the reasons which you mention.

   Nevertheless as you know I asked you to reconsider releasing the DPP
   file and statements to the South Yorkshire Police until after the
   completion of the Inquests.

   The Inquests having begun proceeedings are sub judice until the
   matter is completed. Inquests are not adversarial and in that sense
   there are no parties to them. Nevertheless certain persons have
   various rights under the coroners rules and there can be little doubt
   that individual officers and probably the SYP force would fall within
   the terms of of the rules.

   I think that to disclose to one party information and statements some
   of which at least would form the basis of the the evidence which will
   be used at the Inquests
      i.   gives that party a potential advantage
      ii. does not appear to be fair and
      iii. is or gives the appearance of being against the rules of
           Natural Justice.
Generally speaking I have been against early disclosure though it may
be necessary for the smooth running of these very complex inquests to
modify my practice a little. However in principle I feel that if
disclosure is made to one party then one would have to be prepared to
let others have the opportunity of studying the documentation too.
There are restrictions on the power of the coroner to release police
statements which have not been given in evidence but it would be
difficult I think for,me to resist a request to confirm that I had no
objection to WMP releasing copy statements if I knew that they were
already in the possesion of SYP.

The scope and form and content of the evidence and the verdict of the
jury cannot be predicted. It follows that after the completion of the
Inquests it may be that a further look might have to be taken by other
parties at various aspects in the light of what might have been said
or done at the Inquests. This could include questions of discipline. I
would have thought it better and more cost and time effective to say
nothing of reduction in trauma to the officers involved if the
question of whether there have been any breaches of discipline were
dealt with at the end of the Inquests when the matter hopefully could
be dealt with once and for all rather than have the uncertainty that
the matters might have to be reopened.

The following considerations are strictly nothing to do with me as
coroner particularly as there is a division between your
responsibilities so that you are dealing with the DPP and PCA
side of thing . You might however like to weigh the following:

   1.   The position with regard to the Hillsborough disaster
        is already highly charged and I am anxious that nothing should
        be done which could upset or inflame rightly or wrongly a tense
        situation. I fear that if it became known that there had been
        disclosure to one party before the Inquests are completed it
        would generate a great deal of upset.

   2.   I am not fully conversant with the rules and provisions of the
        PCA but I seem to understand that public interest immunity
        might have to be considered. This raises a rather interesting
        thought as to the interrelationship of this with the duties of
        Discovery in civil proceedings. I do not know the answer to
        this but no doubt your legal advisors would be able to offer
        guidance.

In the final analysis the decision as to what should be done will have
to be yours but I hope that the points made above will be helpful in
your discussions and decision taking.

Please let me know what your decision is in due course.

I should perhaps add that I am active considering the timing for the
start of the resumed inquests but am not yet able to give you a date.
I hope however that it will be possible to commence in the relative
near future though the intervention of Christmas and winter does
present some problems.


Yours sincerely,
