                                                                pDU^ji                         IR .1 5



                                                                                   1*1*9
                                                                                                                    h fz3G
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised                                   Num ber



T itle                                                        <Hjo/ h             t/*£_       /{oUtshd
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)     M
                                                                                                rf

Receiver's instructions — urgent action — V6s/No      /Z
                                                                                          —                            Receiver



                                                                                                                         ’J k S
                                                                                                                        In dexer
D ocum ent registpr£d/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                             r-:
No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                   Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions          ^<a_



                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




Further action No(s)                                                                                                   Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
    SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY




hMHIRE
HOSPITAL

   MAJOR
  DISASTER
    PLAN

         ISSUED : JANUARY 1989
               MAJOR DISASTER PLAN REVISIONS



REVISION NO.   DATE   PAGE NO.    TITLE OF REVISION DATE REVISED SIGNATURE
                                                      IN PLAN

    1          9/88   19a & 19b     X-Ray Dept     Jan 1989

    2                    10       Switchboard       ft       ft
               1/89
                                                                        —

    3          1/89    13 & 14    Anaesthetics      ft       ft


    4          2/89                  CONTENTS       Feb 1989




                                                                         w

                                                         .
                         SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY
                         ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                            MAJOR DISASTER PLAN
This document contains definitive information on the response of the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital to a major accident.

It has been prepared following consultation with all interested parties and
should be given the widest circulation.to ensure all appropriate members of
staff are fully conversant of their role in the event of a major accident.
This procedure is supplemented by departmental action cards (issued
separately) prepared to give each staff member concerned precise details of
his role.

Clarification may be sought or amendments suggested via the Hospital
Administrator.

                                 CONTENTS
                                                                PAGE
SECTION 1.     MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE INSHEFFIELD             1-3
               What is a Major Accident?                        1
               Notification.                                    1
               District Hospitals Control.                      1
               Distribution Principles.                         2
               Site Medical Officer/Mobile Teams.               2-3
SECTION 2.     OUTLINE OF THE ORGANISATION OF THE
               ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL IN THE EVENT
               OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT.                             5_9
               Preparation of the Hospital as soon as the
               Alert is Received.                               5_6
               Control Points.                                  7_8
               Initial Assessment & Treatment.                  8-9
SECTION 3.     DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONAL POLICIES.               11-30
               Switchboard.                                     12-13
               Accident & Emergency Department Medical
               Staff.                                          13-14
               Medical Staff.                                  14-15
               Anaesthetic Services.                           15-16
               Nursing Administration.                         17-18
               Unit Administrator.                             18-20
               Medical Records Department.                     20
               X-Ray Department.                               21-22
               Haematology & Blood Bank.                       23-24
               Portering.                                      24-25
               T.S.S.U./C.S.S.D.                               25
               Pharmacy.                                       25-26
               E.C.G. Department.                              26
               E.E.G. Department.                              26
               Clinical Chemistry.                             26
               Post Mortem Technicians.                        26-27
                                          CONTENTS

                                                               PAGE
SECTION 3.     Social Work Department.                         27
(continued)    Physiotherapy Department.                       27-28
                Orthopaedic Appliance Makers.                  28
                Operating Department Assistants.               28
                Chaplains of all Denominations.                28
                Security Staff.                                28-29
                Laundry.                                       29
                Catering Department.                           29
                Department of Estates Management.              29-30
SECTION   4.   INFORMATION RELATING TO INCIDENTS INVOLVING
                CONTAMINATION BY CHEMICALS OR RADIOACTIVITY.   31-34
                Dangerous Chemicals.                           31
               Radioactivity.                                  31-33
                Incident Reports.                              33-34
               Casualties exposed to large doses of
               radiation.                                      34
                            MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE
                SECTION 1 MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD
              (This Paper briefly describes the arrangements agreed
                across Sheffield and is intended to supplement the
                         detailed plans at each Hospital.)
                            WHAT IS A MAJOR ACCIDENT?
There is no standard definition, but, for hospitals this is generally an
accident where the number and severity of live casualties requires special
arrangements to be made.

                                  NOTIFICATION
It is normally declared by the Ambulance Control but could also be declared by
other Emergency Services, and notification is to the Switchboard's of all
designated major accident hospitals (Royal Hallamshire and Northern General
Hospitals in Sheffield). The Switchboard Operator receiving the call should
notify the Northern General Hospital to ensure that the message is received.
However, on site, the Major Accident procedure should not be put into effect
until confirmed by e i ther:-
        Consultant in A & E
       Senior Registrar in A & E
       Senior Registrar in Surgery.
The switchboard operator should contact the above mentioned staff in the order
shown and the first one to be contacted will liaise with the ambulance service
to obtain more precise details of the incident. This doctor will decide whether
or not to implement the Major Accident Procedure. The switchboard operator will
take no action to implement the procedure until instructed to do so by one of
the above mentioned medical staff.

A1 ternatively, if large numbers of severely injured casualties arrive without
notice at the Accident & Emergency Department the Consultant in charge may put
the procedure into action locally.
                           DISTRICT HOSPITALS CONTROL
To provide co-ordination of Sheffield Hospitals and communications with other
services and areas, a central point will be manned in the General Manager's
office at the R.H.H. Local hospital controls will be set up separately at the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General Hospital.
                                DISTRIBUTION PRINCIPLES
 The first patients will be taken to the relevant Accident Dept as shown below:-
 9.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m. daily                        Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                                                     (except where accident occurs
                                                     close to the Northern
                                                     General Hospital).
8.00 p.m. to 9.00 a.m. each night                    The hospital whose Accident
                                                     and Emergency Department is
                                                     rotated to be open after 9.00
                                                     p.m. according to the
                                                     following rota:-
                                                     Monday      - R.H.H.
                                                     Tuesday     - N.G.H.
                                                     Wednesday   - N.G.H.
                                                     Thursday    - R.H.H.
                                                     Friday      - R.H.H.
                                                     Saturday    - N.G.H.
                                                     Sunday      - R.H.H.

One hospital will not normally be expected to take more than 25 seriously
injured casualties likely to require admission before the other takes an equal
number.

The District Hospital Control will be responsible for the distribution of
casualties by liaison with the Ambulance Service where necessary.
ChiIdren w i 11 be taken with adults to the appropriate adult Accident and
Emergency Department (at least initially). Children will not be taken direct to
the Children's Hospi ta l.                                      - ------------

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAMS

A medical and nursing team or Site Medical Officer will not be automatically
despatched to the site of a major accident. However, should medical and nursing
assistance be required by the Ambulance Service in the light of the particular
circumstances the Medical Controllers at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and the
Northern General Hospital will make appropriate arrangements in the light of the
particular needs and staffing resources. The mobile team will normally be sent
from the hospital not accepting the initial casualties and any further teams
required will be sent on a rotational basis. The Ambulance Service provides a
vehicle with certain basic supplies for transporting a medical and nursing team
and further specialised equipment, supplies and protective clothing are held in
readiness at both hospitals. On arrival at the site the senior person on the
medical team will evaluate the situation and act as Site Medical Officer. He
must contact the Ambulance Incident Officer and will normally locate himself at
the Ambulance Service Communications Point.
The Site Medical Officer is responsible for:-

1.    Formulating a casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with the
       Ambulance Incident Officer.

2.    Arranging for the attendance of further medical and nursinq teams if
       required.




                                     - 3 -
             SECTION 2.   OUTLINE OF THE ORGANISATION OF THE
                        ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                     IN THE EVENT OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT
PREPARATION OF THE HOSPITAL AS SOON AS THE ALERT IS RECEIVED
(1)    Accident and Emergency Department
          The Department will be cleared of patients being treated as
          quickly   as possible. They will be sent home, to a ward, or to
          the Physiotherapy Department, if they require transport home.
          When they leave the Physiotherapy Department, on the arrival of
          their transport, they will depart via the Medical School, 1B 1
          Floor (no. 6) exit. Accident and Emergency Staff will be
          allocated for patient assessment and treatment.
          Security Staff will place notices outside the Department, to the
          effect that it is closed because of a major accident, and in
          Claremont Crescent, and will lock all doors in the Department
          except those to the Orthopaedic Clinic.
          The Switchboard will divert G.P. referral calls away from the
          hospital. Those that are on their way in will enter the hospital
          via B Floor entrance and go straight to the ward.
          Accident and Emergency X-Ray patients will go back to the
          department.

          (If the alert is received in the Accident and Emergency
          Department by either the red telephone or radio, the person
          receiving the call should inform the Switchboard to commence the
          procedure.)
( ii)     Orthopaedic Clinic
          The Orthopaedic Clinic will be cleared to receive casualties.
          Patients will either go home or to the Physiotherapy Department
          if transport is required, at the appropriate time leaving the
          hospital at the Medical School entrance. Clinic sheets will be
          set to one side in order that patients may be sent new
          appointments.
(i i i)   Physiotherapy

          Patients to return to their wards or to rooms B48 & B45 for
          out-patients waiting for transport. Other out-patients should be
          sent home immediately.
(iv)      Theatres

          Operations will cease - no more patients to go to theatres from
          wards.
(v)       Wards

         Junior Medical Staff will assess their patients in preparation
         for discharge. Patients for discharge, if requiring transport
         will gather in the Physiotherapy Department where they will be
         monitored by Nursing Staff who will request additional voluntary
         services via Main Reception if necessary. Ward G2 will be
         cleared by Portering Staff who will transfer patients to wards El
         and E3 for assessment before discharge or transfer to other
         wards. Ward G2 will be available for the reception of major
         accident patients. If further wards required at any stage, a
         general surgical ward will be considered.
(v i )   Porterinq Staff

         Porters will take control, using lift keys, of both patient
         movement lifts one theatre lift and one passenger lift, holding
         them in readiness for movement of patients. One theatre lift to
         remain under control of theatres. B Floor Theatres then to
         contact Porters Lodge for any patient movement required.
         Trolleys from Transit Ward and the remainder of B Floor will be
         assembled in the Orthopaedic Dept, entrance.
         Care trolleys will be reserved for patients requiring X-Rays if
         possible. Additional sheets will be obtained from the laundry and
         taken to Ward G2.
         Ward G2 will be evacuated.
(vi i)   Documentation

         At the assessment point members of the Medical Records Department
         will commence documentation, passing a copy of the information
         received to both the Accident and Emergency Department Control
         and having a copy ready for collection by runner for the B Floor
         C on tr ol .

         The Police will set up their own documentation procedure room in
         B306 sited in the Accident and Emergency staff offices.          <
         The Administration will ensure details of patients going home via
         the Physiotherapy Department are collated and passed onto the
         Community Nursing Officer.
(viii) Muster Point

         Nursing Volunteers will report to Nursing Administration on B
         Floor. Those staff and volunteers with no designated area to
         report to will go to the Assistant Administrators' Office, Room
         B164, where an Administrator will allocate duties.




                                _   6 _
     (ix)    Relatives
             Relatives will be directed to the B Floor entrance where the
             Administrator on duty will give information that has been
             transferred from the documentation point. Relatives will be
             marshalled in the A Floor Out-Patient W.R.V.S. Waiting Area.
     (x)     Press
             The Press will be directed to the Committee Room where the
             Administrator on duty at the Reception Desk will keep them
             informed of the up-to-date situation.
     (xi)    Car Parking
             The Police will control the area around the hospital.   Staff
             should park at adistance and walk via C Road.
     (x i i ) Waiting List Patients   not yet admitted
             These will be sent home by the Admissions Staff after
             instructions from Nursing Control if necessary.

     (xi i i ) General Notification of Staff
             Arrangements exist for notifying Radio Sheffield and Radio Hal lam
             of the need to broadcast pre-arranged messages asking staff to
             report to the hospital.


2.   CONTROL POINTS
     Three hospital control points will be set up as follows (in addition to
     the District Co ntrol):-
     (i)     The Hospital Control in the Hospital Administrator's Office where
              the General Manager, Chairman of the Medical Staff Committee, the
>            Matron and the Hospital Administrator, or their deputies, will
              direct the Hospital's response. An ex-directory telephone number
              with six lines is available in this area.
     (ii)    Accident and Emergency Department Control which will be
              established in Accident and Emergency Administration. This will
              be staffed by the Accident and Emergency Consultant, Assistant
              Matron (Accident and Emergency) or deputy and an Administrative
              Assistant.
     (iii)   Theatre Control will remain and the normal emergency procedures
             will continue.
             Also the following agencies will set up their own controls in the
             hosp it al :




                                      - 7 -
(i)    The Ambulance Service will establish a control by appointing a
        liaison officer to be situated in the Ambulance Office B80.
(ii)   The Police will establish a control for their own documentation
        purposes using, if necessary, the Non-Accident Area. A telephone
        line separate from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard may
        be installed in that area, (B306).

INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
An assessment team consisting of the Accident and Emergency Senior
Registrar, Orthopaedic Senior Registrar or Registrar of the day, the
Orthopaedic Senior House Officer and Sister(or Staff Nurse) from the
Orthopaedic/Accident and Emergency Department will assemble together
with a documentation team provided by the Medical Records Department at
the Orthopaedic Clinic entrance and will direct casualties as follows:-
(a)    The slightly injured to the Orthopaedic Dressing Area.
(b)    The moderately injured to the Clean Dressing Room.
(c)    Those with major trauma initially to the resuscitation area with
        the Transit Ward being used as necessary.
(d)    The dead to the temporary mortuary in the Seminar Room,
        Orthopaedic Clinic.
(e)    Camp beds are available in the main stores should they be
        required for patient use on a temporary basis.
(f)    In cases involving radioactive and contaminated victims,
        polythene sheeting should be laid on the main corridor from the
        Casualty Department to the Transit Ward. Patients suspected of
        being contaminated should be taken to room B123 in order that
        they may be showered.

       The Fire Brigade also have a mobile decontamination facility
       available if it is required.
(g)    Should any advice be required regarding second stage assistance
       for radiation cases the following numbers should be contacted:-
       (i)    Working Hours - 0235 24141 ext. 4444 or 4059
       (ii)   Out of Hours - 0235 24141 ext. 5329 or 5137
(h)    In incidents involving chemicals or poisons expert advice may be
       obtained by ringing either:-
       (i)    The National Chemical Emergency Centre -
              0235 24141 ext. 2121      or
       (ii)   Guys Hospital Poisons Centre - 01 635 9191
                                        66o
      B SC
                                                                                                               611
                                                         --------

                                   2
                                                                                        M IM e M O lC                   a n
                                        a 68   648         tfia.                        AScC^TieH
        & 6lf                                                      '




                                                                                                           o«THorrtfMc I rt
i-H C\J CO




                  TRIAGE.                                  PHYSIOTHERAPY
                  MINOR INJURIES.
                  TEMPORARY MORTUARY.                                                                                   I-------

                  MODERATE INJURIES                                                                                     &91
LO




                  SERIOUS INJURIES.
                                                                       W RV5
                                                                       Q ug gf T

                                                                                                                 S>9*>

                                                                                                                   4


                                                                            i       i
                                                                           -T

                                                                                    LJ
                                                                                                           Aue«Ji »*»
                                                                                   03O4



                                                                                                           f t lo f t
                                                                                                                           u u rta*



                                                                                               «t«T£AS
                                                                                               © * rie C                  6Wl*
                                                                                                ftte t




                                               ftm
                           6 lto
         6 > **
                                                5                      m
                                                                                                   Bill                        6io&:
                                                                                                                                  ■M


                                                     -   9 -
                      SECTION 3.   DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONAL POLICIES

 1.      Switchboard
 2.      A. & E. Department Medical Staff
 3.      Medical Staff - General
 4.     Anaesthetic Services
 5.     Nursing Administration
 6.    Hospital Administration
 7.    Medical Records Department
 8.    X-Ray Department
 9.    Haematology
 10.   Portering
 11.   CSSD/TSSU
 12.   Pharmacy
13.    E.C.G.
14.    E.E.G.
15.    Clinical Chemistry
16.    Histopathology
17.    Social Work Department
18.    Physiotherapy
19.    O.A.M's.
20.     Operating Department Assistants
21.    Chaplains
22.    Security
23.    Laundry
24.    Catering
25.    Estates Management




                                     -   11 -
SWITCHBOARD
A.     The operator who receives the alert to telephone IMMEDIATELY:-
       (i)     Ambulance Control or Police on ex directory number to
               check the call is not a hoax and then confirm with the
               Switchboard at the Northern General Hospital.
       (ii)    Inform either:- 1 Consultant in A.&.E.
                               2 Senior Registrar in A & E.
                               3 Senior Registrar in Surgery.
               The first of the above doctors to be contacted will
               instruct the switchboard operator whether or not the Major
               Accident Procedure is to be implemented.
               If the switchboard operator is instructed to implement the
               procedure the following staff should be telephoned.
       (iii)   The Senior Assistant Matron or Assistant Matron on duty.
       (iv)    Accident and Emergency Reception.
               When Department closed Accident & Emergency Consultant or
               Senior Registrar.
       (v)     The Orthopaedic Senior House Officer on take.
       (vi)    Chairman of the Medical Staff Committee.
       (-vii) Specials on-call Anaesthetist.
       (viii) Porters' Lodge.
       (ix)    General Surgical House Surgeons.
       (x)     On-Call Blood Transfusion Technician.
       (xi)    Contact the Superintendent Radiographer Accident
               and Orthopaedic, X-ray (Ext. 2640). If not available or
               after 5.00 p.m. contact the On-Call Radiographer.
       (xii)   On-Call Radiologist.

B.     Another Operator on duty will telephone:-
       (i)     Any other operator at home to request her to telephone all
               other operators and ask them to report to the hospital.
       (ii)    On-call Administrator.
       (iii)   Patients Services Officer or Deputy Patients Services
               Officer.
       (iv)    On-Call House Staff in E.N.T., Orthopaedics not on take,
               Neurosurgery, Medicine and Ophthalmic Surgery.
       (v)     On-call Physiotherapist.

                                -   12 -
        (Vi)       Clinical Chemistry M.L.S.O. On-Call.
        (vii)      On-Call Pharmacist.
        (vi i i) On-Call E.C.G. Technician.
        (ix)       Histopathologist and M.L.S.O. (according to list).
        (x)        E.E.G. Technician.
        (xi)       Senior Dining Room Supervisor or Catering Manager.
        (xii)      Social Worker.
        (xiii) Chaplain.
        (x i v )   Engineer or emergency Works Control Centre out-of-office
                   hours.

ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT MEDICAL STAFF
(i)     The Accident and Emergency Consultant on-call will be
        contacted by the switchboard and will decide whether to implement
        the procedure and will then proceed to the Non-Accident Unit
        (telephone ext. 2178) in the Accident and Emergency Department in
        order to co-ordinate the reception, assessment and treatment of
        casualties.
        In the absence of the Accident & Emergency Consultant the On-take
        Surgeon will undertake this role.
        In the absence of a more senior surgeon the Senior House Officer
        (Accident and Emergency) will begin this task.
(ii)    The Casualty Officers will clear the Accident and Emergency
        Department as soon as possible. Patients will be sent home
        directly after treatment or asked to return home and be seen by
        their General Practitioner. Any patients requiring transport
        will be directed to the Physiotherapy Gymnasium to await
        transport.
        The Senior House Officer will notify the Accident and Emergency
        Consultant of the staffing situation, will make arrangements to
        clear the department of patients and man the Resuscitation Area
        and Moderately injured area.
(iii)   The Switchboard will contact the Orthopaedic House Surgeon
        on duty who will in turn inform the Orthopaedic Registrar and
        Senior Registrar and Consultant and will then proceed to the
        assessment point.
        The Orthopaedic Senior Registrar will join the Senior House
        Officer and the Senior Registrar in Accident and Emergency at the
        assessment point as soon as possible.
            ™ ? i Ar Sth^ S t °n i a11 wil1 be notified by the Switchboard and
            will proceed to the Accident and Emergency Department and
            call in any additional staff required.
 (V)        The Accident and Emergency Senior House Officers will qo to
            Resuscitation Area where they will be joined by the Orthopaedic
            5rpl°r ThU S A °TJ1cf r w 5en he becomes free from the assessment
                   I ,Accid ?n t .and Emergency Senior House Officer will stay
            in the moderately injured" area. As additional staff arrive
            the^fol 1 owing a r e a : ^              ACCld6nt a"d        C o n S u U a n t t0
           A     Control Point
           B     Major Injury Area
           C     Moderately injured Area
           D     Major Injury Area


(v i )   Tlhe Accident and Emergency Control will be established in the
          Accident and Emergency Office Area (telephone ext. 2178) and will ^
          Matrm              A^ c Ident and Emergency Consultant, Assistant ™
          Matron (Accident and Emergency or Deputy) and an Assistant
          A d m i m strator.

MEDICAL STAFF - (Non Accident and Emergency)

The organisation of medical staff in the Accident and Emergency, and
Orthopaedic Departments will be at the direction of the Accident and
t h I T e a yw n i $o J e r a t e . ^   f 0 " 0wi"s sect1ons        Indication of how

(i )     Orthopaedic Staff

          The Orthopaedic Senior House Officer will be alerted by the
          Switchboard and will inform the Orthopaedic Senior Reqistrar
                        $o n ^ u f nt and will then go to the assessment area
          to assist the Accident and Emergency Senior Registrar.

          Ihf                  rep0rt t0 the non-Accident Unit either to man,
          the Accident and Emergency Department control in the absence of
          the Accident and Emergency Consultant or to work as suggested by
                       ^   E? er9ency Consultant. He will make contact with
          other Orthopaedic Consultants as necessary.
         The Orthopaedic Senior Registrar and Registrar havinq been
         contacted will proceed to the Orthopaedic Clinic entrance to lead
         the assessment team. At an appropriate time, the Orthopaedic
         Senior House Officer will support the Accident and Emergency
         Senior House Officers in the Resuscitation Area.




                                            - 14 -
     (ii)     E.N.T.
              The E.N.T. Senior House Officer will be informed by the
              Switchboard that a major accident has occurred and will proceed
              to Ward G2 to make arrangements and clear the ward for the
              reception of casualties.
     (iii)    Consultant General Surgeon On-Take
              The Consultant General Surgeon on-take will be informed by his
              House Officer that a major accident has occurred and will report
              to the Accident and Emergency Control and then determine his
              appropriate course of action.
     (i v )   The Chairman or Secretary of the Medical Staff Committee
              On being alerted by the Switchboard, the Chairman or, if he is
              Consultant General Surgeon on-take, the Secretary of the Medical
              Staff Committee will report to the Hospital Administrator's
              Office to set up the hospital control.
     (v)      Neurosurgery, and Ophthalmic Surgery Consultants
              These staff will be contacted by their Junior Staff and will
              proceed to the main theatres.
     (v i )   Consultant Physicians
              The Consultant Physician on-take will be contacted by the
              R.M.O.and will report to the Accident and Emergency Department.
              He will determine whether or not to call upon his colleagues for
              assistance.
     (vii)    All Junior Staff
              On being alerted by the Switchboard, junior medical staff will:
     (a)      assess their in-patients to see if they can be discharged or
              transferred and if necessary inform their consultants of any
              assistance required.
     (b)      report to the Accident and Emergency Control in the Non-Accident
              Unit to be allocated to duties in the Department.
4.   ANAESTHETIC SERVICES
        (i)   Switchboard bleeps "Specials" On Call Anaesthetist at the Royal
              Hallamshire Hospital to contact the 'First On Call' Anaesthetist,
              direct him to the Accident and Emergency Department.
              The "Specials" On Call Anaesthetist contacts the Second On Call
              (Senior Registrar) Anaesthetist, then goes to the Accident and
              Emergency Department.
       (ii)   The Second On Call (Senior Registrar) Anaesthetist informs the



                                       - 15 -
       Consultant Anaesthetist (General) On Call for the Royal
       Hallamshire Hospital before leaving for the Accident and
       Emergency Department.

(iii) The (General) Consultant Anaesthetist 'On Call' telephones
       another Consultant Anaesthetist and directs him/her to the
       Accident and Emergency Department of the Royal Hallamshire
       Hospital to set up Anaesthetic Control.
(iv)    The Consultant Anaesthetist (General) 'On Call' for the Royal
       Hallamshire Hospital telephones from his/her home base, six
       Registrar Anaesthetists, six Senior Registrar Anaesthetists and
       three Consultant Anaesthetists, who are told to report to the
       Consultant Anaesthetic Control (Room B127 Transit).
 (v)   The Consultant Anaesthetist (General) On Call Royal Hallamshire
       C?o 7 *    e? P roceeds t0 the Anaesthetic Emergency Control in
       d Ml of the Transit Ward •




                              16-
NURSING ADMINISTRATION
A list of staff available by telephone is maintained in         NURSING
ADMINISTRATION.

OUTLINE POLICY

On being notified of a     MAJOR ACCIDENT    the Senior Nurse in Charge of the
Hospital will:

1.     Inform the Nurse in charge of Accident and Emergency, Transit
        department, Theatres (A floor) and Ward G2.
2.     Inform Senior Assistant Matron (General Medicine, Surgery
       and Accident and Emergency).
3.     Assume the role of 2 above until her arrival in Hospital.
SENIOR ASSISTANT MATRON        (General Medicine, Surgery, Accident and
Emergency!                ~~
1.     On being informed of a MAJOR ACCIDENT proceed to Nursing
       Administration and set up Nurse control.
2.     Inform   MATRON,   who will inform    D.N.O. AND D .N .S. Community.

3.     Inform Orthopaedic Assistant Matron.
4.     Inform   THEATRE MANAGER.

5.     Arrange extra Nursing staff for ward G2.
6.     Inform Assistant Matron Out-Patient Department of Major Accident.
7.     Liaise with Assistant Matron or Deputy in Accident & Emerqency
       and Ward G2.
8.     Co-ordinate Nursing staff needs calling in extra staff as
       necessary and deploy as necessary.
9.     Instigate Nursing Administration       ACTION PLAN.


Procedure for Theatre Manager
On receipt of the message 'Major Accident*:-
(i)   Contact Theatre Nursing Officer.
(ii)    Liaise with the duty Surgical and Anaesthetic Consultant who will
        be in Theatres.
(iii)   Provide back up support for other Senior Assistant Matrons as
        need arises.
(iv)    Inform Senior Operating Department Assistant on duty.
UNIT ADMINISTRATOR

(i)     Maintain an up-to-date list of telephone numbers of all Unit
        Administrators plus supporting clerical and secretarial staff,
        District General Manager and Assistant General Manager.
(ii)    Upon hearing that the Major Accident plan is in operation, the
        on-call Administrator should contact the General Manager, other
        on-call Administrators, the on-call Administrator for the
        Northern General Hospital, the District General Manager and
        Assistant General Manager.
        If no other administrator is available he should ring admini
        stration, clerical and secretarial staff until he finds a member
        of staff to undertake the duties in item (ii).
(iii)   The first R.H.H. Administrator to be contacted by the Duty
        Administrator should ring down the list of administration
        secretaries and receptionists for a reasonable time.
(iv)    He should then ring Radio Sheffield and Radio Hallam in order
         that they put out the pre-determined message over the air before
         going to the hospital.
(v)     The Administrator first to arrive in the Hospital Administrator's
         office will set up the hospital control ensuring that the
         following services are organised:-
        (a)    Contact is made with Northern General Hospital Admini
               strator and the Police at Snig Hill.
        (b)    Porterinq Services
               Head Porter and/or Deputy Head Porter   contacted   and
               duties carried out as listed.
        (c)    Medical Records
               Patients' Services Officer or most senior member of
               Medical Records Staff on site to ensure documentation of
               all patients and maintenance of a list of all patients.
(d)    Switchboard
       Ensure that all available telephonists are on duty.
(e)    P.P.A. (ITU)
       Inform the Senior P.P.A. on duty or on call for the ITU.
(f)    C.S.S.P.
       Ensure responsible officer is on duty.
(g)    Pharmacy
       Ensure responsible officer is on duty.
(h)    Linen
       Ensure responsible officer on duty (by telephoning him/her
       at home if necessary) to supply linen to wards, starting
       with Ward G2.
(i)    P.A.M.
       Ensure P.A.M. are available.
(j )   Catering.
       Telephone ext 2577 to ensure that a responsible officer
       is on duty to provide its services as required.
(k)    Chaplains.
       Ensure that all Hospital Chaplains are informed that the
       Major Accident plan is in action
(1)    Pther Administrators in the District are alerted     to
        provide support.
The second Administrator to arrive will man B Floor Reception
and: -
(a)    Ensure information of patients received is gathered by
        runner from the Prthopaedic Department entrance in
        preparation for informing relatives authoritatively.
(b)    Control crowds to ensure adequate access to lifts.
(c)    Select      and direct staff volunteers who will muster in Room
       B164.
(d)    Ensure that the Committee Room is set up for the Press
       using the jack point telephone and that the Press are
       confined to that room and fed with information as
        appropriate.
(e)    Ensure information on patients going home from the wards
        via the Physiotherapy Department is collated and passed on
        to the Community Nursing Pffice.
 (vn)    The most senior Administrator or Manager on site may wish to
         alter the Officers originally undertaking duties (v)-(vi)
         depending on the circumstances at the time.
 (v111) The third Administrator to arrive will man the A floor relatives
        area and keep them informed.

 ( v i n i ) The District General Manager or Assistant General Manager will
             set up the District Control point sited in the Unit General
             Manager s Office and will call the District Nursing Officer and
             dny other District stdff he requires to give assistdnce.
MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT

(i)     Patients' Services Officer or Deputy Patients' Office and
         Accident and Emergency Reception will be notified by the
         Switchboard.

(n)     Accident and Emergency Department Reception Staff will notify
         Admissions Office.

(iii) Admissions Office Staff will notify Medical Records Officer.
(iv)    Medical Records Officer will notify member of staff at home, who
         by pre-arrangement will telephone other Medical Records Staff to
         call them into the hospital.

(v)     Staff on arrival will report to the Admissions Office on B Floor
         and sign in.

(vi)    Staff will then proceed to the assessment area where they will
        sign an action card and act accordingly.
(vii)   The Medical Records Officer is responsible for maintaining a
        Major Accident box in which will be found a supply of folders
        containing casualty card, identity bracelet, X-Ray request form,
        blood transfusion request form, operation consent form,
        appropriate bag for clothing and envelope for valuables. A MAJAX
        patient register will also be maintained.
(viii) The Medical Records Officer will ensure that all documents are
       available in the assessment area and that clerical staff document
       patients as they arrive.

(ix)    A list of patients will be maintained with details of immediate
        disposal. This information will then be passed via a runner to
        the Main Hospital Control.
      X-RAY DEPARTMENT
      M)     A l i s t o f s t a f f a v a i l a b l e by t e l e p h o n e i s m a i n t a i n e d i n t h e X-ray
             Departments and a t t h e homes of t h e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t R a d i o g r a p h e r s
             and S e n i o r S t a f f .




                   WORKING HOURS
                                    SWITCHBOARD

                                           T
                                     SUPT/SENIOR RADIOGRAPHER
                                     IN A/0 X-RAY ON 2646


      SUPT/SENIOR RADIOGRAPHER                         RADIOLOGIST IN A/0                         MAJAX CARD -
      ON IN-PATIENT X-RAY                              X-RAY                                      SUPTS,OFFICE




                                                SETS UP CONTROL
SUPT/SENIOR CONSULTANT SISTER/STAFF SUPT/SENIOR
OUT-PATIENT RADIOLOGIST NURSE IP    CT SCANNERS IN IP STAFF ROOM
            IP X-RAY    X-RAY                   ON 2764
X-RAY




MAJAX CARD- MAJAX CARD- MAJAX CARD-                             MAJAX CARD- MAJAX CARD-
SUPTS OFFICE REPORTING  NURSES                                  SCAN CONTROL SUPTS OFFICE
             ROOM       STATION                                 ROOM         (GWD)

    E                A                       G


                                                 n -
                     OUT OF HOURS

ON-CALL RADIOGRAPHER 1
VIA 2646 OR BLEEP    [
                               SWITCHBOARD
                                             s»   ON-CALL RADIOLOGIST
                                                  AT HOME OR VIA AIR-
      ♦
CALLS 2nd O/C
                         CALLS 3rd 0/C AT HOME
                         OR VIA AIR-CALL
                                                          I
                                                  CONTACTS A CONSULTANT
(IF NOT IN DEPT,)                                 RADIOLOGIST AND OTHER
      *
MAJAX CARD -
                         CONTACTS A SUPT.AT
                         HOME OR FAILING THAT
                                                  RADIOLOGISTS AS REQUIRED

SUPT'S OFFICE            ANOTHER SENIOR           ASSEMBLE IN REPORTING
                         RADIOGRAPHER             ROOM ON C FLOOR
                                 I
                         USING INFORMATION
                         PROVIDED BY O/C STAFF,   MAJAX CARD -
                         CALLS OUT SUFFICIENT     REPORTING ROOM
                         RADIOGRAPHERS AND D/R
                         TECHS. KEEPS A LIST
                                                      A
                         OF WHO THEY HAVE


1ST ARRIVAL
              ✓          TRIED/FOUND,



m
MAJAX CARD -
                         GOES TO DEPT, TO LIASE
                         WITH SUPT/SENIOR IN
                         DEPT,
IP SUPTS OFFICE
(GWD)
HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD BANK
(During normal working hours)
  (i) The telephone operator will inform the blood bank staff that a
      'Major Accident' has occurred.
 (ii) Senior Member of staff present will proceed as follows:-
      (a)   Contact the Blood Transfusion Service and request the
            immediate supply of:-
            20   units   0+
            20   units   A+
            20   units   0-
            20   units   A-
            10   units   B+
            50   units   Plasma
      (b)   Organise an adequate supply of equipment and materials
            (antisera, saline etc.)
      (c)   Organise the service to supply suitable and/or compatible
            blood according to the requests CLEARLY made.
(iii) When the immediate need for urgency has passed, the senior member
      of Blood Bank Staff should institute a "search" to ensure that
      blood and blood products removed from the Blood Bank but not used
      are returned and not wasted unnecessarily.

HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD BANK
(Out of normal working hours)
General
A list of names and telephone numbers of staff is issued weekly to
Switchboard.
In the event of a 'Major Accident' the following procedure of calling
staff should be adopted:-
      Inform the person who is already on-call for emergency blood
      bank duty. If the person on-call is already working in the Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital Blood Bank, it is imperative that he must be
      able to telephone o u t . Such outgoing calls will activate the
      procedure.
Internal
On receipt of the 'Major Accident' warning the person on-call will
contact the member of staff on-call for the diagnostic haematology who
      will immediately telephone the Blood Transfusion Service requesting the
      immediate delivery of:-
      20    units   0+
      20    units   0-
      20    units   A+
      20    units   A-
      10    units   B+
      50    units   Plasma

      He will subsequently telephone a third person from the on-call list.
      The third person will then contact a fourth person from home.       All will
      proceed to the laboratory as quickly as possible.
      The senior member present will organise within the Blood Bank:-
      (a)     the reception of samples;

      (b)     the provision of essential equipment (anti-sera, saline slides
               e t c .);

      (c)     Organise the rapid preparation and issue of suitable and/or
              compatible blood according to the requirements CLEARLY made on the
              request.                                       -----

10.   PORTERING

        (i) The Switchboard will contact Porters' Lodge who will inform the
            Head Porter or the Senior Deputy who will be responsible for
            contacting other members of staff. The Assistant Head Porter on
            the Porters' Lodge will also inform Main Reception.
       (ii) The staff will report to the Assistant Head Porter at the Porters'
            Lodge.

      (iii) The Assistant Head Porter on duty at the Porters' Lodge will e n s u r e d
            that:-                                              W

              (a)    the assessment areas are clear of chairs;
              (b)    stretchers, trolleys and wheelchairs from Transit are
                      available in the Accident and Emergency and Orthopaedic
                      areas.

              (c)    Porters are sent to Accident and Emergency Department to
                      assist Sister-in-charge with transportation of patients.
              (d)    Porters are sent to Ward G2 to assist with transferring and
                     clearing patients. Discharged patients will be taken to the
                     Physiotherapy Department until transport has been arranged.
              (e)    Extra linen is supplied to the wards beginning with Ward G2.




                                          - 24 -
             (f)   Barrier off A Floor relatives area.     Main waiting area for
                   use by relatives.

             (g)   Relatives are taken to the A Floor Main Entrance Foyer in
                   Outpatient Department.
             (h)   The Press are taken to the Committee Room.
             (i)   Lift control is undertaken.

11.   T.S.S.U./C.S.S.D.
        (i) An Administrator will contact either the Sterile Services Manager
            or her deputy



            If neither of the above are available the Administrator should make
            arrangements to contact other staff.
       (ii) The first person contacted will then be responsible for contacting
            the rest of the available staff.
      (iii) Staff attending will, under the direction of the most senior member
            of staff:-

            (a)    give priority to Orthopaedic, Neurosurgical and General
                   Surgery instruments;
            (b)    ensure the distribution of sterile trays, instruments and
                   supplementary packs is continued;
            (c)    be available on Ext. 2817 to ensure that C.S.S.D. requests
                   are processed and extra procedure packs and ward instruments
                   are made available;
            (d)    advise the Hospital Administrator if extra instruments are
                   required from the Children's Hospital.

12.   PHARMACY

        (i) The Switchboard will contact the on-call Pharmacist who will be
            responsible for contacting other available staff.
       (ii) the department has stocks of certain items which are most likely to
            be in demand.
      (iii) Pharmacy Staff will deliver items on demand.




                                        25-
         (iv)     Patients being discharged who require urgent medication should
                  given priority.
13.      E.C.G. DEPARTMENT

         (i)      Switchboard will inform E.C.G. Technician on call that a 'Major
                  Accident' has occurred.
         (ii)     E.C.G. Technicians will be available in department on bleep nos
                  110/496 for use as required.
         (iii)    All other staff in the In-Patient Department will report to
                  general muster point for duties as required.
14.      E.E.G.

        Switchboard Operator to contact the E.E.G. Technician on-call. (Dr.
      ■ Gumpert arranges for an on-call rota to be supplied to Switchboard at
        the beginning of each month.)
15.     CLINICAL CHEMISTRY
        Major Accident Plan

        If the hospital's major accident plan is activated during normal working
        hours, senior staff will organise the work of the department as appears
        to be appropriate under the circumstances.
        Outside normal working hours, the on call MLSO will be informed by the
        hospital switchboard that the hospital's major accident plan has been
        put into operation.

        If the MLSO is within the hospital, he should at once telephone a senior
        member of laboratory staff and inform him that the major accident plan
        has been activated. A list of senior staff member's telephone numbers
        is held in the Hot Area. It may be impossible to telephone out of the
        hospital via the d i a l '9' facility as the switchboard will almost
        certainly be overloaded. In such circumstances use the public telephone!
        in the 'F ' or 'H ' floor lift hall, using the lOp coins held for the
        purposes of the "Hot Area".

        If the MLSO is at home he should contact a senior member of staff before
        leaving for the hospital.

        When a senior member of staff is informed that the major accident plan
        has been activated, he should inform at least two other staff members,
        including the Head of Department or his deputy by telephone from home,
        before leaving for the hospital. All staff so informed should proceed
        to the hospital.
16.     POST MORTEM TECHNICIANS

        It is possible that large numbers of dead patients may have to be
        accommodated in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in the event of a major
        accident as the Ambulance Service may not have the resources to take
        bodies to the Medico-Legal Centre after they have been certified dead.
        The following arrangements will therefore obtain:-
                                         -2 6   -
      Cal1-Out
      The Switchboard will have a list of Histopathology Medical and
      Scientific Staff and Mortuary Technicians and will ring the home numbers
      if appropriate until a response is obtained.
      Duties
      Post Mortem Technicians should report to the Post Mortem Suite to:-
      (i)      receive bodies from the portering staff who will bring them from
                the holding area in the Orthopaedic Clinic.
      (ii)     complete as much of the documentation related to the body as
                possible.
      iii)     keep the bodies in order in the Post Mortem Suite
      (iv)     arrange for viewing individually in the Viewing Room.
      SOCIAL WORK DEPARTMENT
      (i)      The Group Principal Social Worker will be contacted by
                Switchboard.
      (ii)     All available staff will be contacted by the Group Principal or
               Principal Social Worker by telephone from home. All staff should
               report to the C Floor Social Work Department via C Floor staff
               entrance (door 14).
      (iii) Staff will be deployed to the Physiotherapy Department to assist
             slightly injured patients and distressed relatives and to take to
             the Board Room.
      (iv)     Medical Social Workers will liaise with Social Services
                Department arranging services for discharged patients and for
                patients receiving minor injuries to the incident who are allowed
                home.
      (v)      The Social Work Department cash box will be made available if
                necessary. The cash box is stored in the Cashier's Office.
18.   PHYSIOTHERAPY STAFF
      (i)      The on-call Physiotherapist will be notified by Switchboard that
                a major accident has occurred.
      (ii)     The on-call Physiotherapist will telephone her Head of Department
               or Deputy before coming to the department and will remain on
               bleep.
      (iii) The Head of Department or Deputy will contact all other staff
             from h o m e .
      (iv)     All staff will report to the Physiotherapy Department and assist
                with return of patients to wards, flow of patients for discharge
                to Medical School etc.


                                        27-
       (v)     Requests for physiotherapy will be through the on-call
                Physiotherapist via the switchboard.
19.   ORTHOPAEDIC APPLIANCE MAKERS
       Orthopaedic Appliance Makers are called out as required by the
       Administrator.                                           J
20.   OPERATING DEPARTMENT ASSISTANTS

       The Theatre Manager or Deputy is informed by the Nurse in charge of the
       hospital that a 'Major Accident' has occurred and makes contact with
       Theatre Control who in turn inform the Senior Operating Department
                          ! ° L the °Pe r ?ting Theatres. He then contacts as many
       members of their staff as possible and ask them to report for duty. The
               °P®rating Department Assistant in Theatres maintains contact.
       w n k                  in order to dePloy staff according to need, and the
       I.T.U based Operating Department Assistant allocates staff round the
       Control         discussion with the Accident and Emergency Department

       The Senior O.D.A. (I.T.U.) on duty or on call will be informed by the
       Administrator and will contact as many members of his staff as possible
       to report for duty.

21•   CHAPLAINS OF ALL DENOMINATIONS

       (i)    The Resident Hospital Chaplain will be contacted by bleep by
               Switchboard. The Resident Hospital Chaplain will then contact
               the part-time Free Church and Roman Catholic Chaplain.
      (ii)     Chaplains will assemble in the Chapel area and await further
               instructions. All three Chaplains carry bleeps.
22.   SECURITY STAFF

      (i)     Staff on duty will receive notification from Accident and
               Emergency Reception.
      (ii)    One man on duty will

              (a)      Lock all entrances/exits other than the Orthopaedic
                        Clinic, C Road, Medical School, B Road, B Road Main
                        Entrance and Out-Patient Department (during weekdays).
              (b)      Unlock the Physiotherapy   Department if it is locked and
              (c)      Place the "Department Closed" signs outside:-
                       the Accident and Emergency Department
                       and on Claremont Place
      (iii)   The second man on duty will remain behind in the office at all
              times to give out keys as required. He will then telephone
              another Security Officer at home and ask him to call in all other
              staff.




                                        - 28 -
(iv)      All other Security Staff will report to the Administrator   at B
           Floor Reception to carry out the following duties:-
          (a)    Control Press on B   Floor
          (b)    To be available in Orthopaedic area to take charge of any
                  excess amounts of valuables,
          (c)    To assist with the control of staff/patients on B Floor.
LAUNDRY
(i)       The Laundry Manager or one of his/her assistants will be
          contacted by the Administrator.
(ii)      On arrival at the hospital he/she will liaise with portering
          staff and if necessary will take emergency linen trolleys to :-
          (a)    Ward G2
          (b)    Transit Ward
(iii)     He/she will remain available on the Laundry Manager's bleep (469)
          to take linen to other areas as required.
(iv)      Other Laundry staff who hear of the major accident will report     to
          the general muster point for duties as required.
CATERING DEPARTMENT
(i)       The Catering Manager/Assistant Managers will be contacted by the
          senior person in the kitchen to come to the hospital. The
          Managers, if available, will at the same time contact Dining Room
          Supervisors and Kitchen Supervisors and any personnel necessary.

(ii)      Other staff who hear of the accident should report to the
          Catering Department in the first instance but may be re-directed
          to B Floor Reception to give general assistance.
(iii)     The Department will provide free food and beverages as requested
          by Administration and call staff in as necessary.
DEPARTMENT OF ESTATES MANAGEMENT
During Normal Working Hours
In the event of a Major Accident during normal working hours (0900 to
1720 hours) the Switchboard Operator will contact the emergency works
no. 2899.
Clerical Officer - Ext. 2899
The Clerical Officer receiving the call will contact the most senior
Unit Works Officer available, by bleep or by telephone.
 Unit Works Staff

 On being notified, the Unit Works Officer or most senior officer
 available shall draw a bleep from the pool in Room B179 and report to
 the Majax Control in the Hospital Administrator's Office,B Floor, Royal
 Hallamshire Hospital. He will notify the Control Centre of the bleep
 number on which he can be contacted if Works support is required and
 then return to his normal duties carrying the bleep.             ’
 Outside Normal Working Hours

In the event of a Major Accident outside normal working hours (1720 to
0900 hours) the Switchboard Operator will contact the Works Emerqencv
Control in the Boiler House (ext. 2332).
Attendant on duty at Works Emergency Control

On receipt of a call stating that a Major Accident has occurred (note
there is no specific code phrase as previously) the attendant on duty
will:-                                                              J
                                                                           i
(i)     bleep the Shift Foreman on duty and inform him that a Major
        Accident has been notified.

(ii)    telephone the 'on-call' Supervisor and notify him that a Major
        Accident has been notified.
(iii)   complete a DW 18 stating "Major Accident Notified".
Shift Foreman

On being notified, the Shift Foreman will report to the Majax Control in
the Hospital Administrator's Office, B Floor of the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital. He will notify the Control Centre of his bleep number on
which he can be contacted if Works support is required, prior to the
arrival of the 'on-call' Supervisor. He will then return to his duties
and obtain a craftsman's bleep to hand to the on-call Supervisor when he
arrives.
On-Call Supervisor

On being notified, the on-call Supervisor must proceed immediately to
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, draw a craftsman's bleep from the Shift
Foreman and report to the Majax Control in the Hospital Administrator's
Office, B Floor of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. He will notify the
Control Centre of the bleep number on which he can be contacted if Works
support is required and then leave the Control Centre but remain in the
Hospital, and await any contact.




                                - 30-
     SECTION 4. INFORMATION RELATING TO INCIDENTS INVOLVING
           CONTAMINATION BY CHEMICALS OR RADIOACTIVITY


DANGEROUS CHEMICALS
Expert Advice and assistance can be obtained from:-
A.    The National Chemical Emergency Centre
      Tel.    0235 24141 ext. 2121
B.    Guy's Hospital
      Tel.    01 635 9191
The procedures to follow will be those invoked for any Major Accident
with the exception that there must be a demarcation line established
in the Accident and Emergency Department to separate "clean and
"dirty" areas in terms of contamination. This also applies to
Ambulance Personnel who may accidently become contaminated. Blankets
and stretchers used in the "dirty" areas must not cross the
demarcation line.
On stand down from the emergency situation staff engaged on the
"dirty" side of the demarcation line should use the shower facilities
on site or alternatively the Fire Brigade may be requested to provide
decontamination facilities which may also be used for items of
equipment.

RADIOACTIVITY
Expert advice and assistance can be obtained from:
A.    Medical Physics Department
      Weston Park Hospital
      Tel.    Tie Line 730-0 or 670222 during normal working hours.
B.    A. E. R. E.
      Tel.    0235 24141 ext. 4444/4059   (working hours)
      Tel.    0235 24141 ext. 5329/5137   (other hours)
Name                  Hospital        Home Address           Home Tel No
                      Tel Extn
                      RHH                                    Sheffield

                      RHH                                    Chesterfield


                      BDGH                                   Barnsley
(Barnsley HA)

                      RDGH                                   Sheffield
(Rotherham HA)
                      DR I                                   Doncaster
(Doncaster HA)

                      C&NDRH                                 Chesterfield

Uni versi ty
Radiation Safety
Officer              SU
                     WPH                                     Sheffield

       (i)    An area should be set aside (the "dirty area") for the
               reception of casualties and should be covered with plastic
               sheeting.

       (ii)   Protective clothing should be issued for all staff who will
              handle the patient.
       (iii) A plentiful supply of paper towels and tissue should be
             available.

       (iv)   Large polythene or paper bags will be needed for the collection
              of the patient's clothing and contaminated equipment etc.
       (v)    An area should be cleared where the ambulance can wait for
              monitoring and possible decontamination.
       (vi)   A limited number of staff should be appointed to handle the
              patient and a person should be designated to log the movements
              of any of those staff who must leave the "dirty" area after the
              casualties have arrived, in order to minimise the difficulty of
              tracing contamination.
 (vii) If other areas of the hospital become involved in handling the
       patient, e.g. a theatre or intensive care unit, similar
       arrangements should be made for these areas as appropriate.
 The following initial decontamination procedure should be followed:-
 (i)     Experience has shown that washing with soap and water will
         effectively remove contaminated material from the skin in most
         cases. Initial treatment and any necessary washing to remove
         as much of the suspected contamination as practicable should be
         done in the "dirty" area.

 (ii)    Open wounds should be irrigated. Special care needs to be
         taken in the cleaning of areas near the eyes and in preventing
         the spread of possible contamination to other parts of the
         body.

(iii) It will usually be possible to seek further expert advice from
      a designated hospital before proceeding beyond the initial
      treatment stage, it is inadvisable to excise wounds unless
      contamination is obvious or unless surgically indicated before
      monitoring assistance is available.
As far as is reasonably practicable, all scattered radioactive
material and contaminated surface materials (e.g. soil, herbage etc)
should be collected and contained in order to minimise the amount of
residual contamination which may subsequently have to be flushed into
sewers or watercourses. The consent of the Department of Environment
  ^     ^ i o c h e m i c a l Inspector (tel. 01 273 4014 during office hours
and 01 212 7071 during silent hours) should be obtained before any
flushing is undertaken but if decontamination by flushing is urqently
necessary before the Department can be contacted, then sufficient
flushing water should be used to keep the activity of the effluent
             f°llo w ",n9 limits and the Senior Radiochemical Inspector
should be informed of the action taken as soon as circumstances
permit.

1.      500 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharqe to
         sewers;

2.      50 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge into a
         watercourse.
Incident Reports

In order that the effectiveness of NAIR can be assessed, a brief
report on each incident will be required from the radiation staff
involved and should be sent to the National Radiological Protection
Board, Harwell, Didcot, 0X11 0RQ (tel. 023 583 600) as soon as
possible. This is in addition to any police report and should cover
the following points:-

        Date, location and time of incident.
  2.      Nature of         incident and who reported incident.

  3.      Assessment of radiological hazard, whether present or not.
  4.      Nature of         assistance given and any difficulties encountered.
  5.      Whether Second Stage assistance was sought.
  6.      Effectiveness of arrangements.
  7.      Outcome of incident.

 Casualties exposed to large doses of r a H i ^ n n

 c a s u a l U e s ’ a f f e c t e d ‘ b y ^ a ^ i q ^ r a d i a t i lamrfh1re H° Sp U a ' should



 E n q u ir te s ^ b o u t’ treatm en^ or ^adm^ssfo^of ^                   1
 to the appropriate officer or department i n d i c a t e d " $h° Uld be 'M d e
 (1)     The Hammersmith Hospital,
         Duncane Road,
         London, W12 OHS.
         Tel No. 01 743 2030
         (The Duty Medical Registrar)
(2)      The Middlesex Hospital,
         Mortimer Street,
         London, WIN 8AA.
         (Tel No. 01 636 8333)
         (The Admitting Medical Officer)
(3)     The Royal Marsden Hospital,
        Fulham Road,
        London, SW3 6JJ.
        (Tel No. 01 352 8171)
        (The Medical Physics Department)
(4)    The Royal Marsden Hospital,
       Downs Road,
       Sutton,
       Surrey. SM2 5PT.
       (Tel No. 01 642 6011)
       (The Medical Physics Department)
Sheffield Health Authority




 MAJOR
DISASTER
      PLAN

    issued: July 1986
               MAJOR DISASTER PLAN REVISIONS
                                                                             I
REVISION NO.   DATE   PAGE NO.   TITLE OF REVISION DATE REVISED] SIGNATURE
                                                     IN PLAN
                          SH E FFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                          NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL

                             MAJOR DISASTER PLAN


                                  CONTENTS

                                                                    PAGE

SECTION I.    MAJOR DISASTER PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD                 1-3
              What is a Major Disaster?                               1
              Notification                                            1
              District Hospitals Control                              1
              Distribution Principles                                 1
              Accident & Emergency Services in Sheffield              2
              Site Medical Officer/Mobile Team                        2
              Incidents Involving Dangerous Chemicals                 2
              Incidents Involving Radioactive Substances              3

SECTION II.   MAJOR DISASTER PLAN FOR THE NORTHERN
              GENERAL HOSPITAL - SUMMARY OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES     4-15
              Preparation of the Hospital                          4-6
              Control Arrangements                                  7
              Screening of Casualties                                8
              Staff Response                                         9
              Access to Hospital Site                                9
              Maps showing Patient Flow and Departments           10-11
              Essential Internal Telephone Numbers                12-13
              Procedure to be Followed in the Event of Major
              Disaster Plan being implemented at the
              Royal Hallamshire Hospital                          14-15

SECTION III. PROCEDURES FOR INDIVIDUAL STAFF, WARDS AND
             DEPARTMENTS                                          16-38
             Switchboard Operators                                16-19
             Nurse in Charge of Accident & Emergency Department    20
             Senior Nurse on Duty for the Acute Services          2 0 -2 1
             Nurse in Charge of Ward 60                             21
             Assistant Matron, Operating Theatres or Deputy        22
             Medical Staff                                        22-23
             Hospital Control Team                                24-25
             Hospital Administrator and Staff                     25-29
             Medical Records Department                           29-30
             Distribution Services Department                      30
             Blood Bank Senior Chief MLSO or Deputy                31
             Superintendent Physiotherapist or Deputy             31-32
             Superintendent Radiographer or Deputy                 32
             Unit Pharmaceutical Officer or Deputy                32-33
             Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD)             33-34
             Hospital Chaplains                                   34-35
             Group Principal Social Worker or Deputy               35
             Higher Senior Anatomical Pathology
             Technician or Deputy                                  35
             Linen Services Manager or Deputy                     35-36
             Supplies and Stores Staff                            36-37
             Catering Department                                  37-38
S e c tio n   I.

MAJOR DISASTER PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD

WHAT IS A MAJOR DISASTER?

There is no standard definition, but for hospitals this is generally an
accident for which the number and severity of live casualties require
special arrangements to be made.


NOTIFICATION

The declaration of a Major Disaster will be made by one or other of the
Emergency Services, the most likely of these being the Ambulance Service.
Notification will be made to the Switchboards of the receiving hospitals.
However, if large numbers of severely injured casualties arrive without
notice at the Accident and Emergency Department, the procedure may be put
into action locally on the instructions of the senior doctor present in the
Accident and Emergency Department.


DISTRICT HOSPITALS CONTROL

The choice as to which hospitals are to be initial receiving centres for
casualties will be made by SYMAS, depending on a range of factors including
the location of the accident, the number of casualties involved, and the
nature of the accident. It is possible that SYMAS will select neighbouring
hospitals outside Sheffield, e.g. Rotherham or Barnsley, together with only
one of the Sheffield hospitals, i.e. Northern General Hospital or Royal
Hallamshire Hospital. If the Northern General Hospital is selected, j.t
will still be necessary for the Northern General Hospital Switchboard to
notify the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard that the Major Disaster
Plan is being put into operation at the Northern General Hospital. In the
event of a Major Disaster in which the Royal Hallamshire Hospital is
designated as the receiving hospita.1 for casualties the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital switchboard will notify the Northern General Hospital switchboard
and the limited action described on pages 14 and 15 of this document will
be taken. A District Hospitals Control point, will be established at the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital by a Senior Administrative Officer to provide
co-ordination of Sheffield hospitals and communications with other services
and Districts. Local hospital control points will be set up in each
hospital.

DISTRIBUTION PRINCIPLES

The District Hospitals Control at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital will be
responsible for the distribution of casualties if direction of the
Ambulance Service is required.




                                   -   1 -
ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES IN SH EFFIELD

The Accident and Emergency Departments at the Northern General Hospital and
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital are open every day between 9.00 am and 9.00
pm.

Overnight, between 9.00 pm and 9.00 am, one Accident and Emergency
Department remains open as follows:-

          Monday        Royal Hallamshire Hospital
          Tuesday       Northern General Hospital
          Wednesday     Northern General Hospital
          Thursday      Royal Hallamshire Hospital
          Friday        Royal Hallamshire Hospital
          Saturday      Northern General Hospital
          Sunday        Royal Hallamshire Hospital

One hospital will not normally be expected to take more than 25 seriously
injured casualties likely to require admission before the other hospital
takes an equal number.

CHILDREN will be taken with adults to the receiving hospital in the first
instance. Children will not be taken direct to the Children's Hospital.

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAM

Should a Site Medical Officer or Mobile Team be considered necessary, SYMAS
will make the request to the hospital which is not receiving the casualties
of the Major Disaster. The Senior Nurse on duty for the Acute Services will
be contacted and will liaise with the Consultant General Surgeon of the
firm on take and the Consultant Anaesthetist of the firm on take. If the
Senior Staff indicated above accede to the request, specific members of the
Hospital Mobile Team will be identified, and the Senior Nurse on duty will
contact SYMAS to indicate agreement and obtain further information. The
Team will usually comprise a minimum of one Anaesthetist, one Surgeon and
two trained Nurses, who will be sent out first to assess the situation and
will call for more assistance if necessary. A vehicle equipped with certain
basic supplies will be provided by one of the Emergency Services for
transporting the Mobile Team. Further specialised equipment and protective
clothing is held at both hospitals in readiness to be taken out by the Site
Medical Officer/Mobi1e Team if appropriate.

 INCIDENTS INVOLVING DANGEROUS CHEMICALS

It is possible that a Major Disaster may involve patients who have been
injured or contaminated with toxic or hazardous substances. Specific
guidance to NHS staff is given in the Trent Regional Health Authority
Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures, a copy of which is available in
the Accident and Emergency Department. Advice on dealing with patients
involved in such incidents can also be obtained by contacting Dr. C.C.
Harling, Consultant Occupational Physician.
INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

Any incident involving radioactivity may give rise to casualties who, as
well as being contaminated, will require treatment for their injuries.   The
Royal Hallamshire Hospital is designated as the hospital prepared to accept
contaminated casualties from Sheffield and the surrounding Districts.

Where the need for life-saving treatment appears to override the need for
decontamination, ambulance crews (in liaison with their control) must take
the casualty to the nearest Accident and Emergency Department, even though
it may not be designated to receive contaminated casualties.  This
situation may arise in Sheffield if the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
and Emergency Department is closed and casualties are received first at the
Northern General Hospital.  In this event arrangements must be made with
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital to obtain advice and assistance in the
decontamination of casualties and staff.  Initial guidance is contained in
the Trent Regional Health Authority Guidelines on Major Accident
Procedures, a copy of which is available in the Accident and Emergency
Department.
S e c tio n   II.

MAJOR DISASTER PLAN FOR THE NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL - SUMMARY OF GENERAL
PRINCIPLES.

PREPARATION OF THE HOSPITAL

              Switchboard

              Telephone operators will notify a range of staff that the Major
              Disaster Plan is in operation. With the exception of staff
              responding to Fire or Cardiac Arrest calls, all other calls through
              the Switchboard will be ignored, until completion of the call out
              sequence.

              Bleep holders will be alerted by an emergency bleep signal - a
              rapid sequence of three bleeps - and should report as instructed in
              their particular section of the Major Disaster Plan.

              The staff contacted by switchboard will communicate with other
              staff to fulfil a cascade system as indicated on pages 18 and 19 of
              this Plan.

              Accident and Emergency Department

              See 1 on map, page 10

              The Department will be cleared of patients as quickly as possible.
              Patients who are able to go home, will be directed to Outpatients
              Area 1 Ambulance Waiting Area to await their own or Ambulance
              transport home. See 11 on map, page 11. Patients whose condition
              is such that they cannot be discharged home, will remain.

              Portering Staff will be sent to the department to assist with
              moving equipment and manning lifts.

              Incoming casualties will be brought to the Ambulance Entrance of
              the Accident and Emergency Department for assessment. See 2 on map,
              page 10. Clerical staff will establish an emergency documentation
              point inside the Ambulance Entrance.

              The Walking Wounded Entrance of the Accident and Emergency
              Department will be locked. See 3 on map, page 10.

              Orthopaedic Clinic

              See 4 on map, page 10.

              The clinic cubicles, consulting rooms and waiting areas will be
              cleared to allow the establishment of the Hospital Control in
              Suite B, Administrative Base in Suite C and Nursing Base in Suite
              A. The Sister's office will be cleared to allow the establishment
              of the Police Liaison Base, see A on map, page 10. The Plaster Room
              and Treatment/Disposal Room will be cleared to allow the
              establishment of a temporary Mortuary, see B on map, page 10.




                                         _ 4 _
A c c id e n t and E m erg ency X -R a y D e p a r tm e n t

See 5 on map, page 10.

The Accident and Emergency X-Ray rooms and associated waiting areas
will be cleared of patients to allow X-Rays of Major Disaster
casualties to be taken.

A documentation point will be established at the reception desk.

Mobile Team

A team will be sent to the scene of the accident only if requested
by SYMAS and acceded to by the Senior Nursing and Medical Staff on
duty.

Equipment for the team is located at the Ambulance Entrance
to the Accident and Emergency Department.

G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department

See 6 on map, page 10.

The department will be cleared to receive Non-Urgent casualties
requiring minor treatment or rest and those awaiting transport
home.
A documentation point will be established at the reception desk.

Operating Theatres

All routine operations will cease.

Wards

Ward 60 (Day Case, Dental and Orthopaedic - 34 beds) will be
cleared of patients and prepared for casualties requiring
admission. See 7 on map, page 10.

A documentation point will be established on the ward.

A senior nurse manager will supervise arrangements to prepare other
wards to accept patients transferred from Ward 60 and, if
necessary, to accept casualties admitted from the Major Disaster.

Outpatients Areas 1 & 2

All Outpatient Clinics will cease so that Clinical staff can be
released to assist in the Major Disaster. Patients whose condition
is such that they cannot be discharged home, will remain.

Outpatient Area 1 - Third Reception Area

Will be used as a base for the Press. Statements will be issued
through the Administrative Base only. See 12 on map, page 11.
Staff Snack Bar at Level C

Will be used for relatives of casualties. Social Workers and
Chaplains will be based here. See 13 on map, page 11.

Appliance Clerk's Office - A & E Department

Will be used as the Ambulance Liaison Base.
See 8 on map, page 10.

Orthopaedic Library
Will be used as a Reporting Point for Nursing Staff who do not have
specific duties in the Plan. See 9 on map, page 10.

Orthopaedic Laboratory

Will be used as a Non-nursing Staff Reporting Point for those
staff/volunteers who do not have a specific duty to perform in
their Departmental Plan.
See 10 on map, page 10.
CONTROL ARRANGEMENTS

        Hospital Control

       Situated in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, where the Senior
       General Surgeon, Matron and Unit General Manager or their deputies
       will direct the whole hospital response.

        Administrative Base

        Situated in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C, where an Administrator
        will co-ordinate the support services and allocate essential tasks.

        Nursing Base

        Situated in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite A, where a senior nurse
        will co-ordinate the nursing services.

        Medical Control

        In addition to the Senior General Surgeon in Hospital Control, in
        certain areas there will be a Medical Controller who will have
        complete authority in that area. These Controllers will liaise
        with Hospital Control.

          Resuscitation Controller - based in the Accident and Emergency
          Department.  This will be the Consultant Anaesthetist on duty.

          Surgical Controller - based initially in Ward 60. This will be
          the Consultant General Surgeon on duty under whom all patients
          will be admitted unless specifically transferred to another
          Consultant. Operating lists and priorities will be decided by
          the Surgical Controller.

         Operating Theatre Controller - based in the Operating Theatres.
         Appointed by the Surgical Controller to supervise work in the
         Operating Theatres in conjunction with the Senior Nurse on duty
         in Theatres.

         Minor Injuries Controller - based in the G & M Wing Physiotherapy
         Department.  This will be the Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon on
         duty.
SCREENING OF CASUALTIES

The Senior Doctor in charge of the Accident and Emergency Department will
assess casualties on arrival at the Ambulance Entrance. Patients will be
graded into the following categories:-

IMMEDIATE          requiring resuscitation:
                   will be taken to resuscitation stations
Red Label          within the Accident and Emergency Department.

URGENT             requiring admission and surgery:
                   will be transferred to Ward 60 in the first
Blue Label         instance. The ward will have been cleared by
                   nurses and medical staff to prepare for
                   casualties requiring admission. Other
                   wards may be cleared by a senior nurse
                   manager on duty for the Acute Services
                   to accept patients transferred from Ward 60
                   and, if necessary, to accept casualties
                   admitted from the Major Disaster.



NON-URGENT         requiring minor treatment or rest:
                   will be transferred to the G & M Wing
Green Label        Physiotherapy Department.

DEAD               will be held in the Orthopaedic Clinic
                   Plaster Room.
White Label        Individual identification of bodies will
                   take place in the adjoining Treatment Room.

All casualties will be documented on arrival.

An index of casualties will be kept showing the initial disposal of
casualties.




                                    -   8 -
STAFF RESPONSE

In the event of a major disaster, local radio stations will broadcast a
message asking all staff who are on-call to report for duty immediately, as
follows:-

        "You are tuned to Radio Sheffield/Hallam. Here is a special
        announcement for staff of the Northern General and Royal
        Hallamshire Hospitals, Sheffield.

        There has been a major accident. All staff on call for the Northern
        General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals should report for duty
        immediately.

       Members of the public are asked NOT to telephone the hospitals or
       Radio Sheffield/Hallam. A telephone number,   to which enquiries
       may be made, will be announced very soon.

        No volunteers or blood donors are required at this stage. A
        separate announcement will be made if their assistance is needed
        later."

Nursing Staff who are off duty should remain at home and report at normal
duty time unless specifically called in.

Non-nursing staff who are off duty should proceed to the hospital, entering
by the Herries Road entrance, and report as follows;-

        Staff with specific duties in the Plan - go to your department and
        report to the senior person on duty.

        Staff without specific duties in the Plan - report to the
        Orthopaedic Laboratory for instructions.

DO NOT TELEPHONE THE HOSPITAL - The Switchboard will be inundated with
calls.

ACCESS TO THE HOSPITAL SITE

        Barnsley Road Entrance

        Access will be restricted to Emergency vehicles, e.g. SYMAS,
        Police, Fire Service and Accident and Emergency Medical Staff.

        Do not park outside the Accident and Emergency Department - it will
        be required for Emergency vehicles. Use the staff car park on the
        on the access road leading uphill from the Barnsley Road entrance.

        Herries Road Entrance

        All other staff and visitors should use the Herries Road entrance
        and park in the Herries Road car park. Do not park in the
        Physiotherapy Yard, Acute Wing ward yards or outside the Accident
        and Emergency Department.

        Herries Road Stores Entrance

        This will be closed to all traffic.
                                         Non-Urgent
                                         Treatm ent
                                          Centre


       Basement Corridor



LEVEL D                      Ray Dept.




                                Non-Nursing S ta ff
                                  Reporting Point




                             Nursing Staff
                             Reporting
                             Point




                                             Surgical Controller
            Nursing Base
             Hospital
             Control
                                             Admission Ward


Administrative Base




                        10
                                                       I


                                              ,_r

LEVEL C


                                                  13
                       R elatives ’ Base




           J




    nr

                        P a tie n t

                  >1 DA isrecah a rg e
                  11
                              P ress B ase   12



   HXHXhvsn

   ir^XHXJ-vsrj



                         11
ESSENTIA L INTERNAL TELEPHONE NUMBERS

 1. Hospital Control - Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B           4869

 2. Administrative Base - Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C        4056

 3. Nursing Base - Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite A               4868

 4. Accident & Emergency Department:

    Ambulance Liaison - Appliance Clerk's Office             4820
    Reception                                                4743
    Resuscitation                                            4873
    Sister                                                   4741
    Assistant Matron                                         4894
    Consultant                                               4870

 5. Porters:

    Front Hall, General Wing - Portering Base                4864
    Distribution Services Manager                            4924

6. Pharmacy:

   Dispensary                                                4753
   Medical Gases                                             4503
   Unit Pharmaceutical Officer                               4751

7. Haematology:

    Blood Bank                                               4246

8. Operating Theatres:

   Reception, Theatres   1-6                                 4596
   Corridor, Theatres    1-6                            4593/4365
   Reception, Theatres   7-11                                4204
   Corridor, Theatres    7-11                           4934/4935
   Assistant Matron                                          4819

 9. Ward 60                                                  4096

10. G & M Wing Physiotherapy:

    Reception                                                4858
    Superintendent                                           4857

11. Medical Controller - Assistant Matron
                         (Night Duty) Office Ward 60         4116

12. Nursing Staff Reporting Point - Orthopaedic Library      4443

13. Non-nursing Staff Reporting Point - Orthopaedic
                                        Laboratory (Lobby) 4592




                                   - 12 -
14. X-Ray Department:

      Main Department - Reception                      4726
      A/E X-Ray Department - Reception                 4553
      Superintendent                                   4727

15.   Mortuary                                         4307

16.   Police Liaison Base - OrthopaedicClinic Sister   4057

17.   Relatives Base - Staff Snack Bar,Level C         4132

18.   Consultant Occupational Physician                4161




                                    - 13 -
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE EVENT OF MAJOR DISASTER PLAN BEING
IMPLEMENTED AT THE ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL

In the event of a Major Disaster in which the Royal Hallamshire Hospital is
designated as the initial receiving hospital for casualties, the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard will notify the Northern General Hospital
Switchboard.

1.   PROCEDURE FOR SWITCHBOARD OPERATOR

       On receipt of the notification from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
       Switchboard, the following people must be informed immediately

                (i)    Unit General Manager - Mr. R. Akroyd

               (ii)     Matron - Miss J.M. Day

              (iii)     Senior General Surgeon - Mr. K.T.H. Moore

               (iv)     Senior Nurse on duty for the Acute Services

                (v)    Consultant Anaesthetist on take

               (vi)    Consultant Surgeon on take

              (vii)    Accident & Emergency Consultant

             (viii)    Accident & Emergency Anaesthetist

       The message to be given to the above people is "The Royal Hallamshire
       Hospital have implemented their Major Disaster Plan. "

       The Northern General Hospital Major Disaster Plan will not be put
       into effect at this stage. However, Hospital Control will beset up
       bythe Unit   General Manager, Matron and Senior General Surgeon in
       readiness to receive further communications from the District
       Hospitals Control. The other staff indicated in the above list will
       prepare to follow the Major Disaster Plan if called upon to do so.

2.   PROCEDURE FOR HOSPITAL CONTROL TEAM

       a)   Procedure for Senior General Surgeon or Deputy

              (i)     Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and inform the
                      telephone operator when you are in position; you will be
                      joined by Matron and the Unit General Manager.

             (ii)     Continue to act as Medical Controller of the procedure at
                      the Northern General Hospital, as influenced by the
                      overall situation in Sheffield, which will be co-ordinated
                      by the District Hospitals Control at the Royal Hallamshire
                      Hospital.




                                       - 14 -
     b)   Procedure for Matron

            (i)   Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and join the
                  Medical Controller.  Inform the telephone operator when
                  you are in position.

     c)   Procedure for the Unit General Manager

            (i)   Go immediately to Hospital Control and inform the
                  telephone operator when you are in position.

           (ii)   Set up Hospital Control with internal telephones,   Direct
                  Exchange lines, stationery, etc.

The District Hospitals Control is responsible for the distribution of
casualties and, if it is decided that the Northern General Hospital will
begin to receive casualties, the District Hospitals Control will inform the
Hospital Control Team at the Northern General Hospital.  In this event the
Unit General Manager will implement the full Major Disaster Plan by
informing the Switchboard Operator to commence the call-out sequence with
the message " Implement the Major Disaster Plan" .
S e c t io n   III.

PROCEDURES FOR IN D IV ID U A L S TA FF. WARDS AND DEPARTMENTS

SWITCHBOARD OPERATORS

General

1. Maintain a comprehensive list of essential staff and check it for
   accuracy on the final day of each month.

2. In the event of a Major Disaster, the operator(s) on duty are most
   likely to receive information from SYMAS or from the Royal Hallamshire
   Hospital prefaced with the words "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".
   If the instruction originates from the Northern General Hospital Control
   the words used will be "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".

3. Whatever the source of the message, log the words used and time
   received.

4. Log the response to the call out sequence given below.

5. The call out procedure given below is a cascade system. The number of
   calls to be made by the operator is limited.  Further calls will be made
   by the nominated individuals in each department or specialty.

6. The call out procedure given below involves only the Northern General
   Hospital Switchboard and (except where indicated) is applicable at all
   times on all days of the week.

Call Out Sequence

1. Increase level 9 facility by acting upon instructions contained in the
   sealed envelope marked "Major Disaster Plan - level 9 facilities".

2. Make contact with the following and give the message "Implement the
   Major Disaster Plan". No other information is necessary.

       a)      Accident and Emergency Department Receptionist (If Accident, and
               Emergency Department closed, proceed to (b))

       b)      Senior Nurse Manager on Duty for Acute Services.

       c)      Duty   SHO in General Surgery

       d)      Duty   SHO in Orthopaedic Surgery

        e)     Duty   1st on call Anaesthetist

        f)     Hospital Administrator or on call Administrator

        g)     Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard (only if
               initial notification does not originate from
               Royal Hallamshire Hospital)
    h)   Medical Records Officer

    i)   Off duty Switchboard Operators

    j)   Head Porter or Duty Porter

   k)    Senior Chief Haematology MLSO or MLSO on call for Blood Bank

    1)   Superintendent Physiotherapist or Physiotherapist on call

   m)    Superintendent Radiographer or Radiographer on call

    n)   Unit Pharmaceutical Officer or Duty Pharmacist

    o)   CSSD Manager

    P)   Hospital Chaplain

    q)   Social Worker

The above will initiate further communications along their cascade as
detailed in flow chart.




                                   - 17 -
                                             •                                   •
                                             FLOW CHART FOR IMMEDIATE COMMUNICATION

Telephonist
         -A & E Reception:                                  ■Nurse i/c A & E-                     •A & E Consultants
                                                            -A & E medical staff on duty


         ■Senior Nurse Manager on duty                      •Ward 60
          for Acute Services
                                                            •Theatres, bleep no 192
                                                             ITU
                                                            •A & E Consultants
                                                                   (during A & E closed nights)
                                                             Matron
                                                             Ward 66                              •Ward 65
                                                             Ward 64                              ■Ward 63
                                                             Ward 62                              -Ward 61


          Duty SHO in General Surgery,                      •Registrar in General Surgery
                                                            ■Consultant in General Surgery


         ■Duty SHO in Orthopaedic Surgery.                  •Registrar in Orthopaedic Surgery     Staff needing to use hospital
                                                            -Consultant in Orthopaedic Surgery    telephone handsets to make
                                                                                                  external calls may do so by
         ■Duty 1st on call Anaesthetist                      Senior Registrar in Anaesthetics
                                                                                                  using the code #6 555
                                                             2nd on call Anaesthetist
                                                                                                  followed by the external
                                                             Consultant Anaesthetist
                                                                                                  number desired.

         -Hospital Administrator                             Unit General Manager
          or on call Administrator
                                                            ■All other Administrators

         -Royal Hallamshire Hospital
          Switchboard (only if initial
          notification does not originate
          from Royal Hallamshire Hospital)
                                       FLOW CHART FOR IM MEDIATE COMMUNICATION


h)   ■Medical Records Officer                         -Other Medical Records Staff

i)   ■Off duty Switchboard Operators                  -All other off duty Switchboard Operators

j)   Head Porter or Duty Porter
                                                      •Distribution Services Manager
                                                      -Head Driver

k)   ■Senior Chief Haematology MLSO                    Blood Bank MLSO
      or MLSO on call for Blood Bank
                                                       Senior Chief Haematology MLSO
                                                       Consultant Haematologist

     Superintendent Physiotherapist                    Other Physiotherapists
     or Physiotherapist on call

m)   Superintendent Radiographer
     or Radiographer on call                          -Junior Radiologists
                                                      Consultant Radiologists

n)   Unit Pharmaceutical Officer
     or Deputy Pharmacist                             •Other Pharmaceutical Staff


o)   CSSD Manager
                                                      Other CSSD Staff                    Staff needing to use hospital

P)   Hospital Chaplain                                                                    telephone handsets to make
                                                      Other Chaplains
                                                                                          external calls may do so by
q)   Social Worker ---
                                                      Other Social Workers                using the code #6 555
                                                                                          followed by the external
                                                                                          number desired.
NURSE IN     CHARGE OF ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT

1.     Notification of a Major Disaster will be made by the Switchboard
       Operator to the Reception Desk.

2.     Inform all staff present in the department, including A & E
       Consultants.

3.     Issue Major Disaster action cards to available staff.

4.     Commence 'Cascade' for informing off-duty staff.

5.     Ensure all Waiting areas are cleared of patients as quickly as
       possible.

6.     Patients requirinp transport home to be directed to Outpatient Area 1
       Ambulance Waiting Area.

7.     Ensure Documentation Stations are set up in Ambulance Entrance (Triage
       Area).

8.     Inform Nursing Base (Orthopaedic Clinic Suite A) of current staffing
       levels and number of additional staff required.
       If Nursing Base has not yet been established, inform Senior Nurse on
       duty for Acute Services.

9.    Direct flow of patients as follows:-
       Incoming patients - via Ambulance Entrance (West Door).
      Patients for admission to Ward 60 - via X-Ray corridor.
      Minor Injuries to Physiotherapy Department - via link corridor through
      Main X-Ray Department.

SENIOR NURSE ON DUTY FOR THE ACUTE SERVICES

1.    On being informed by the Switchboard Operator that the Major Disaster
       Plan is in operation the Senior Nurse will proceed to the Orthopaedic
       Clinic, Suite A, to commence establishment of the Nursing Base.

2.    The Senior Nurse will ensure communication of the Major Disaster
       declaration to those indicated in the Flow Chart (page 18, item b).

3.     In the first, instance the Senior Nurse will be aware of the requirement
       to provide nursing support to:-

     v a)   Areas immediately affected by the Major Disaster.

       b)   Existing   patients within the hospital.

4.    From available nurse staffing rotas, identifying staff on-duty, the
       Senior Nurse will send additional staff immediately to the following
       areas:-

       a)   Accident & Emergency Department - for resuscitation points as
             directed by the Nurse in charge of the department.

       b)   G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department - to assist the Casualty
            Officers in the treatment of minor injuries. This team will be
            assisted by the Physiotherapists.
5.   Identify a member of the nursing staff to supervise arrangements for
     the preparation of the other wards to accept patients transferred from
     Ward 60 and, if necessary, to accept casualties admitted from the Major
     Disaster.

6.   Check/confirm and, if necessary, identify nurse staffing availability
     to:-

     a)   Operating Theatres

     b)   Intensive Care areas

     Ensure that nurse 'supervisors' are available in these key areas.

7.   Identify and inform 4 trained nurses (to include 1 Senior Sister or
     Charge Nurse) of the possibility of their requirement to be members of
     a Mobile Team to attend at the scene of the Major Disaster.

8.   As Nurse Managers become available, the Senior Nurse will deploy to the
     areas of need, until such time as the Hospital Control directs
     otherwise. Assign a Nurse Manager to the Nursing Staff Reporting Point
     (Orthopaedic Library) to ensure appropriate deployment of nurse
     volunteers.

9.   The Senior Nurse will establish and maintain communication with Medical
     and Administrative colleagues throughout the initial stage of the
     procedure, i.e. prior to and during the establishment of the
     Administrative Base and Medical Control, leading to the establishment
     of the overall Hospital Control.

NURSE IN CHARGE OF WARD 60

1.   Notification of a Major Disaster will be made by the Senior Nurse on
     duty for Acute Services.

2.   Inform all staff present ovi Ward.

3.   Set up immediately 14 beds to receive initial casualties (8 DaySurgery
     and 6 Dental beds).

4.   Ensure that Oxygen points are established to 14 beds and that drip
     stands are available.

5.   S e ^ a u t the equipment from the MAJOR DISASTER BOX to cover 14 beds.

6.   Wait for Medical staff to clear remaining beds.

7.   Keep Nurse Manager informed of bed occupancy and staffing levels.

8.   Replenish supplies of Pharmacy and CSSD.
A SSISTA N T MATRON OPERATING THEATRES OR DEPUTY

1.   Notification of a Major Disaster will be made by the Senior Nurse on
     duty for Acute Services.

2.   Inform all staff present in Theatres 1-11.

3.   Commence 'Cascade' for informing off-duty Nursing staff and Operating
     Department Assistants.

4.   Cancel all list cases, in conjunction with the Operating Theatres
     Controller.

5.   Allocate staff to cover all theatres, as follows:-

     a)   Nurses to prepare theatres

     b)   ODAs to prepare Anaesthetic rooms

     c)   Recovery Nurses to return list cases to their wards

6.   Receive operating lists when prepared and make out theatrecards.

7.   Allocate cases to theatres and inform staff.

8.   Ensure adequate supplies of CSSD, linen, drugs and blood.

9.   Inform Nursing Base of current staffing levels and number of   additional
     staff required.

MEDICAL STAFF

The following instructions provide for the initial situation; they can be
altered at any time as directed by Hospital Control.

Junior staff assist their Consultants, but in the absence of the Consultant
at one of the locations, they may have to assume increased responsibility,
having first informed Hospital Control.

ANAESTHETISTS

Assemble outside the Plaster Room in the Accident and Emergency Department.
The senior Anaesthetist directs staff as required to:-

1.   A & E Resuscitation Points.
     The duty Consultant Anaesthetist will act as Resuscitation Controller.

2.   Ward 60 and ITU.

3.   Operating Theatres.

4.   G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department.
ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY OFFICERS

Assemble in the Accident and Emergency Department.

1.    The senior doctor on duty will grade casualties on arrival at the
      ambulance entrance.

2.    Other officers will be directed by this senior doctor or the
      Resuscitation Controller to:-

      (a)   Treat patients already in the department, if this is necessary.

      (b)   A & E   Resuscitation Points.

      (c)   G & M   Wing Physiotherapy Department.

SURGEONS (General, Gynaecology, Orthopaedic,
         Plastic, Dental, Thoracic)

The Senior General Surgeon will join Hospital Control. All other surgeons
if called upon to assist assemble in Ward 60, Assistant Matron (Night Duty)
Office.

The Surgical Controller will direct staff as required to:-

1.    A & E Resuscitation Points.

2.    Ward 60 and ITU.

3.    Operating Theatres.

4.    G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department. TheConsultant   Orthopaedic
      Surgeon on duty or deputy will act as Minor Injuries Controller.

PHYSICIANS

If  called upon to assist assemble in Ward 60, Assistant Matron (Night Duty)
Office to be directed by Surgical Controller.

RADIOLOGISTS

Assemble in the Radiology Department office.

Give support as required in Ward 60, ITU and the Radiology Department.

BACTERIOLOGISTS, CHEMICAL PATHOLOGISTS,
HAEMATOLOGISTS AND HISTOPATHOLOGISTS

 The Consultants in charge will be informed by their Scientific Officers.

HOUSE PHYSICIANS AND HOUSE SURGEONS

 1.     Assemble in Ward 60, Assistant Matron (Night Duty) Office.

 2.Clear wards of unoperated patients, patients   waiting to go home or
     otherwise fit. These patients will be identified and subsequently the
     senior nursing staff will arrange for them to be transferred to the
     designated waiting areas.

 3.   Report to the Surgical Controller on Ward 60 for further duties.
HOS P IT A L CONTROL TEAM

The Hospital Control Team is responsible for directing the whole hospital
response to a Major Disaster, liaising with District Hospitals Control and
dealing with media statements and press conferences.  The Team comprises
the Senior General Surgeon, Matron and the Unit General Manager or their
deputies. Hospital Control is located in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B.
Messengers and clerks will be provided as necessary.

1.   Procedure for Senior General Surgeon or Deputy

       (i)    Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and inform the telephone
              operator when you are in position; you will be joined by Matron
              and the Unit General Manager.

      (ii)    Check with the following sections that Medical staff are in
              position:-

                            Accident and Emergency Department
                            Ward 60
                            G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department

     (iii)    Continue to act as Medical Controller of the procedure at the
              Northern General Hospital, as influenced by the overall
              situation in Sheffield, which will be co-ordinated by the
              District Hospitals Control at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

      (iv)    Be prepared if necessary to call upon the assistance of doctors
              in Gynaecology, Plastic Surgery, Dental Surgery, ENT Surgery,
              Cardiothoracic Surgery and in General Medicine.  In the event of
              their assistance being required, instruct the Switchboard
              Operator to communicate accordingly with the doctors concerned.

2.   Procedure for Matron

       (i)    Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and join the Medical
              Controller.  Inform the telephone operator when you are in
              position.

      (ii)    Check that the Senior Nurse on duty for the Acute Services has
              identified the requisite number of nurses for the teams listed
              below:-

                            Accident & Emergency Department

                            G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department

     (iii) Check that a Senior Nurse on duty has been sent to supervise the
            clearance and preparation of Ward 60 ,to receive casualties
            requiring admission.

       (iv)   Check that arrangements are made to prepare other wards for
              accepting inpatients transferred from Ward 60 or casualties from
              the Major Disaster requiring admission.

        (v)   Check that Nursing Base is established in the Orthopaedic
              Clinic, Suite A, so that off-duty staff may be requested to
              report for work as required.




                                        -   24 -
3.   Procedure for the Unit General Manager

       (i)     Go immediately to Hospital Control and inform the telephone
               operator when you are in position.

      (ii)     Set up Hospital Control with internal telephones, Direct
               Exchange lines, stationery, etc.

     (iii)     Ensure that Administrative Base is established in the
               Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C, so that the non-medical and
               non-nursing support services may be co-ordinated from this
               point.

      (iv)     Ensure availability of up-to-date casualty information for
               compilation of media statements and preparation of press
               conferences.

HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR AND STAFF
(See also section headed 'Hospital Control')

1.   The Administrative procedure requires the availability at the hospital
     of the Unit General Manager and at least three Administrators with full
     knowledge of the Major Disaster Plan.

     Keep an up to date list of the telephone numbers of the Unit General
     Manager; Administrative staff and secretaries; Catering and Linen
     Service Managers; Mortuary staff; Unit Personnel staff and secretaries;
     Security, Fire and Works Officers; Stores and Supplies staff; Cashiers;
     District Officers.

2.   FUNCTIONS

     (a)     Hospital Control

             The Unit General Manager or most senior Administrator available
             will direct the whole hospital response from this point.

     (b)     Administrative Base
                                     )


           The next most senior Administrator will be assisted by at least
           two other Administrators and will be responsible for co-ordinating
           the services listed overleaf from the Administrative Base. The
           responsible officers for the services listed will report to the
           Administrative Base.

3.   NOTIFICATION AND INITIAL RESPONSE
     - During Office Hours

     It is the responsibility of the first Administrator contacted to ensure
     that the Unit General Manager and all Administrators are notified.

     (a)   Hospital Control

           The Unit General Manager or the most senior Administrator
           available goes immediately to Hospital Control. He ensures that
           the Hospital Control is set up and notifies the District Hospitals
           Control at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital when the Hospital
           Control is operational.
   (b)   Administrative Base

         The next most senior Administrator available goes immediately to
         the Administrative Base. He will ensure that the Administrative
         Base is set up and will be assisted by at least two other
         Administrators.

   - Outside Office Hours

   It is the responsibility of the Administrator on-call to contact the
   Unit General Manager and all other Administrative staff. All available
   staff will leave for the hospital immediately.

   (a)   Hospital Control

         The first person to arrive at the hospital will set up Hospital
         Control and await the arrival of the Unit General Manager or
         deputy.

   (b)   Administrative Base

         The second person to arrive at the hospital will set up the
         Administrative Base, report his arrival to Hospital Control and
         await the arrival of the next most senior Administrator. All
         other available Administrative staff will report on arrival to the
         Administrative Base and will assist the Administrator in charge
         with the co-ordination of the services listed below.


SERVICES CO-ORDINATED BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE BASE

         Distribution Services

          Responsible Officer:    Distribution Services Manager
          Key Tasks               To ensure the availability of
                                  staff, equipment and vehicles
                                  for the following duties:-
          Portering

          Responsible Officer:    Head Porter or Deputy
          Key Tasks           :   Assist with setting up casualty
                                  reception and other emergency
                                  patient areas; organise internal
                                  movement of patients; ensure
                                  availability of equipment from
                                  Major Disaster store rooms.

          Car Parking

          Responsible Officer:    Head Porter or Deputy
          Key Tasks               Ensure access to Accident and
                                  Emergency Department is kept clear
                                  and that flow of vehicles is
                                  maintained by means of barriers
                                  and emergency signposting.
                                  Administrative Base will request
                                  assistance from the Police Liaison
                                  Officer if required.




                                     - 26 -
Transport

Responsible Officer:    Head Driver or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of all vehicles
                        for use in moving staff and
                        emergency supplies to emergency
                        patient areas as required.

Medical Records and Patient Documentation

Responsible Officer:    Medical Records Officer or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Set up casualty documentation
                        system; maintain up to date
                        information on casualties.

Switchboard

Responsible Officer:    Switchboard Supervisor or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Notification of essential staff;
                        maintenance of communications;
                        call in additional telephonists
                        if required.

Catering

Responsible Officer:    Catering Manager or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Ensure supply of refreshments
                        and meals to emergency patient
                        areas, wards, relatives and staff,


Linen

Responsible Officer:    Linen Services Manager
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of emergency
                        supplies of linen.

Messengers

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base
Key Tasks           :   Carrying messages and documents
                        between Hospital Control,
                        Administrative Base and other
                        key points in the hospital.

Secretarial and Clerical

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base
Key Tasks           :   Provide clerical services
                        as required.

Patients' Property and Valuables

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base/Cashier
Key Tasks           :   Ensure safe keeping and
                        recording of patients' property
                        and valuables.




                           - 27 -
Public Relations and Press Information

Responsible Officer:    Hospital Control
Key Tasks           :   Ensure that Press and members
                        of the public assemble in
                        appropriate locations; provide
                        information to Hospital Control
                        for use in formal press statements
                        and press conferences.

Mortuary

Responsible Officer:    Higher Senior APT
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of Mortuary
                        facilities for deceased patients.
                        Collect information in conjunction
                        with MRO for Coroner's Office.

Supplies

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Assistant
                        (Supplies and Stores)
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of emergency
                        supplies from Stores.

Volunteers

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base
Key Tasks           :   Assign member of staff to Non-
                        Nursing Staff Reporting Point
                        (Orthopaedic Laboratory) who will
                        ensure appropriate deployment of
                        staff and non-staff volunteers
                        and non-nursing staff who do not
                        have a specific duty but offer
                        help, e.g. in Relatives Base,
                        Transport, Messenger Service.

Blood Bank

Responsible Officer:    Principal MLSO
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of blood
                        supplies to emergency patient
                        treatment areas; liaise with
                        Regional Blood Transfusion
                        Centre and Administrative Base.

C.S.S.D.

Responsible Officer:    CSSD Manager or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of sterile
                         supplies to emergency patient
                         treatment areas; receive information
                         from Nurse in charge of theatres;
                         liaise with Administrative Base.
           Hospital Chaplains

           Responsible Officer:     Full-time Hospital Chaplain
           Key Tasks           :    Co-ordinate ministry as
                                    appropriate to patients and
                                    relatives; provide support to
                                    Social Workers in setting up
                                    and running the Relatives Base.

           Pharmacy

           Responsible Officer:     Unit Pharmaceutical Officer
                                    or Deputy
           Key Tasks            :   Ensure availability of adequate
                                    supplies of drugs, dressings and
                                    medical gases to emergency patient
                                    treatment areas; liaise with
                                    Administrative Base.

           Social Work

           Responsible Officer:     Group Principal Social Worker
                                    or Deputy
           Key Tasks            :   Ensure the setting up and running
                                    of the Relatives Base in conjunction
                                    with Chaplains; maintain up to date
                                    list of patient information in
                                    conjunction with the MRO; deal with
                                    enquiries from relatives; maintain
                                    contact with Police Liaison Officer,
                                    Hospital Chaplains and
                                    Administrative Base.

MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT

1.   The Medical Records Officer or Deputy will be notified by the
     Switchboard.

2.   Medical Records Officer will notify a member of staff at home who, by
     arrangement, will telephone other Medical Records staff to call them
     into the hospital.

3.   Staff on arrival will report to the Accident and Emergency Reception
     Desk, take the next available Action Card and act accordingly.

4.   A list of patients will be maintained with details of immediate
     disposal.

5.   Further disposal/discharge of patients will be recorded wherever
     possible.

6.   Medical Records Officer is responsible for:-

     a)   Maintenance of an up-to-date list of volunteer personnel.

     b)   Maintenance of appropriate Major Disaster documentation.

     c)   Training of volunteer personnel in Major Disaster
          documentation procedures.




                                      - 29 -
     d)   Ensuring that all documents are available in the assessment area
          and that clerical staff document patients as they arrive.

     e)   Ensuring that immediate disposal of patients is recorded.


DISTRIBUTION SERVICES DEPARTMENT

1.   Implementation of Major Disaster Plan will be by the Head Porter or
     Senior Porter on Duty, receiving a telephone from the Switchboard. The
     Switchboard will use the words"Implement the Major Disaster Plan".

2.   On receipt of the call the Porter will contact colleagues in the
     following order

              a)   Distribution Services Manager
              b)   Head Porter           ) who will call in
              c)   Deputy Head Porters ) other Porters
              d)   Senior Driver or Driver(s) available who will
                   call in other transport Staff and inform them
                   of the initiation of the Major Disaster Plan
                   using the same words as the Telephonist,
                    i.e. "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".

     On receipt of this message staff will report to the G & M Wing Front
     Hall.

     If one or more staff detailed above are unavailable, proceed to the
     next one(s) on the list, do not delay.

3.   On reporting to the G & M Wing Front Hall the most senior Porter will
     despatch Porters as follows:-

              3 to Accident and Emergency Department.
              3 to man lifts in OPD/Ward Block, using keys
                obtained from the keyboard in the Head Porter's
                office to lock off lifts for manual over-ride.
              2 to Theatres.
              1 to G & M Wing Physiotherapy.
              1 to remain on Front Hall.

     All other Porters to be despatched to collect all available wheelchairs
     and trolleys to Accident and Emergency and take major disaster linen,
     stretchers, poles, etc. from Laundry and store-room outside Head
     Porter's office (key obtained from the keyboard in the Head Porter's
     office), then to report to the Orthopaedic Laboratory for further
     instruction.

4.   Transport Staff will report to the Transport Office and await
     instructions.
BLOOD BANK SENIOR CHIEF MEDICAL
LABORATORY SCIENTIFIC OFFICER OR DEPUTY


1.     Always maintain a list of personnel at hospital switchboard, and for
       use within the department.

2.     Check blood supply and liaise with Regional Blood Transfusion Centre
       (Telephone: Sheffield 424242).

3.     Assemble available Medical Laboratory Scientific Officers and
       inform appropriate Medical Staff. After 1700 hours on weekdays or
       during weekends and Bank Holidays, notification will be to the
       Haematology Scientific Officer on call who is responsible for
       ensuring that all other Technical and Medical Staff are contacted.

4.     Send Scientific Officer with Gp A, B and 0 supply to Outpatient
       Area 1 Blood-taking Room. Urgent cases will be ABO grouped for
       uncross-matched blood transfusion if necessary.

5.     Organise supplies of rapid and routine cross-matched blood to
       Ward 60 or other cleared wards as requested. Give ample warning to
       Regional Blood Transfusion Centre in event of stock depleting. If
       transport is required, contact Administrative Base.

SUPERINTENDENT PHYSIOTHERAPIST OR DEPUTY

     1. Maintain list of staff telephone numbers for use within the
        department and by staff at home. It will be the responsibility of the
        person initially alerted to contact other members of staff indicated on
        the list.

     2. Assemble staff in the G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department.

     3. Supervise clearance of Physiotherapy Department and prepare for
        patients with Minor injuries. Patients awaiting transport home after
        treatment should go to the staff room.

     4. Detail a Physiotherapist to control the patient waiting area and
        the flow of patients for diagnosis, treatment or discharge.

     5. Direct doctors to deal with lying, sitting and walking cases in
        various rooms. Supply radiography request forms.

     6. Send to C.S.S.D. for panniers containing syringes, sutures and
        dressing packs.

     7. Send to Pharmacy for lotions (Hibitane), local anaesthetic
        (1% Lignocaine), bandages, strapping, plaster of paris bandages,
        Tetanus Toxoid.

     8. If required, anaesthetic equipment is available in Radiology
        Department.
 9.   Is o la te   n o is y p a t i e n t s .

10. Put out mattresses on floors if necessary.

11. Ensure that patients are seen by a Medical Records Clerk before
    discharge home.

SUPERINTENDENT RADIOGRAPHER OR DEPUTY


 1. Maintain an up to date list of personnel including Clerical
    Staff, copies of which should be available for each member of
    staff to use for cascade call-out.

 2. Assemble staff and notify all medical staff in the department. After
    1700 hours on weekdays or during weekends and Bank Holidays initial
    notification will be to the 'on call' Radiographer based in the
    department.  Further contact will be established in the manner
    prescribed in the list and that person will be responsible for
    alerting the remainder of the team.

 3. Cancel routine investigations.

 4. Send first team to the A & E Department and prepare X-Ray rooms to
    receive casualties from the Major Disaster.

 5.    Send second team to prepare rooms in     the Main X-Ray Department to
      receive patients with minor injuries      from the G & M Wing Physiotherapy
      Department.

 6.    Sendthird team with mobile machineto Ward 60 for first in-patients.

 7.    Send fourth team with mobile machine to G & M Wing Physiotherapy
      Department for manipulation of minor fractures and application of
      plaster under general anaesthetic.

 8. Send fifth team to Theatre when required.

 9. Radiologists will supervise teams in Accident and Emergency
    Department, Ward 60 and Main X-Ray Department.

10.    Assign available Clerical staff from within department to set up
      documentation point for Accident and Emergency X-Ray Rooms.

UNIT PHARMACEUTICAL OFFICER OR DEPUTY

 1. Always maintain list of personnel at hospital switchboard, and
    for use within the department.

 2. Assemble staff. After 1700 hours on weekdays or during weekends and
    Bank Holidays, the switchboard will contact the on-call Pharmacist.
    it will be the responsibility of the person initially alerted to contact
    other members of staff indicated on the list.
3. Arrange for adequate supplies of the following items in order of
   priority to Accident and Emergency Department, Physiotherapy Department
   and Ward 60.

            a)   Intravenous fluids, Sodium Chloride 0.9%
                                       Haemaccel

            b)   Analgesics, Morphine 10 mg injection
                             Co-Dyramol tablets

            c)   Antibiotics, Ampicillin
                              Flucloxacillin
                              Metronidazole
                              Cefuroxime injection

            d)   Antiemetics, Prochlorperazine injection 25 mg/ml

            e)   Tetanus Toxoid

            f)   Local anaesthetic agents (1% Lignocaine
                                           and Prilocaine 1/2%)

            g)   Medical gas supplies to A & E Department,
                 Theatres and Physiotherapy Department.

                 (Physiotherapy Department will send for
                 dressings and drugs almost immediately to
                 Pharmacy and CSSD).

4. Prepare to supply additional dressings and plaster of paris bandages.

5. Prepare to obtain supplies from other hospitals if necessary.        It may
   be necessary to alert the Pharmacists at other hospitals.

CENTRAL STERILE SUPPLY DEPARTMENT (CSSD)

1. Implementation of the Major Disaster Plan will be by the CSSD Manager,
   or most senior member of staff on duty receiving a telephone call from
   Switchboard.  If no members of the CSSD are on duty the Switchboard
   will telephone the most senior person available, ringing them in the
   following order until they are able to contact a member of staff

            a)   CSSD Manager

            b)   CSSD Deputy Manager

            c)   Chargehands in order as notified to Switchboard.

            The Switchboard will use the words       "Implement   the
            Major Disaster Plan".

2. On receipt of the call the Manager will inform staff on duty. If call
   is received when department is closed the Manager will ring colleagues
   as detailed on the list which they hold at home and in the department.
3. On receiving the call members of staff will report to the CSSD entering
   the hospital via the Herries Road entrance.

4. On arrival staff will report to the Sterile Store which will be used as
   the CSSD Base (internal telephone number 4454).

5. If the CSSD is closed the first member of staff to arrive will collect
   keys from Theatres 1-6, go to department and unlock it. Switch on
   power and start trial run on two autoclaves.

6. The second and other members of staff to arrive will check that
   the emergency panniers have been collected from the bottom of
   the stairs leading to Theatres 1-6. If not collected take to
   Physiotherapy Department those panniers marked "Physiotherapy
   Department" and Ward 60 those panniers marked "Ward 60".

7. At regular intervals visit Accident and Emergency Department, Ward 60
   and Physiotherapy Department to assess supply needs and collect soiled
   items for reprocessing.

8. Most senior member of staff on duty to monitor and call in, as
   necessary, extra staff to enable Theatres and Departments involved to
   be supplied with their requirements.  If the telephone does not have
   level '9' access, dial ++ 6555 followed by the telephone number.

9. Issue extra stocks on demand and deliver as necessary.

10. If the CSSD Manager or Deputy are not initially available, attempts
    should be made at regular intervals to contact them.


 HOSPITAL CHAPLAINS


 1. The whole-time Chaplain will maintain a list of personnel at hospital
    switchboard.

 2. Switchboard will alert the Duty Chaplain who is responsible for
    contacting other Chaplains.

 3. Assemble in Staff Snack Bar, Level C, from where ministry to patients
    and relatives will be co-ordinated.

 4. Chaplains will be assigned to:-

             (a)   Accident and Emergency Department

             (b)   Ward 60 or other cleared wards - to minister to
                    those urgent casualties awaiting operations
                    etc.

             (c)   Staff Snack Bar, Level C - to work    alongside
                    the Medical Social Workers in giving support
                    to the relatives who will be directed here.
5. The whole-time Hospital Chaplain will act as co-ordinator and
   should advise colleagues where he is based.  If he is required
   urgently, the Chaplain carries a Bleep.

6. Subject to availability,     the Chaplains will endeavour to visit the
   G & M Wing Physiotherapy     Department to see those with 'Minor' injuries.

GROUP PRINCIPAL SOCIAL WORKER OR DEPUTY

 1. The switchboard at Northern General Hospital will contact Group
    Principal Social Worker or deputy from a list of personnel provided
    and updated by the Group Principal Social Worker.

 2. The Group Principal Social Worker or deputy will contact a minimum of
    three Social Workers and one Clerk from the list of staff held by them
    to provide a social work servive within the hospital.

 3. The Social Work Staff will be based, with the Chaplain, at the Staff
    Snack Bar (Level C). Their duties will include:-

      3.1   Answering enquiries from next of kin regarding people
            admitted to Northern General Hospital in conjunction
            with the Police Liaison Officer.

      3.2   Seeing patients and/or their relatives regarding non-medical
            problems of patients in liaison with the Hospital Chaplain.

      3.3. In particular, liaise with the Chaplain for counselling of
           bereaved relatives.

      3.4   Keeping minimal records of people seen and action taken.


HIGHER SENIOR ANATOMICAL PATHOLOGY TECHNICIAN OR DEPUTY

 1. The Higher Senior APT or deputy will be notified of
    the Major Disaster by Administrative Base.

 2. Open up the Mortuary and prepare the Fridge Room.

 3. Receive bodies from the temporary Mortuary in the
    Orthopaedic Clinic.

 4.   Complete documentation relating to the body.

 5.   Arrange for viewing of bodies if required.

 6.    Deal with enquiries from the Police, Medical Records,
      Administrative Base.

LINEN SERVICES MANAGER OR DEPUTY

 1.    The Linen Services Manager or Deputy will be notified of theMajor
      Disaster by Administrative Base. A register of stafftelephone    numbers
      must be maintained for use within the department.
 2. Open up and prepare the stock of emergency linen.

 3. Contact Administrative Base for an assessment of the number of
    casualties involved, areas requiring extra linen and arrangements
    for transport.

 4. Bring in additional staff as required.    The telephone must be manned
    at all times.

 5. Visit the Accident & Emergency Department
              G & M Wing Physiotherapy
              Theatres
              Ward 60
              ITU
    to assess the need for extra linen.

SUPPLIES AND STORES STAFF

 1. Always maintain list of Stores and Supplies personnel and home
    telephone numbers within the department and ensure that this
    information is also kept by Administration.

 2. In the event of the Major Disaster Plan being implemented during
    working hours assemble all available Stores and Supplies personnel at
    the Herries Road Store. At all other times the Storekeeper Clerk or
    Senior Storekeeper will be contacted by an Administrator. It will be
    the responsibility of the person initially alerted to contact other
    members of staff indicated on the list and instruct them to report to
    the Herries Road Store.

 3. Inform Administrative   Base when you have arrived at the Herries Road
    Store. Remain in the    Stores building with at least one member of
    Stores/Supplies staff   designated as a messenger in order to deal with
    problems of supply to   any department.

 4. Demands are likely from:-

                Accident & Emergency Department

                Orthopaedic Clinic (Hospital Control)

                Operating Theatres

                Physiotherapy Department (G & M)

                Ward 60

                I.T.U.

                Catering Department

                Portering/Distribution Services
5. While waiting for such demands, check the Major Disaster Plan to
   remind yourself of the activities in these departments and, if in
   difficulty, contact the Administrative Base for advice.

CATERING DEPARTMENT

 1. Upon being called from the hospital by Administrative Base the Catering
    Manager or Deputy Catering Manager will, before leaving their home,
    call at least one other Catering Manager.

 2. Upon arrival at the hospital those called out will report to the
    Administrative Base, in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C, and check
    catering requirements.

 3. The first Catering Manager to arrive will then obtain the keys to the
    Staff Snack Bar, which are located in the Switchboard, and unlock all
    access doors to the Snack Bar.

 4. The first Catering Manager will assess the availability of the
    following products

                  Tea Bags              Disposable   Cups
                  Instant Coffee            "        Dinner Plates
                  Sugar                     "        Cutlery
                  Milk                      "        Side Plates
                  Soup Mix
                  Bread
                  Margarine
                  Sandwich Fillings
                  Eggs
                  Sausages
                  Baked Beans
                  Frozen Chips
                  Bacon
                  Biscuits

 5. If additional supplies are required the second Catering Manager to
    arrive should obtain these from the Geriatric Wing Dining Room and
    Kitchen, the keys for which are located in Sister's Office, Ward 38.

 6.    The second Catering Manager should make arrangements to supply
      refreshments to the G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department where people
      with minor injuries are to be treated.

 7. The first Catering Manager should set up the servery counter to serve
    hot beverages, biscuits, sandwiches and soup.

 8.    The second Catering Manager will assist in sandwich preparation and   set
      up for the preparation of meals.

 9. The first Catering Manager will serve on the counter, whilst the second
    prepares meals.
    10. Where Catering Staff are already on duty in the Staff Snack Bar, they
        should be given specific duties to carry out. If necessary they should
        be asked either to  stay at work beyond the end of their shift or be
        allowed to go home and subsequently to return to work, if deemed
        necessary.  It should be remembered that they must only use the pay
        'phones if they need to make any telephone calls.

    11. One hour after being called out the first Catering Manager should visit
        the Administrative Base to ask if the persons manning the base, or any
        others, require any form of catering service delivering to them and
        this should be provided without adversely affecting the availability of
        catering staff in the Snack Bar.

    12. If at any time the   resources of the Snack Barappear to be stretched,
        the first Catering  Manager must either inform the Administrative Base


•
        and/or arrange for other Catering Managers to be called out.




                                    -38-
        Printed by
Sheffield Health Authority
      Printing Works
  Middlewood Hospital
             ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL

             MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT


                  MAJAX PROCEDURE


In the event of a MAJOR ACCIDENT being declared
you will


1.   Receive a telephone call requesting that you
     come in as soon as possible.

2.   Enter the hospital by C Road Entrance and take
     the stairs to Floor B.

3»   Report to the Admission Office.

4*   Sign Register.

5*   Proceed to the Triage Area (Orthopaedic Reception,
     Floor B).

6.   Sign Register and take next Action Card.

7*   Proceed as instructed on the card until told
     otherwise by Medical Records Officer.

8.   If sufficient staff have arrived, report to the
     Medical Records Officers' Room - B163»
                    CABD HUMBER 1

E n t e r y o u r nam e a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Put pre-numbered bracelet on patient (first
patient number 30}*).


Enter as many details as possible (e.g. name,
age etc.) on white card placed on the front
of the case notes.   If the patient is
unconscious state male/female and/or any
other immediate identification available.


P la c e th e c o m p le te d c a rd i n th e box p r o v id e d
r e a d y f o r e n t r y i n t h e M a ja x R e g i s t e r .
                   CABS HUMBER 2

E n t e r y o u r name a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n th e A c t io n C a rd R e g is t e r .



Put pre-numbered bracelet on patient (first
patient number 30^).


Enter as many details as possible (e.g. name,
age etc.) on white card placed on the front
of the case notes.    If the patient is
unconscious state male/female and/or any
other immediate identification available.


P la c e th e c o m p le te d c a rd i n t h e box p r o v id e d
r e a d y f o r e n t r y i n t h e M a ja x R e g i s t e r .
                     CABD HOMBKR 3


 E n t e r y o u r nam e a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
 p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 1 from
 Majax Centre and proceed to point A
  (Transit).


 As patients are taken past, enter the number
 from the patient's wrist label, name and
 destination.    (if it is possible to obtain
 any other relevant details, e.g. address, age
 please record).
                     CARD HUMBER 4


 E n t e r y o u r name a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
 p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 2 from
 Majax Centre and proceed to point B
  (A/E WRVS).


 As patients are taken past, enter the number
 from the patient's wrist label, name and
 destination.    (if it is possible to obtain
 any other relevant details, e.g. address, age
 please record).
                   r .im   WOKBSSR 5


E n t e r y o u r nam e and n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect Majax Register from Majax Centre.


Collect white cards already completed from
box.


Enter details from white card into Majax
Register.


Update these details on receipt of
information brought in from various points.


Continue to enter and update accordingly.


Complete appropriate index cards (G.1) in the
same manner as above.
                   n*lTO HPHBKR 6


E n t e r y o u r name a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled n u m b e r O from
Majax Centre and proceed to the A/E X Ray
Reception area.


 Clear the reception desk of existing work
 (place in Senior Radiographer s office;.


 Get out special Majax X-Ray Register and
 Index Cards (kept in stationery cupboard
 opposite X-Ray reception point).


 Document patients as they arrive for x-ray in
 Majax X-Ray Register and complete index card.


  Add to Medical Records documentation if
  possible, by using clip-board sheet.
                      CARD HUMBER 7


E n t e r y o u r name a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Link up with first or second documentation
Clerk.    (Main entrance to triage area).


Take dictated details on white card placed on
the front of the case notes.   Enter as many
details as possible (e.g. name, age, etc.).
If the patient is unconscious state
male/female and/or any other immediate
identification available.


P l a c e t h e c o m p le t e d c a r d i n t h e b o x p r o v i d e d
r e a d y f o r e n t r y i n t h e M a ja x R e g i s t e r .
                    CABS HUMBER 8


E n t e r y o u r name a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Link up with first or second documentation
Clerk.    (Main entrance to triage area).


Take dictated details on white card placed on
the front of the case notes.   Enter as many
details as possible (e.g. name, age, etc.).
If the patient is unconscious state
male/female and/or any other immediate
identification available.


Place the completed card in the box provided
ready for entry in the Majax Register.
                     CARD HUMBER 9


 E n t e r y o u r name a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
 p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 4 from
 Majax Centre and proceed to point C
  (Orthopaedic entrance to Plaster Room).


 As patients are taken past, enter the number
 from the patient’s wrist label, name and
 destination.    (if it is possible to obtain
 any other relevant details, e.g. address, age
 please record).
                   CARD HUMBER 10


E n t e r y o u r name and n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 5 from the
Majax Centre and proceed to the A/E X-Ray
Reception area.


Link up with the sixth Clerk.     (Already
documenting in X-Ray Department).


Document patients as they arrive for X-ray in
the Majax X-Ray Register, and complete index
card.


Add to Medical Records documentation if
possible by using clip-board sheet.
                CARD HUMBER t t


 Enter your name and normal area of work i
                                         m
 print in the Action Card Register.




S#i ^ r ° S ,S ! r l . “   tod Ward 02 ,hlch holds


Proceed to Ward G2.




paTientadBn ^ f.iCatl0n f°rm (HMR°      f0r


Prepare and complete bed state with details
of admissions, discharges and transfers.


            completing HMR1 's only use one
       form at a time in the clip-board as
       these are self carbonated.
                    CARD NUMBER 12


E n t e r y o u r nam e a n d n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 6 from
 Majax Centre and proceed to Physiotherapy
Department.


List patients awaiting discharge from wards
(number, name, ward, destination, type of
transport, time of departure).   Inform
patient that an appointment will be sent to
them by post.


Inform Orthopaedic Clinic Out-Patients that a
letter will be sent to each individual
regarding a further appointment.


If any Majax patients have proceeded to this
area please list following details: Majax
Number, name, destination, type of transport,
time of departure.
             CARD SOMBER 15


Enter your name and normal area of work in
print in the Action Card Register.


Collect clip-board labelled number 7 from
 Majax Centre and proceed to point D (outside
Physiotherapy Department).


Enter the number from the patient's wrist
label, the time of departure, destination,
means of travel.
                   CAM) BOMBER 14


E n t e r y o u r name and n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 8 from
Majax Centre and proceed to point E
 (X-Ray exit on Transit corridor).


As patients are taken past, enter the number
from the patient's wrist label, name and
destination.    (if it is possible to obtain
any other relevant details, e.g. address, age
please record).
                   CAEP 1UMBER 15


E n t e r y o u r nam e and n o r m a l a r e a o f w o r k i n
p r i n t i n t h e A c t i o n C a rd R e g i s t e r .



Collect clip-board labelled number 9 from
Majax Centre and proceed to Physiotherapy
Department).

Link up with twelfth Clerk.                   (Physiotherapy
Department).


List patients awaiting discharge from wards
(number, name, ward, destination, type of
transport, time of departure).


Inform Orthopaedic Out-Patients that a letter
will be sent to each individual regarding a
further appointment.


If any Majax patients have proceeded to this
area please lift following details:  Majax
Number, name, destination, type of transport,
time of departure.
