                                                                      P o s I ,o Jtr/t


                                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                     COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                          I N D E X


    1.   Briefing note dated 20.6.89 re. meeting with Lord Ferrers

    2.   Letter   dated 27.6.89   from Lord Ferrers to Sir John Layden

    3.   Letter   dated 31.7.89   from Sir John Layden to Lord Ferrers

    4.   Letter   dated 31.7.89   from Mr R C Johnston to Mr M J Addison (Home Office)

    5.   Letter dated 9.8.89 from Mr M J Addison to Mr R C Johnston

    6.   Letter   dated 10.8.89   from Mr R C Johnston to Mr Addison (Home   Office)

    7.   Letter dated 11.8.89     from West Midlands Police Authority to
         Mr R C Johnston

    8.   Letter   dated 14.8.89   from Mr R C Johnston to Sir John Layden

    9.   Letter   dated 16.8.89   from CC to Mr Dear

   10.   Letter   dated 17.8.89   from Mr Dear to CC (in response to 9. above)

   11.   Letter   dated 21.8.89   from Mr R C Johnston to Mr Addison (Home   Office)

   12.   Letter   dated 23.8.89   from CC to Mr Dear

   13.   Letter   dated 23.8.89   from Mr S Walker to Mr Dear

   14.   Letter dated 23.8.89 from Mr S Walker to Mr A V Astling (Clerk to
         West Midlands Police Authority)

   15.   Letter dated 31.8.89 from Mr Boys Smith (Home Office) to Mr Johnston

^^16.    Letter dated 5.9.89 from ACC, Mr Jones to ACC, Mr Anderson together with
         letter of reply from CC to Mr Dear

   17.   'Note for F i l e 1 dated 7.9.89 following conversations the DCC had with
         Sir Richard Barratt and Mr Dear re. correspondence at item 16. above

   18.   Letter dated 7.9.89 from Mr Dear to CC in response to CC's letter to
         Mr Dear of 6.9.89 (at item 16. above)

  19.    'Note for F i l e 1 dated 8.9.89 following conversation DCC had with
         Bob Johnston re. police representation at Secretariat visit to West
         Midlands

  20.    Letter dated 12.9.89 from Bob Johnston to CC enclosing copy of letter
         dated 12.9.89 to Bob Johnston from Mr Addison (H.O.)

  21.    Copy letter dated 8.9.89 from Municipal Mutual Insurance Company to South
         Yorkshire Joint Secretariat

  22.    Copy faxed letter dated 21.9.89 from Mr Johnston to Mr Astling (West
         Midlands Police Authority Clerk)

  23.    Copy faxed letter dated 27.9.89 from Mr Johnston to Mr Astling
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - FINANCING OF WEST MIDLANDS POLICE ENQUIRY
MEETING WITH LORD FERRERS ON TUESDAY.   20   JUNE 1989
Briefing Note for Members
1     Introduction

     This meeting was set up pursuant to the resolution of Police F and G P
     Committee on 21 April 1989 that "any costs incurred by the South Yorkshire
     Police Authority in consequence of the public enquiry (including the
     associated West Midlands police inquiry) be met from central resources."
     An officer level meeting was held at the Home Office on Thursday, 18 May
     1989. Members have previously received a note of this meeting but a
     further copy is attached.
2     Establishment of Enquiry
     The Chief Constable of West Midlands was initially invited by Mr Wright to
     conduct an enquiry into the policing of the match at Hillsborough on 16
     April on the basis that the magnitude of and publicity surrounding the
     disaster made it essential that an independent view of the police action
     was obtained. In taking this decision Mr Wright had not identified any
     specific Chief Constable and it was only after Mr Dear had been identified
     by the Chief HMI and his suitability personally approved by the Home
     Secretary that the formal invitation was made.
     Following discussions that same day involving the Home Secretary, both
     Chief Constables, and the Chief HMI, the Home Secretary announced in the
     Commons on Monday the establishment of an enquiry to be headed by Lord
     Justice Taylor with the following terms of reference
      To enquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15
     April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control
     and safety at sports grounds."
     In answer to questions Mr Hurd stated that "the work to be carried out by
     the Chief Constable of the West Midlands force will be at the service of
     Lord Justice Taylor __ " -
3    Assistance between Forces
     The following circumstances for enlisting the aid of an external police
     force can be identified under present legislation:-
     (a) Under Section 14 of the Police Act 1964 "The chief officer of police
          of any police force may, on the application of the chief officer of
          police of any other police force provide constables or other
          assistance for the purpose of enabling the other force to meet any
          special demand on its resources."
     (b) Under Section 85(3) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, if
         it appears to the chief officer that a complaint is not suitable for
         informal resolution he shall appoint an officer from his force or
         some other force to investigate it formally.
          Where the investigation is supervised by the Police Complaints
          Authority they may approve the officer from the other force.
-2-
      It is apparent that neither of these clauses covers the circumstances of
      the West Midlands enquiry.
4     View of Home Office
      In the officers meeting on the 18 May Mr Addison argued that the enquiry
      was started at the initiative on the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
      and that the principal focus of the enquiry was on policing in South
      Yorkshire and the actions of some of the members of the South Yorkshire
      force. Therefore the financing of the investigation should be met, at
      least in the first instance, by South Yorkshire Police Authority.
      While the basis of the assistance provided by West Midlands could not be
      said to fall under the normal mutual aid arrangements these provided the
      most useful basis for sorting out the financing. This would involve SYPA
      reimbursing the West Midlands and the Home Office financing SYPA’s
      expenditure after a certain threshold had been reached. (For example, in
      the context of the miners’ strike the cost remaining with South Yorkshire
      County Council had been limited to 3/4p (approximately £1 m ) .
5     View of SYPA
      Our response was that the enquiry was concerned not only with national
      issues but also with matters that were not solely to do with policing -
      safety at sports grounds etc. The Home Secretary had quite properly
      subsumed the West Midlands enquiry under that to be headed by Lord Justice
      Taylor and the conduct of Mr Dear’s officers made it quite plain that they
      were reporting to Lord Justice Taylor. South Yorkshire Police were
      incurring significant expenditure on their own internal investigations in
      preparation for the enquiry and to answer any writs served on the force.
6     Financial Resources
      The current y e a r ’s budget assumes balances as at 1 April of £1.895m.
      This includes an operational contingency of Elm leaving an estimated year
      end balance of only £895,000.
      It is already apparent that provisions for pay awards for APT and
      uniformed staff will be insufficient to meet the settlements which in the
      case of police officers are linked to wage inflation.
      To meet any other than a small proportion of the cost of the West Midlands
      enquiry, currently estimated to run to several million pounds would leave
      the Authority with no resources to finance contingencies arising during
      the year and with no balances for the first year of community charge.
7     Conclusions
      We must obviously therefore resist the suggestion that the Police
      Authority should pick up the bill for the West Midlands enquiry. It may
      be appropriate that South Yorkshire should contribute a small amount
      towards the full cost but it is important that the Government specifically
      accepts their basic responsibilities for an enquiry of national
      importance.
      R C Johnston
      Clerk and Financial Officer
P0RCJ22
Conclusions

We must obviously therefore resist the suggestion that the Police
Authority should pick up the bill for the West Midlands enquiry. It may
be appropriate that South Yorkshire should contribute a small amount
towards the full cost but it is important that the Government specifically
accepts their basic responsibilities for an enquiry of national
importance.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
.03 ’S3 14:32 ROTHERHAM BOROUGH COUNCIL                            p .wd.     o




                                                           H o m e O ffice
                                                          QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                          LON DO N SWIH 9AT



 4 6 9A/LF/MT



                                                        s2~7 June 1989




           S i   y ld h -i



 HILLSBOROUGH;        COST OF INVESTIGATION— BY WEST MIDLAND SPOLICE


 I said that I would write to you..following our recent meeting on
 this subject.   I much enjoyed meeting you and the other members of
 your Police Authority and I am o$ly MO sorry that it should have
 been the distressing events at Hillsborough which occasioned the
 meeting.  May I again express my.sympathy for all of you at this
 difficult time.

  I was very grateful for the clear and courteous way in which you
  explained your Authority's position.

 You agreed that the Chief Constable p£lr South Yorkshire initially
 decided that another force should be. called in to investigate the
 events at Hillsborough, because it was desirable that the
 investigation should be seen to be independent of South Yorkshire
 police.

 You also take the view timt, wh«n it.was subsequently decided to
 establish the enquiry under Lord Justice Taylor and to place the
 results of the investigation    fcbe #®!cvice of that enquiry, this
 so changed the character of the investigation, and its scope, that
 as a matter of principle the South Yorkshire Police Authority
 should no longer be expected to bear the costs.

 You also made the point that the expected scale of costs could be
 such as seriously to .threaten tha (efj;iaiency of the South Yorkshire
 police force and could not be abnorbsd within the Authority's own
 resources.



                                                  /I explained that




  Sir John Layden JP
I explained that the Home Secretary accepts that/ because of the
scale of the investigation and its unexpected nature, the likely
costs could not be absorbed by South Yorkshire within the usual
police funding arrangements without serious detriment to the
efficiency of the force.

He also recognises that, as a result of the decision to make the
results of the investigation directly available to Lord Justice
Taylor, it has been widened to cover national aspects which go
wider than the concerns o£ South Yorkshire, or even South Yorkshire
policing.

Nevertheless, it remains the case that much of the investigation
will be concerned with the policing of events on the day, a matter
which is inescapably the concern of the South Yorkshire police.  We
have looked, therefore, for a solution which reflects the statutory
responsibility, which is shared between police authorities and the
Home Secretary, for meeting the costs of police operations in
England and Wales.

Taking all these considerations into account, the Government is
prepared to offer South Yorkshire Police Authority a special
payment towards the costs of the investigation.  This would apply
to costs, which are incurred by South Yorkshire Police Authority in
reimbursing additional costs incurred by West Midlands Police as a
result of the investigation.  (By additional costs we mean costs
such as overtime, travel, subsistence and accommodation of
personnel directly involved in the investigation, together with
consequential overtime costs incurred as a result of the need to
provide cover for the officers assigned to the investigation - but
not basic pay.)

The level of assistance, which we are prepared to officer, would be
for the Government to meet 90% of all coBts above the product of a
lp rate (which we understand would be around £1.3 million).  Up to
the £1.3 million mark the normal police grant of 51% would apply.

A limit would be placed on-the total amount which South Yorkshire
Police Authority would have to contribute.  Whatever the total
costs of the investigation, South Yorkshire would have to
contribute no more than the product of a 3/4p rate, which we
calculate would be about £975,000.  Beyond that point the
Government would meet 100% of the cost.

Special payments have previously been made in only a small number
of cases.  The Government already contributes substantially to
police expenditure through police grant and block grant.  In South
Yorkshire's case the contribution amounts to some 75% of the Police
Authority's budget.




                                           /This would be
This would be the first special payment provided since the increase
in police grant from 50% to 51%, which was intended in part to
leave police authorities in a better position to meet unexpected
expenditure.

There is no pre-determined formula for special payments.  In
deciding to adopt the formula, which was used in the miners'
strike, we are taking into account the particular circumstances of
this case.

I have considered very carefully the points which you made to me at
the meeting.  I have reflected in particular on what you told me
about South Yorkshire Police Authority's operational contingency
fund and its balances.  I appreciate that the position here is
tight.

Nevertheless I think that the terms of the offer recognise South
Yorkshire's position and the fact that the investigation is
contributing to the enquiry by Lord Justice Taylor as well as being
of relevance to South Yorkshire Police.  No more than £975,000
would need to be contributed by the Authority whatever the costs.
On present estimates, the costs may reach £4 to £5 million. At
that level of costs the authority would be contributing between 20%
and 23% of the total costs, and the Government between 77% to 80%.

I do not think that South Yorkshire can reasonably be excused
meeting any of the costs.  For all its awfulness and subsequent
events, it was essentially a policing matter, and the arrangements
for the financing of police authorities are designed to allow for
some of the unexpected.   We have endeavoured to recognise the
extra-ordinary circumstances of this case by making a proposal
which is more generous than normal, and I hope that you will be
able to agree that we have done so.

I would be grateful if you would be kind enough to let me know that
your Authority would be content to proceed on these terms.

As we agreed at the meeting, -it is important that we move quickly
in order to reimburse the West Midlands Police Authority for the
additional costs which it has incurred.

My officials would be happy to discuss with yours any queries which
they may have about the details of what would qualify for payment.




                              FERRERS
     JL/RCJ/VS
                                                                                31 July 1989
                                                                                      341




  Dear Lord Ferrers

  HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

 « s t ko f ° ? h X « ? UL - ] i t t f   s f , ? 7 Jl,ne 1" wh1ch >°"          your stance on the
 meeting ™ 20 j jn e                                ' nqU,ry , s previous1* explained to us at our


 sa 5 " h a ? 1weUa?so a ~ r5tPn f ° S M ! Urt-er “ ' “ members o f the Authority and have to
 say   tnat we also are still of the view which we explained at that meeting.

 extnende3l„rSa
 exLenaea  in a a:avtt
                     h hatttthe
                 way that   h h,.W Police
                                   p ^ - Midlat
                                              n5 S
                                            Authority has inqu1ry 1s PerhaPs
                                                           not previously     bei"9 ^ t h te r
                                                                          consiriprpH

 S n e atok
 write        outh?ur
        to 1 you      hLk ^when
                  further    » thewe A have
                                       !!thor1ty
                                             received? this
                                                       ,r1* information.
                                                             thi* • r t T M M . n i
 Yours sincerely




Sir John Layden JP
Chairman




Lord Ferrers
Home Office
Queen A n n e ’s Gate
LONDON
SW1P 9AT
   RCJ/VS                                                      31 July 1989
                        Mr R C Johnston                             341




Dear Mr Addison
HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
I enclose a copy of a letter that Sir John Layden has written in response to
Lord Ferrers’ letter of 27 June following the meeting at the Home Office on
20 June.
In order to enable the Authority to take in to account the latest situation when
it meets on 11 August will you please let me know
(a)      to what extent West Midlands Police are undertaking work other than for
          Lord Justice Taylor’s enquiry and for what purposes; and
(b)      whether any expenditure on such activities which is legitimately
         chargeable to South Yorkshire Police Authority would be covered by the
          terms of Lord Ferrers letter of 27 June.
Yours sincerely




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer




Mr M J Addison
Home Office
Queen A n n e ’s Gate
LONDON
SW1P 9AT
                                                   H O M E OFFIC E
                                           Queen A nne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                   'Direct line: 01-273 _ _ . _
                                                 Switchboard: 01-273 3l)0u



Our reference:    POL/89 850/4/30
Your reference:   RCJ/US




   R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA                        \               /
   Clerk and Financial Officer to
    the South Yorkshire Police Authority
   PO Box 37
   Regent Street
   Barnsley
   South Yorkshire
   S70 2PQ                                        9 August 1989




   HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

   Thank you for your letter of 31 July asking to what extent the
   West Midlands Police are undertaking work other than for Lord
   Justice T a y l o r 1s enquiry and whether expenditure on such activities
   would be covered by the terms of Lord Ferrers' letter of 27 June.

    The investigation by the West Midlands police was requested by the
    Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to look into the planning and
    operational decisions of the South Yorkshire Police.        It was
    subsequently agreed to make the results of the investigation
    available to Lord Justice Taylor.

   We accept that some aspects of the investigation have, at the
   request of the Taylor Enquiry, dealt with areas not directly of
   interest to South Yorkshire police, such as design of sports
   grounds.   The West- Midlands Police Authority have not separately
   itemised these aspects. Nevertheless it is clear to us that much
   of the investigation must have concerned events on the day and the
   policing of them; matters which are inescapably the concern of the
   South Yorkshire police.

   I understand that the investigations by the West Midlands Police on
   behalf of Lord Justice Taylor are now virtually complete, other
   than follow up enquiries or particular aspects which may require
   some further work.

   The national interest in the Taylor Enquiry 'was taken into account
   when Lord Ferrers wrote to Sir John Layden on 27 June making the
   offer, on behalf of the Government, of a special payment which
would effectively meet nearly 80% of the anticipated costs of the
investigation from central funds.

Turning to the specific questions in        your letter the purposes
served by the West Midlands police inquiries clearly include the
preparation of evidence to the Coroner's inquest “a nd ™ their
inquiries Qna$ also" be[_ relevant I H ~ T u H i ^ ' ~ t b ~ complaints . or
discipline ffToceedings ~or "conceivably to tgaseJ. if any7~taken to
the criminal or civil "courts.      It is obviously not possIEle To"
Sppor€Ton“ costs precisely" €o each of tjjft&e purposes.             I can,
however, confirm that the special payment!w i y ) cover all aspects of
the investigation which has been underEaken by West Midlands
Police, both those aspects related to the Taylor enquiry and those
related to other matters of concern to South Yorkshire, such as
evidence to the Coroner's inquest (in some cases the same material
may serve more than one purpose),

Any work which is being or may be undertaken by other forces in
relation to disciplinary investigations would not qualify for the
special payment. However, if any of the work already undertaken by
the West Midlands as part of its recent investigation proves
relevant to any disciplinary or complaints investigation we are
prepared to let it count for the purposes of the special payment.




                                               M J ADDISON
 RCJ/VS                        POL/89 850/4/30                 10 August 1989
                    Mr R C Johnston                                       341




Dear Mr Addison
HILLSB0R0U6H : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
Thank you for your letter of 9 August the contents of which I will report to
the Authority at the earliest opportunity. However, I have to advise you
that tomorrow's meeting has been cancelled as a result of the NALGQ action.
I would also take this opportunity to refer again to the question of damages
which was raised by the Home Office at our ■first meeting. At the time, on
the basis of discussions which had then taken pi ace.with our Insurers, I
stated that I felt that the total insurance cover of £8 |-m would be adequate
for any eventuality. I can a w K S ^ - n o further at present than to say that
the Insurers have radically changed their advice in the light of the
progress of the inquiry and the publication r,f the reo^rt. Tt m av well be
that +he Authority will have tr make precision-in closing the accounts for
the current year for damages in excess of the insurance cover.
Yours sincerely




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer




Mr M J Addison
Home Office
Queen Anne's Sate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT
W E S T M I D L A N D S POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                      Council H ouse
Clerk                                                                 Dudley
                                                                      DY1 1HF
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M.Soc.Sc
                                                                      T elephone: Dudley 4 5 6 0 0 0

M y Reference:

                     AVA/ C T I FAM/9/AKG2/8
Y o u r Reference:




         11th August 1989


         Mr R.C. Johnston B.A. I.P.F.A.
         Clerk and Financial Officer
         South Yorkshire Police Authority
         P.O. Box 37
         Regent Street
         BARNSLEY
         South Yorkshire S70 2PQ




         Dear Mr Johnston,

                                               HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

         We   seem to have made no progress in persuading the Home Secretary to accept
         costs   of  the Hillsborough Inquiry should be paid direct by the Home Office and
         the   position appears to rest with the offer in Lord Ferrers’ letter of the 27th
         June   to your   Chairman and your Authority     resolving to consider the matter
         further after receiving legal advice.

         Here  in the West Midlands we are naturally          increasingly concerned that
         substantial   costs   continue  to be incurred with no immediate       prospect of
         reimbursement   and I think it now appropriate to render an account to you of our
         costs  to date    and   to  request your Authority to pay this interim account for
         £1,677,402 as the Home Office suggest.

        It   should  be noted that the attached account is based on actual payments made
        and    there are   a number    of large   outstanding accounts   on computer and
        communications   equipment   and accommodation etc. which will be charged in the
        near   future.    It  is also intended that a charge for interest incurred by the
        West Midlands    Police Authority    from the dates    of payment to the dates of
        reimbursement will    be   included in future accounts in accordance with the Home
        Office advice that no costs of the Inquiry will fall on the West Midlands.

        No doubt your Authority will consider this along with the legal advice you have
        sought on the issue. I await hearing from you.

        I a m informing         the Home Office of this action and enclose a copy of my letter
        to them.




                                                      Clerk
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                          P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                          Regent Street
                                                                                          Barnsley
                                                                          South Yorkshire S70 2 P Q
                                                                  Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref:        RCJ/VS                    Your Ref:                     Date:   14   August 1989
This matter is being dealt with by     Mr R C Johnston                 Telephone ext:   341




            Dear Sir Jack
            HILLSBOROUGH - COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
            I now enclose copies of a further exchange of correspondence with the Home
            Office together with a letter from West Midlands Police Authority enclosing an
            account for their costs to date. I have placed these papers on the Agenda for
            the Authority’s meeting on Friday, 18th, and am preparing a covering report.
           As previously reported, the extension of the activity of West Midlands Police in
           to matters leading through to the inquest might, I think, put a different light
           on the Authority’s stance. Consequently although I have spoken to David
           Blunkett MP I have not tried to arrange a meeting between and Authority
           representatives. Equally I have delayed taking Counsel’s opinion.
            Yours sincerely




           R C Johnston
           Clerk and Financial Officer
           Encs

           cc         Councillor G Gallimore, Vice-Chairman
                   sM r P Wright, Chief Constable




   r       Councillor Sir Jack Layden                         n
           Chairman
           South Yorkshire Police Authority
 y
*i




                                                                16 August 1989

     G J Dear Esq QPM DL LLB
     Chief Constable
     West Midlands Police
     P 0 Box 52
     Lloyd House
     Colaors Circus Queansway
     Birmingham 34 6NQ




     I have today received a letter from the Director of Public Prosecutions
     expressing his view that in relation to the events at Hillsborough on
     13 April last there should now be a full criminal enquiry - not limited to the
     possible culpability of police officers alone.  I understand you are in
     receipt of a copy of this latter,  I would he grateful if you will undertake
     this enquiry together with any police discipline aspects which may emerge.

     Thar 3 -~o currently throe matters of public complaint under investigation and
     which have bean raised by Mr Trevor liicks.

     The South xorushire Police Authority is to   consider his complaint against my
     Cepucy. Hr Peter Hayes, on Friday next.

     His comoiaint against Mr Ductcenfield is with Mr K Cooper, Assistant Chief
     Constable of Northamptonshire Police, and ia supervised by Mr E N Taylor of
     :. : - 3 Police Coiapiaincs Authority. A neeting i3 arranged -jetween them and
     Mr Hie Its on 23 August aad until this has taken place it is considered
     appropriate that the complaint restains with Mr Cooper.      If after 23 August
     Mr Hicks is persisting with the aatter of complaint then I suggest it should
     he referred to you and this will be arranged through the Police Complaints
     Authority.

     Mis remaining complaint is of incivility which is being investigated by a
     superintendent from this Force.

     There is a fourth complaint of corruption, namely police officers allowing
     fans into the ground on payment, which is being investigated by an officer
     from Greater Manchester Police.  You may wish to consider which if any of
     these you would wish to take over.

     In relation to costs, I am advised by our Treasurer that in  thelight of on­
     going negotiations between the Authority and the Home Office it is highly
     probable that an agreement will soon be reached.   The effect of this is likely
     to be that the costs of the enquiries you have undertaken so far and in the
n




    G J Dear Esq QP M DL LLB            - 2 -                       16 August 1989




    future in relation to any discipline or criminal matters or in respect of the
    inquest will be met in full from central government following the agreed
    contribution from the South Yorkshire Police Authority.  If such an agreement
    is reached it will effectively deal with the queries you raised in your letter
    of 11 A u g u s t .

    It is my intention to make an announcement of the Director's advice and of
    action on the afternoon of 16 August.
From:   G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        HEADQUARTERS
                                                               PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                               Col more Circus Queensway
                                                               Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                               Telephone: 021-236 3000




         P Wright Esq CBE O.St.J CBIM                           GJD/AMS
         Chief Constable
         South Yorkshire Police
         Snigg Hill
         Sheffield
         S3 8LY                                                 17 August 1989




                     ( W      ,



          INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

          I refer to your letter of 16 August 1989 in which you formally request
          us to undertake a full criminal enquiry - wider than just the Police -
          into the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. I have noted the
          Director of Public Prosecutions' interest and advice. I also note that
          you would like us to undertake responsibility for any police
          disciplinary aspects which may emerge.

          Given that we have already undertaken a considerable investigation on
          behalf of Lord Justice Taylor and presently for HM Coroner, it is
          logical that we should take on the added responsibilities for any
          criminal aspects and any police disciplinary matters which may emerge.
          We will willingly take on these added responsibilities to our current —
          investigation. My Police Authority have asked me to seek a written      c
          assurance that expenditure incurred by us will be met in full by South \
          Yorkshire Police with or without Home Office assistance.               3
           In respect of the financing of the investigation I have had sight of
           Lord Ferrers' original letter to your Police Authority and I am aware of
           a subsequent letter which clarifies the definition of the 'investigation'
           to be in the widest sense. It would appear, therefore, that if your
           Police Authority, which I understand will meet on Friday of this week,
           agrees the original Lord Ferrers offer, as clarified, then all financial
           costs will be met by the Home Office over and above an agreed
           contribution by the South Yorkshire Police Authority. Subject to your
           Police Authority agreement there appears to be no impediment to our


                                                                      cont
pursuing the investigations without delay. After your Police Authority
has had its meeting it would be helpful to me if you could acquaint us
with their decision so that I can keep my Police Authority fully
informed.

The investigations will continue on a day to day basis to be headed by
Mr Mervyn Jones with his existing team which will be increased for a
short period to address the added responsibilities. In your letter you
asked if we would like to take on the three matters of public complaint
made by Mr Trevor Hicks as well as a fourth complaint of alleged
corruption. Before taking on these responsibilities I think it would be
helpful if the meeting with Mr Hicks takes place on 23 August.
Thereafter I can see advantages in there being a meeting between
ourselves, yourselves, a representative of the Director of Public
Prosecutions Office and Mr E N Taylor of the Police Complaints
Authority. At that meeting we could agree what responsibilities we are
undertaking, the terms of reference, lines of communication and
accountability.

I trust this satisfactorily addresses the issues raised in your letter.
          P0LET43/SW/MR
                                                                                                                    21 August 1983
                                                  Mr S Walker
                                                                                                                            620
   Dear Mr Addison

   HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                                                                                      Authority considered the
   the view that the costs Incurred bv                                                          J9 iJ SJ-' a * ’stl m to reiterate
   f t the service of the I n q u i r y Lord l ' f ?!                                                       of West Midlands F o l i a
   sw o t*                                                                                                   v c v & s tts
                                                                         1 M '-" 11WJ ilU 1
                                                                                          .
                                                                                              t , iti r p r o n r n # ■ » « « « . , , /
                                                                 tfffS
                                                                                                                                  t»f 1   f)f~f,I


  S       M        r      s    s        s     s     / s                                                 ^                    * * .» » „

 of 27 June w i n app'y to ,11 J J h L ^ nf m e n t s i e t .otit 1n                                            Lord Ferrers i n t ^
 that Authority and any interest' incurred                       any                                            1^terest charged "by
 arising from any delay between th^ VendA^tf/'^'f                 re                                            P o n c e Authority
 payment from the Home Office,      ~               Ailc~ m ^ s by                                              it and receipt o f
 C l e a r l y the a m o u n t s i n v o l v e d wi 11                    ba   i sv>„«   .,
 a p p r o p r i a t e m a t we agree a mechanism                                             evore H       seeras t e me t o be
 monies to the Authority,                                    When replyii
 on this also.         J                                        n r e p l^ 1(,9 p e r h a p s y o u will let me have y o u r ' v i e w s
Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y


R_€ Johnston
k lfitL    Any ±       in p i t i b l       0 j [f j j e r


    : J Addison
      Office
Queen A n n e ’s Gatp
LONDON
'M.1H 9AT


                                                                                                                  l^-y y
                                                                                                            <r~f ^
                                                               23   August Ifif

'6 I Star         *1 BL LLB
 Chief 'Constable
 W m c iiilmifls folic*
        *         52
 Lloyd Rous*
 Cel«ore Ctfems Qneensway
 Biroinghatt 14 61Q




 I refer to year letter of I? August ltf'A a m •<>-        >ir willingness : ■< :ept
   - .       \;ien te undertake the full criminal mm      ; <'to the event a at
 Rlllsborough oil 15 April II             *ing the advice fro* the Director of Public
    , tecutic •      s'   ' . you will enquire In1' ••         ted discipline or
 co«plai             ra Including those specifically referred to is rnf letter of
     \ttgt? 1• '".I others whit \ .v.

 Hegardl .• ’K >saplaint natter* I will ad     , ‘ > -t m requested after the
 planned seating with Mr fjp«r©y lick* this date <23 August) and agree
 thereaf            tings as accessary between the various parties youdeacrlbe
 to clarify your terse of reference, responsibilities, lines of cownunlcation
 ljetw®«» ourselves ,    countability,

 f'i, • ,s<  ■rkshire Folic* Authority have alret ■< <«t and considered the offer
 sade by the Hose Office as set ot            itter from Lord Ferr®r® and a
 subsequent letter ft©'.’ 1 •'   ••ilaon ^      <'*«•> •*> flee, both of which you
 refer to.

 %■ understanding la they are accepting the Horn® Office offer but I         ad
 1* Stephen Walker (Deputy Clerk <        nth Yorkshire Police Authority) in
 the absence of the Clerk who Is os holiday, to correspond with you direct on
 this issue and you should regard M s letter       :horitative on this point,
              Copy for Mr P Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                         P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                         Regent Street
                                                                                         Barnsley
                                                                         South Yorkshire S70 2 P Q
                                                                 Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref.       P0LET54/SW/MR              YourRef:                     Date:   23 August 1989
This matter is being dealt with by    Mr S Walker                     Telephone ext:Q20




           Dear Mr Dear
           RE : INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
           The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has sent me a copy of your letter to him
           of 17 August regarding your taking on responsibility for the criminal inquiry
           and any police disciplinary matters which may emerge.
           You have asked for a written assurance that expenditure incurred will be met in
           full by South Yorkshire Police with or without Home Office assistance.
           The South Yorkshire Police Authority met last Friday to consider further the
           offer made by the Home Office and agreed as a matter of practical expediency to
           reimburse the total expenditure of your Force subject to confirmation from the
           Home Office that the total costs would be subject to the level of assistance or
           contribution limit payable by South Yorkshire detailed in Lord Ferrers letter of
           27 June.

           In these circumstances, until I receive the necessary confirmation from the Home
           Office, I cannot (jive the assurance that your Authority requires.
           For your information, the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority has a copy
           of my letter to the Home Office detailing the terms of my Authority’s proposal.
           Yours sincerely


           S Walker
           Solicitor to the Authority




           Mr G J Dear QPM DL LLB
   |~      Chief Constable                                  ~|
           West Midlands Police Headquarters
           PO Box 52
           Lloyds House
           Col more Circus Queensway
           Birmingham B4 6 NQ
                  Copy for Mr P Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable




  P0LET53/SW/MR                        AVA/CT/FAM/9/AKG2/8      23 August 1989
                       Mr S Walker                                   620




Dear Mr Astling
RE HILLSBOROUGH : COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
Haying had a telephone conversation with Mr Waghorn of the Home Office yesterday
which gave rise to some cause for concern on my part, I have had no alternative
but to write further to the Home Office clarifying matters. Enclosed is a copy
of this letter for your information. I understand the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire has received a letter from your Chief Constable on the same topic and
I will be writing in reply but I thought in the interim you may feel it prudent
to let him have sight of my most recent correspondence with the Home Office.
Yours sincerely


R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer

Enc




Mr A V Astling LL M
Clerk to West Midlands Police Authority
Council House
Dudley
DY1 1HF
    P0LET49/SW/MR                      POL/89 850/4/30        23 August 1989
                        Mr S Walker                                 620
Dear Mr Addison
RE HILLSBOROUGH - COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
Having spoken to Mr Waghorn of your department yesterday, it is appropriate that
I further clarify the offer made in my letter of 21 August to ensure there is no
doubt as to the terms of any agreement between us regarding the payment of
expenditure incurred by West Midlands Police.
The Authority agrees subject to their financial contribution being absolutely
limited to the amount set out in Lord Ferrers letter dated 27 June 1989 whereby
the total payment should not exceed the product of the~^.penny rate estimated at
£975,000, as a matter of practical expediency to reimburse West Midlands Police
Authority their total costs.
This is agreed on the clear understanding that the total costs of West Midlands
Police will cover their work in connection with:-
1    Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
2 The preparation of evidence for the inquests in South Yorkshire
3   The criminal investigation advised by the Director of Public Prosecutions
4     Cases taken to the criminal or civil courts and;
5     Any related matter of discipline or complaint.
This agreement is conditional upon your confirmation that all the above
expenditure, together with any interest charged by the West Midlands Police
Authority and any interest incurred by the South Yorkshire Police Authority
arising from any delay between the rendering of accounts by that Authority and
receipt of payment from the Home Office will be subject to the level of
assistance and contribution limit payable by the South Yorkshire Police
Authority detailed in Lord Ferrers letter of 27 June.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has let me have sight of a letter of 17
August from Mr Geoffrey Dear in which he confirms that it would be logical for
his Force to take on the added responsibility for any criminal aspect and any
disciplinary matters which may emerge. That Force will willingly take on these
added responsibilities to its current investigation but Mr Dear points out that
his Police Authority have asked him to seek a written assurance that expenditure
Mr M J Addison                                                /
Home Office
Queen A n n e ’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT
incurred by his Force will be met in full by the South Yorkshire Police with or
without Home Office assistance. Obviously I cannot give this assurance at the
present time and certainly the South Yorkshire Police cannot, but I am sure none
of us would wish the criminal inquiry to be held up whilst the Home Office and
the South Yorkshire Police Authority negotiate responsibility for the
expenditure referred to earlier in this letter. I mention this because it does
highlight the need for an urgent resolution of the expenditure issue.

Yours sincerely




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
 RCU by:                                              ; 5- 9-89           10:08PM ;              0226 ?3044i:-i           0742523409;# 1
I    '»9 M9/Mb 1M:04                          ?2<d'Z2t5-'I'6U442                       S* Y- *J-S-                                    lg]001



                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                          POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                                                                        P.O. Box 37
R.C, Joh nston B.A., I.P.F.A,                                                                                         Regent Street
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                                                                BamSley
                                                                                                           South Yorkshire S70 2 P Q
                                                                                                    Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

                                                                                                          Dale:
                                                             Your Ref
Our Ref:

T his m titttr is being dealt w / h l>y




             PRIVATE          AND     CONFIDENTIAL



                                                                             T R A M S M 1 S S 1 Q N



           JO;      . . . . . . . . . . . 1y c . O e i 9 bt.CBE. . . . .
                                                                            .......

                               .......................SqiM   .KQtksbUe.PoJ ice.




           FROM;         ..............
                                                     s.oj.iciUQr. a q .tbe.Avtborjfcy.



           Date;          _ , . . . . .. . . . 5. .SeDtembe.r                 ......

    ™                                        ,                                 four
           No. of P a ge s (inc. t h i s page)                          ..........
           Our Fa x N u m b e r           0226/730442

            in the event o f bad r e c e ip t please contact Q Z Z 6 /m m m W * M W A




                                                                                             n


                                                                                             j
  ROv1 BY:                                     ; 5- 9-89           10:09AM ;             0226 7304424                    0742523409;   n 2
    ' '89 09/0b 10: Mb                  ©0i!i!6-Y30442                         S. Y. J. S.                                             1^002


                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                                                               P.O. Box 37
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.
                                                                                                              Regent Street
Clerk and Financial Officcr
                                                                                                                   Barnsley
                                                                                                   South Yorkshire S7U 2 P Q
                                                                                           Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222


O u r Ref:   SW/VS                                  Your Kef:                                    L>atr   :5 S e p t e m b e r 1989

7>ii!matter is hemp, dealt with by             Mr' S W a l k e r                                 lelcphon<‘   <’-tf           620




             Dear
    ®        HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
             A t t a c h e d is t he r e p l y we h a ve been w a i t i n g for f r o m the H o m e Of f i c e . I have
             not y e t had the o p p o r t u n i t y of c o n s i d e r i n g this in detail and will h o p e f u l l y
             get r o u n d to it this a f te r n o o n .
             H o w e v e r , on the f a c e of it, it is the e x t r a c o s ts of t h e c r i mi n al i n v e s t i g a t i o n
             b y W e s t M i d l a n d s w h i c h will p r o v e the m a j o r s t u m b l i n g b lo c k. Do you h a v e any
             idea of w h a t e x t r a w o r k is i n v o l v e d and w h a t sort of f i g u r e we are l i k e l y to be
             t a l k i n g about ?
             Yours sincerely




                 vvu ir\ci
             Solicitor to the Authority

             Enc




              Mr P W r i g h t CBE
              Chief Constable
              South Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e
              Police Headquarters
              Snig Hill
        |_    SHEFFIELD                                                           J
RCU   BY:                     ; 5- 9-89   10:09AM ;                 0226 730442-*                0742523409; # 3
      ' ay wy/wb iw:we   ©0226-730442                 s . y.   j . s.                                        1^003




                                                                              H o m e O ffice
                                                                            OVIKEN A N N E 'S G A T E
                                                                             L O N D O N SW1H 9 A T



                                                                           01-273 2746




      Your ref: POLET4 3/SW/MR                                 .                      ,
      Our ref:  POL/89 850/4/30                                ♦                      \




      R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA                                     '' -L _ ■ '
      Clerk and Financial Officer to the
        South Yorkshire Police Authority
      PO Box 37
      Regent Street
      Barnsley
      South Yorkshire
      S70 2PQ                                                                   31 August 1989




      HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


      Thank you for your letters of 21 and 2 3 August to Mr Addison
      informing us that South Yorkshire Police Authority is now
      prepared to agree that it will reimburse West Midlands Police
      Authority the additional costs of the investigation by the West
      Midlands Police subject to clarification of some matters.

       It is a matter of long-standing Government policy that Central
       Government grant should not be paid on interest costs.  We cannot
       therefore consider paying special grant or indeed ordinary police
       grant on any interest charged by the West Midlands Police
       Authority.  For your information we are not aware of any instance
       where one police authority has agreed to pay another interest on
       the costs of an investigation.

      With regard to whether the special payment will cover the cost of
      the criminal investigation announced recently, together with
      related costs of cases taken to court, this was not included in
      the original offer of a special payment.  Moreover, investigation
      of criminal offences is part of the force’s normal function.
      However, as Mr Addison's letter of 9 August indicated, we
      anticipate that much of the work already completed by the West
      Midlands police as part of their original investigation should
RCU BY:                               ; 5- 9-89      10:10AM ;                0226 730442^           0742523409;   »  4
  r • ay o y / 0b 10: 0Y   fy 0 2 2 b -7 3 0 4 4 2               s. y.   j . s.                                     1^004




     prove helpful to the new criminal investigation and will still
     qualify for the special payment.

     If South Yorkshire Police Authority wish to pursue special
     payment for new work related to the criminal investigation we
     will need to consider this separately with details of costs and
     reasons why your authority considers these costs should qualify
     for special payment.

     Your letter of 23 August and Mr Walker in his recent telephone
     conversation with us, asked for clarification of the penultimate
     paragraph of Mr Addison's letter of 9 August and whether the
     special payment will also apply to the costs of work undertaken
     by West Midlands Police connected with the Coroner's inquest,
     discipline and complaints investigation.      As Mr Addison stated in
     hie letter much of the work already undertaken will be relevant
     to these areas with some presentational adjustment.      However, I
 ^ c a n confirm that the additional costs of such further work
 w c a r r i e d out on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police by the West
     Midlands Police in these areas will qualify for special payment.

     As Mr Addison's letter made clear, any work which is being
     undertaken by forces other than West Midlands in relation to
     disciplinary investigations would not qualify for special payment
     and as stated above we will require more information about the
     major criminal Investigation costs before making a decision on
     whether to include these in the special payment arrangements,

     With regard to the second paragraph of your letter of 2 3 August
     we have been advised that the product of a penny rate is
     £1,026,750 rather than the estimated figure of £975,000 quoted
     previously.

    In conclusion, we suggest that your authority should make
    arrangements for paying the outstanding amounts to avoid further
    delay.  We are in contact with HM Treasury to organise the method
    of making special payments to you to assist with meeting the
 *  costs and our Finance Division will be in contact with your
    Finance Department as soon as possible to discuss and arrange the
    mechanism for reimbursement.




                                                                                             SMITH
TELEPHONE:                                           S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                               POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
TELEX: 547996                                           SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P W R I G H T CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          6 September 1989


G J Dear Esq QPM DL LLB
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
P 0 Box 52, Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham B4 6NQ




Stuart Anderson has brought to my attention a letter he has received from
Mervyn Jones dated 5 September, and I am extremely concerned about the
apparent misunderstanding that .still seems to exist about the current
state of the criminal and discipline enquiry arising out of the Taylor
R epo r t .       '

Having spoken to both yourself and latterly to Sir Richard Barratt I
understood that the Coroner's inquiry and the criminal inquiry were being
pursued with the vigour and expedition that the matter requires.  The
letter from Mr Jones indicates that this is not the case and I cannot
accept that the inquiry should be set aside to await the outcome of
discussions on finance.

Again it is my understanding that all the evidence collected to date has
been stored on HOLMES and to quote from the Taylor Report 'it is unlikely
that any further evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to the
history of events'.

Against this background I am not sure what is meant by 'new work' other
than the interviews with the officers singled out for criticism by the
Taylor Report.  Whilst, I understand the difficulties created for you by
the financial debate between the Home Office and our respective Police
Authorities, I think it is intolerable, considering the strain imposed on
the officers involved, that this should introduce delay in bringing the
criminal and discipline inquiry to a speedy conclusion.   In his letter
Mr Jones also implies my agreement to the continued involvement of Mr Cooper
in the disciplinary aspects of this enquiry, which is certainly not the
case.  Your decision not to serve notices or pursue disciplinary matters
until the financial issue is resolved, whilst understood, does not have my
agreement.

In order to gain a better understanding of the problems faced by yourself
and Mr Jones, I would appreciate the opportunity to be up-dated on the
current state of the inquiry and on the work perceived necessary in order
to bring it to a conclusion.
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                 MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
A SSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                         W atery Street
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                         Sheffield S 3 7ET
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
                                                                   Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 2 4 7
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                             KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                  as    ___ ....
                                                                   Prescot
                                                        f
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                  Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                    Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                          Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                      Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                                  JMJ/VSC
                                                                   Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5                                                           5 September 1989
                                                                   Date:




             K S Anderson Esq
             Assistant Chief Constable
             (Complaints and Discipline)
             South Yorkshire Police
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield
             S3 8LY




              COMPLAINT AGAINST POLICE

              I refer to your letter of 30 August 1989 which was received at this
              Police Headquarters yesterday morning by the Chief Constable, Mr Dear.
              He has asked me to reply.

              We acknowledge safe receipt of the copy statements made by Leigh
              (277/F33/89) and Hicks (278/F34/89) which contain allegations against
              certain members of your Force.

              You will probably by now be aware that Mr Dear spoke to your Chief
              Constable yesterday, shortly after lunchtime, to indicate that at this
              time we have not formally accepted the criminal/discipline investigation
              until we have received the written assurance as far as the financial
              circumstances are concerned. I understand from Mr Dear that Mr Wright
              fully appreciated the position we are in, given that our Police Authority
              has made it quite clear that we should not take on any additional
              investigatory responsibility until that written assurance had been
              received. This means that we are not in a position to become the
              Investigating Officers and, therefore, be in a position to serve Notices
              on the affected officers in accordance with Regulation 7 of the Police
              Discipline Regulations. It was agreed between Mr Wright and Mr Dear
              that the existing Investigating Officer already appointed, Mr Ken Cooper
              of Northamptonshire, should undertake the service of those Notices
              without delay. At Mr Wright's suggestion, Mr Dear agreed to telephone
              Captain Taylor at the Police Complaints Authority as to the decision.




                                                       Lloyd House,_Birmingham
    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
Shortly afterwards Mr Dear rang Captain Taylor at his office at the
Police Complaints Authority.  Captain Taylor agreed with the decision
that Mr Wright and Mr Dear had reached and said that he would contact
Mr Cooper for the action to be taken as quickly as possible.

In the meantime our investigation continues to satisfy the needs of the
Coroner.  To a large extent these enquiries are related to the criminal
inquiry and, therefore, nothing is being lost at this time in impetus.
However, there will come a time when I will not be able to undertake
’new work' for the criminal inquiry until we have received the assurance
from your Police Authority.  I know we both agree the sooner that
clarification comes from the Home Office to your Police Authority, the
better it will be for unhindered progress of the overall investigation.

I trust this clarifies the latest position.  If you wish to discuss^
further please do not hesitate to make contact.  I have taken the liberty
of copying this letter to Captain Taylor for his information.
•SEND CONFI RMAT ION
                                                         DATE/TIME                  7- 9-89 10:52AM
                                                         LOCAL I.D.                         0742523409
                                                         LOCAL NAME            SYPOL-C. C. ’S_OFFICE. ¥
** * SEND * * *
 NO    REMOTE STATION I.D.           START TIME         DURATI ON     8PAGES    COMMENT
  1                    CCITT S3   7- 9-89   10:50AM       2 ’40"         4
                                                      TOTAL PAGES :      4
      o I z -71        if03|
                                                                               <EROX TELECOPIER 7010
SEND CONFIRMATION
                                                      DATE/TIME                  7- 9-89 10:58AM
                                                      LOCAL I.D.                       0742523409
                                                      LOCAL NAME            5YP0L-C.C.’S_OFFICE.¥
* * * SEND * * +
 NO    REMOTE STATION I.D.        START TIME         DURATI ON     8PAGES    COMMENT




                                                         -o
                                                         ro
  1                 CCITT G3   7- 9-89   10:57AM                      1
                                                   TOTAL PAGES :      1
       o t a n s     if-©3/
                                                                            XEROX TELECOPIER 7010
TELEPHONE:                                                              S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                                  POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
TELEX: 547996                                                              SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742)   523409                                                         SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P W R I G H T CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE




                                              FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION




DATE


to                                                                       f? /€ y     -7b       rtfr c /c
                        ( f r f y AJO.         0 / 3 7 3   4-03 f
for                 .    .       /   ?    £    >   .   .               7^ 77 ..........       ...........

ATTENTION           ...................................... ..........................

OF                  ................................ ...................


COMMENTS            ............................................ .




FROM                    /7a//V           TftXfrF.'Z,. .'f£9.'?.€rr.i./?.Y. .T?... 9

tel no              .. .*?. Z?r.4..                ?.?.•?..*.       ?.f......... .
                          ( jl
NO OF         ..: .77... .... ................................ .
PAGES
(INCLUDING THIS PAGE)



IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY PLEASE CONTACT:-

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
TEL NO: 0742 768522 EXTENSION 3409
                                                          DCC/JEL
                                                          7 September 1989
                                G>rT   X, ch ->g -£
NOTE FOR FILE:



Spoke with Sir Richard Barratt a.m. this date about an apparent contradiction
between his understanding that West Midlands Police are pursuing both the
criminal and discipline matters without reservation and the apparent reality
that they are not pursuing the discipline matter at all and only pursuing the
criminal investigation on a limited basis in confining their effort to those
enquiries which are co-terminus in this regard with the Inquest inquiry.

Sir Richard was surprised and assured me that he had a personal assurance - as
had Sir John Woodcock - from Mr Dear that the position accords with his belief
as outlined above.

I faxed to Sir Richard a copy of Mr Dear's letter to the Chief Constable dated
5 September 1989 together with Mr Wright's response of 6 September.


Was contacted p.m. this date by Mr Geoffrey Dear who referred to the Chief
Constable's letter of 6 September.  He said there appeared to be some
misunderstanding and the position is as below:-

(a) Mr Wright had agreed, during the interregnum concerning the continuing
debate of the financial problem, that the necessary Regulation 7 Notices would
be served by Mr Cooper as an expedient.  Mr Dear is fully aware of the
absolute need for West Midlands Police to progress this enquiry in due course
but as nothing now can be started until the criminal enquiry is concluded this
is not an immediate problem.

(b) With regard to the criminal enquiry this is actively currently subsumed
within the Inquest investigation which is active and this situation will
continue it is estimated for a further six/eight weeks.  Thereafter the
criminal enquiry will continue notwithstanding the financial position.

Mr Dear emphasised that in extremis he will undertake both the above even
in the face of disapproval of his Authority.  However rather than enter into
such a confrontation situation with his Authority now, he hopes that
the financial difficulties will be overcome within the six/eight week period
referred to and his difficulties with his Committee end and asks our
understanding of this.

In short Mr Dear is making it clear that we need have no fears in that the
West Midlands Police will carry out to conclusion both the criminal and
disciplinary enquiries notwithstanding the financial arrangements eventually
agreed.

(c) Had a further discussion with Sir Richard Barratt (p.m.).   He said that
having discussed the situation with Sir John Woodcock he is now firmly of the
belief that the criminal and discipline matters are being and will continue to
be progressed without reservation.  Sir John is meeting with Mr Dear tomorrow
(8.9.89) and will discuss this with him.




    7
Deputy Chief Constable
From :   G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                           WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
         CH IEF CONSTABLE                                              HEADQUARTERS
                                                                       PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                       Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                       Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                       Telephone: 021-236 5000




         P Wright Esq CBE 0 St J CBIM                                  GJD/AMS
         Chief Constable
         South Yorkshire Police
         Police Headquarters
         Snig Hill
         Sheffield
         S3 8LY                                                        7 September 1989



         PERSONAL                                                      r \




                                                         YOfl.   P
                                                 h
                                                 I   j   i

                                                                 ---




         I spoke to Peter Hayes today concerning your letter to me of 6 September
         1989. I hope that he will have the chance to discuss our conversation
         with you as soon as possible, in which case I feel sure that he will be
         able to put your mind at rest on the doubts that you raised.

         The all important factor to emphasise is contained in the third line of
         Mervyn Jones penultimate paragraph, when he wrote to Stuart Anderson on
         my behalf on 5 September 1989. • He said "nothing is being lost at this
         time in impetus" and that remains the case.

         You will know that I have been issued with a   directive by my Police
         Authority (reinforced as recently as this morning) not to engage in"new
         work" - however that might be defined. I am    unwilling to bring into play
         my statutory powers and for reasons that may be obvious to you would
         wish to be seen to comply with this directive.

         At the moment there is no problem. The work that we are doing is vital
         to the criminal inquiry as essential preparatory work, but is
         coincidentally also essential to the inquiry for HM Coroner. There is
         thus, de facto, a duality which allows me to operate without loss of
         momentum whilst still satisfying points made by my Authority. They,
         incidentally, are about to put more pressure on the Home Office from
         their end to seek a resolution of the financial problems that exist.

         I thought that, after our telephone conversation on 4 September, you
         were in agreement with the Regulation 7 Notices for discipline purposes
         being served by Kenneth Cooper, since he is still appointed as
         Investigating Officer. Immediately after we spoke, I telephoned Captain
         Taylor at the Police Complaints Authority and he was in full agreement

                                                                                   cont
                                   - 2 -

with this course of action.  We appreciate that there are     legal
requirements concerning speed of service and these would best be
discharged by the Notices being served by Kenneth Cooper.   We both
recognised that any disciplinary inquiry would, thereafter, have to be
left in abeyance until after the criminal matters had been resolved.
By that device, therefore, the requirements of the Discipline
Regulations could be discharged without delay and my position with my
Police Authority would not be compromised.  It is, I suggest,- a neat
solution in all the circumstances.

One of the over-riding considerations must be the necessity to be fair
and even-handed with your officers in both disciplinary and criminal
inquiry matters.     I know that you have this already at the forefront of
your mind.     I am absolutely satisfied that their position is not being
prejudiced at the present time, neither do I envisage that occurring in
the future.     On the contrary, I would not allow such a situation to
de v e l o p .

Of course, I would be pleased to discuss any of the details on the
telephone, if you wish.  I shall be at the office or on the car
telephone all next week.
NOTE FOR FILE                                              DCC/AT
                                                           8 September 1989


SECRETARIAT VISIT TO WEST MIDLANDS

Was asked by Bob Johnston to join him, or nominate someone else to join
him, and others from the Secretariat when they visit West Midlands on
Monday 11 September to meet with the Police Authority officers to
discuss the current financial problem.

Told him I felt uncomfortable about the proposal on the grounds that the
financial problems in terms of resolution are not those of the Chief
Constable but those of the Police Authority and its financial advisers.
Furthermore, in terms of information about the costs likely under the
various enquiry heads this can only be made available with any accuracy
by the West Midlands Police.

They are therefore going to the meeting without police representation
and if that causes them problems then Bob Johnston will tell us and he
has agreed in any event to inform us in some detail what transpires on
the day.




Deputy Chief Constable




                                                CoP'r t,      . arfa
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                                  P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                                 Regent Street
                                                                                                 Barnsley
                                                                                South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                         Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref:       RCJ/VS                      Your Ref:                           Date:\2 September 1989
This matter is being dealt with by     Mr R C Johnston                        Telephone ext: 341




           Dear        fefa
           HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
           I enclose a copy of a further letter from the Home Office which makes it clear
           that "provided the proposed costs are reasonable" the special payment will
           extend to cover the criminal investigation.
           At yesterday’s officer meeting with West Midlands it was agreed that we should
           seek a joint officer level meeting with the Home Office in order to
           (a)           persuading them to accept the cost of the criminal investigation;
           (b)           challenging their stance on interest charges;
           (d)            discussing their attitude to the potential uninsured cost of claims for
                          damages.
           Since the proposed costs under (a) need to be discussed with the Home Office
           and since items (b) and (c) remain to be dealt with I am still pursuing the
           arrangements for this meeting.
           Yours sincerely




           R C Johnston
           Clerk and Financial Officer




  r        Mr P Wright CBE                                    “I
           Chief Constable
           South Yorkshire Police
           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
           SHEFFIELD
  L                                                           J
                                                                                           p. 1
   ■g q -0 9 -1 2 r i : 2 i




                                                                HOME OFFICE
                                                         Queen Aime’s Gate London   SW1H 9AT
                                                                 Direct line: 01-273   «
                                                               Switchboard: 01-273 t W 3



 Our reference:       fOL/89 850/4/30
 Your reference:            43/SW/MR




    R C John®ton Esq BA XPFA
    Clerk and Financial Officer
     to the south Yorkshire
     Police Authority
    PO Box 37
    Regent Street
    Barnsley
    South Yorkshire
    S70 2PQ                                                     12 September 1989



    <I) t c v /                 CTo U as

    BXum oM om m t            c o s t of ikvkstigatioh by     west midiawds police
    I refer to the telephone conversation between Hr Waghorn of this
    department and Mr Walker on 7 September in which Mr Walker informed
    vts that Mr Boy* S m i t h 'a latter of 31 August will be diacueaed at
    the forthcoming meeting of ■ your finance and general purposes
    committee on 15th September.

UH I understand that there could be some concern over paragraphs 3 and
   4 of Mr Boys S m i t h 1• letter, which cover the costs of the criminal
   investigation announced recently, it may be helpful if I clarify
   our position slightly' prior to Friday's meeting.       It was not our
   Intention to give the impression that we would not agree to the
    special payment on the*® costs,                 although we did consider that some
    of the work already undertaken by the West Midlands Police could be
    used in              connection   with   the   criminal   investigation         at   no       extra
    cost.

   As Mr Boys Smith said, the criminal investigation costs ware not
   included in the original offer of special payment.  What we need
   therefore is further information on the likely scale of the new
   criminal investigation including an estimate of the number of
   officers involved, the possible length of time required and the
 , additional coat.   Mr Walker did mention that it could be in the
   region of 50 .men, over a period of up to 6 months at a cost of
   about half a million p o un ds.
Provided that the proposed coats are r*flaonabl*( fch«m tifte special
payment   w o u l d .e x t e n d to them as part of the    nece ssa ry
investigation* by West Midlands arising from Hillsborough.
In the meantime we vary much hope that your authority can commence
payments to the West Midlands in respect of the costs of Lord
Justice Taylor*s Inquiry itself which the West Midlands Police
authority have already invoiced for.   It seems unfair to leave the
West Midlands waiting for reimbursement of these items, on receipt
of further information concerning the criminal investigation costs
we will let you have a substantive reply on this point as soon as
possible.




                                            M J ADDISON
                                                      M             m   2.


fcAcr




           »» — nimrimtnr ~~-nrnr                “ ’" * * “ ^
            s w f f i y *aiik11*k«u*s i.rt'x*1    ■^•^4-iininifcM
                                           (
                     i s Sc p m             1

        pCHtli5 S W C f M N t B M M W

        t MANAGEMENT SEiiVtCES
                                    MUNICIPAL! MUTUAL


' s. Walker Esq.,J
Solicitor,
                                                                                             O llr n f :       SW /S C
South Yorkshire Police Authority,
                                                                                             Y i * u r n -(:   S W /V S
P.O. Box 37,
Regent Street,
                                                                                              Ti‘l             ?8 8
                                                                                                  hau-:        8th September 198S
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire.
S.70 2PQ.




 Dear M r v Walker,

 Hillsborough Disaster


 Yuur letter of Se p t e m b e r '5th.: J989 ..'has be««n.cent to m
                                                          for reply, *'jnee 1 was,
 in any .event,., proposing to^write confirming rhe content of our telephone;
 i;onversat i on on .September _5l'h.
                                                                                                                          c n t » t.:ion ir o n )



 described by Roy .Laughton f i t the meeting
 August    7th .

 The important aspects of that presentation w e r e that the C o m p a n y w i s h e d the.
 Authority to be a w a r e that we might have to n e g o t i a t e on the most e c o t o m i u i
 terns available to us, notwithstanding our appreciation.of■the pofc»i» e
 effects o f s u c h negotiations upon,the image, credibility, and morale o f th
 F o r c e . F u r t h e r , we w i s h e d to restate to Members the possibility th a t the
 Lindt of Indemnity^ u n d e r ' the pol tcy might be exceeded, a l t h o u g h .we .ui e no
                                                                                                in
 .'i position to estimate with certai«ty-at this stage.

 With regard to your letter under acknowledgement , my .understanding i o
 Ht1vice aiven l>y Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards -has bec*n to the effcr.t .L
 Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t LHickerifield ought Ito seek the preliminary advice of
 independent s o l i c i t o r s , possibly through the medium of h i s own professional
 a s so c ia tio n .   T h i s would serve two p u r p o s e s . First of <U 1 those s.oli.ciLorb
 could confirm, or possibly disagree with, the view which Metc.1i has




            MimUip.ilMimwl liiMiranccl.imitt-J,2 > 2 7 OUQiuvnSinVt, W^tminsirr SWIII91 IN
                IVK|iht'ni‘:Ol-212 7*>3 J •Tolcv: K95005) MMUNliti ■!v»x.No: 01 -lil M 0 4
                                                ManagingI)ir<,v(«*r: A. U. M.          H.t'OM*. J ^ A
            li.-.'i-'i i. ,f ,-lfj. ,-t          n Si n r I. W ^im inM .r, 1 (Mu)i>n S\V ] H')1 IW            nulnUi YMi, *
                                          Art                         [l'»i MI.A ( in'tijMMi-tnlvr o i l Al IKf*).

                                                                      Aril
 We, as a Company, do not see the ppulLlon as ftec««Kiirily final !«««!, and it i»ny
 well be that further discussion w i l 1 have to take place after the officer has
"■sought -independent advice.     We w I h IikiI to avoid, hywever,. from.as early a
 d a t e a s possible, the: risk o£ -a'-conflict arising .or*.'being seen after the
 officer had cjnmmiLLed himself to any particular course of action.
              I
Yours sincerely,



B. W a        ^ v         ___________
A c c i d e n t X H n i m n Manager.
KCW      BY:                                              ;26- 9-89           2:50PM ;                0226 73044S                   0742523409; (4 1
       ;a y uy/ztj 14:46                          tF0Z Zb -73044Z                        S. Y.   J. s,                                           10001




                                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                    POLICE AUTHORITY
      R.C. Johnston B.A., I .P .P .A.                                                                                              P.O. Box 37
      Clerk and Financial Officef                                                                                                 Regent Street
                                                                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                                                                      South Y orkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                                                             T e le p h o n e Barnsley (0226) 733222

      t-‘u> lie/:                                               Y ou r Kc):                                         Daw.


      / hi\ maHi'r ;v hi'i/u; (truil y'llh />v‘                                                                     Telephone t’>




                                                    F A C   S I M I L E            T R A N S M I S S I O N

               TO:        . . . .MR P E T E R H A Y E S . . . . . .

               . . . . . . . . . DEPUTY, CHIEf. .CPRS.TAB.L£




               FR 0 M;                     MR .R, ,C JOH/'JSTON
                                           CLERK AND FINANCIAL OFFICER



              Date:                                    26 S E P T E M B E R 1989

              No. of Pages {inc. this page)                                                  SEVEN


              Our Fax N u m be r                  0226/730442

              In the e ve n t of b a d rece ip t p l e a s e c o n t a c t 0 2 2 6 / 7 3 3 2 2 2 Ext:                ...341
BY:                                   ;26- 9-89         2:51PM ;                 0226 730442-$              0742523409;     n 2
ay u y /ze 14.■ 47           ® u z z e - 73u44z    .                y. y.   j . s.                                          ri#)UZ

                                                                                                                             2




       RC.l/VS                                                                   S e p t e m b e r 1<?0S
                                      M r R C Johns '.on                                                           ?.41




       Dear

       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
       Following the meeting between tho Chairman of our r e s p e c t i v e a u t h o r i t i e s t h i s
       week, T can now confirm the Authori ty' s agreement in p r i n c i p l e tr» reimburse
       West Midlands P o l i c e Authority the c o s t s of the above Inquiry.

       I will a r r a n g e f o r p a y m e n t s to   be   watte on r ^ c e l n * of your a c c o un t s s u b je c t to
       fa.)       the e x c l u s i o n of any I n t er e st ch a r g e s ; and
       (tv        Homo Of f i c e acceptance in de+ail r>f the s i z e of the addition for
                   admi ni s tr ati ve overhead and any additional s p e ci al p a y m e n t s to the
                   o f f i c e r s involved* and

       (r\        ret res pet I I'-e v e r i f i c a t i o n of the charges made on the basis aqreed
                   wi fh ACC ^on^s and                  Mariner,

       I e n c l o s e a c o n y of m y lette r tr tho                  O f f 1 re a c c e p t i n g the basis of
       spec ial a s s i s t a n c e * r - v n r t f ? , th^se        frem v/hich you will st»e 1 hat you m a y
       exnect p a ym ^ rt of the a c c o u n t s r e n d e r e d as soon as ! am s a t i s f i e d that the
       H e m e O f f i c e h a v e In pi acc a r r a n g e m e n t s to re^mt-firse ^ o y t h voHrsh-frn,
       Yours s i n c e r e l y




       R C -lohnston
       Clerk and f i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r



       r or t h e a t t e n t i o n of Mr C T o m l i n s o n
       M r K \f Astling              ..
       C 1 erf<
       West Midlands Police Authority
       Police Headquarters
       Room 319 Lloyd House
       Colmore Circus
       Queensway
      RTDMtlUl?tJ,Aij        n m /i44j>
    RCU    BY:                                         ;26- 9-89             2:52PM ;                0226 730442-$                             0742523409; # 3
          , ay yy/ze 14:47                 © <^6-730442:                                 s. y. j. s.                                                        i@ dm
                                                                                                                                     h/9 V


           • # V


                                                                            ;*€-C^yt3^                                                                  ^^L^cx^,

                                               <> £            \f£b<**(jQC c /t^ x ^ <^vAvv             9*t       Cip-yJJL.




                          *?           -      , ^                                                <^ V                 <Vl c ^ a ^ p e           <i/^5a
                                                  /?<y&£c6Cn«.$                                           ^   J f> t£ -+&<*oL’                  <%jz .




                                                   •       ■      ^
                                                                                                 k                                    /             ^              i
             /iL-C,       <6       —              ^ A U                /^ ^ y                               Gfi                                     j a .S p e c ^
                                                       •/&         o d tfe J X ^ c /                              ^               ^v--Hi_      ^T


              /^q/*'ti-        ^                                         2&JL y?<?£l$-t- (T c J '-^ ^ r                & s\ ■'?■-■ ’'^ g f '


                                              Ct’0'*7f^ c + ^                   ,    /^j?Si.V\                           /^~C .*r iOkJ-^£■ Cut&tls- ,



                       Cv^y-               '^p.-'siSUL <Za /fr+ < ^ Z,y ° ^                                        ^
                                              A            / & p £ £ *VC5            a c * ^ ] K " ( ® - ^ G- ^ '
                                             ^ ,           y^O.                 a*TTfel <^<L(^es^i^.<Lt O ^
                                                               Cj; ,       CU?^iV»" C^s>^x£,
                                                                           C O ly s? ^}4^     (Z t’ts& C-


            $ " $ C~       y%>     C O r& h.< ^ //>C> , (^<e <^Lj> ^ C W i L ^                                     ^


                           C^CrC-CcJS^                 .                        ^)




L
RCU    BY:                                                      ;26- 9-89                    2:53PM ;                               0226 730442^                                              0742523409;8 4
      ; m             14:4a                    © 0226 -7 30 44 2                                                s. y. j . s.                                                                                   1^004




                  WEST              NJDLANOS                             PO L IC E              AUTH ORITY



                  u oLy Sd 1;House
                  U           ™ ..                                                                                                                                    «            »     8_ 2.1 2“
                                                                                                                                                                                                *,,g5000
                  Colaore Circus Que&nsway

                                                                                                                                                                      Fa* "0!            021 233 4600




                  FACSIMILE MESSAGE TOAMSHIfiSJOM FORM



                 D* te:                                                                                          ™           S& T
                 For the Attention o£:                                               g>-o«r ■>-                          aw.        o f f       ,    s    ,                            ft A

                 FrOM:                                                                C ty tfff       " 7        ~       C         -y




             .   Comment*;
                                      /"                      '* 1   ■     7 "ti   £>^f-x          you n             / f i / / m s i^ E tf!r         s fs s ti            '* * y                        t* v


                 (* o r         T * c - e ?■*'<££,                   Ife                                   ff-rr /J L * * }                                                               ^ '£

                 />v,t"                        f a / H u /*<*.&t                   yi>isA'      ^ W )({f                     rrtexsi-v-er            tr


                                r             7t>                        /<i,v          w-rtv     /fr?rf *fwsC/Ct 1“ 7'                                                                        T r f c j-

                                                    sr'e*                      e ,v "        / vJV » . W             y    »    (        j   j            ,f^ r                            ^

                  $0;€,-C t .              ^Py'<*           (SjiyfeV/frf                */*/          ^ *--/■V                          f„,.? —               y.?j-
                                    .“ ^            /f- J       / ^ f t '/ T C S                       r *                              t                *,*■         <W'V-

                                                                         r-                          0 ^ ‘i f                  iJe
                          rcs-'fi                                                     7~*rt/K^ /?•yj)                 fo u                                                 '&<-£■£'*■ p
                  £**.<<„*> £-dPe>&T                                                                             Sr-? b                         /.                                     r¥&i£s~ '*•c**■ 7
                  /,+t Kf.-fi‘Asfil*s j~             -t sf- rj                               ^tr                                   f*


             HOTB        THAT    THIS                            TRANSHISSION                      COHSISTS                   OF            J            PAGES I« ATOITXOP TO THIS
             M E S S A G E FOfitM.




                 FHTF1/EVP
-Y        BY:                         ;26- 9-89    2:53PM ;              0226 7304424                 0742523409 ; U 5
        ; ay 09/26 14:49        ©0226-730442                   S. Y. J. &                                           1^006


                                                                                                              b
                                        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

                                         FINANCIAL PROPOSALS


1.          Could we confirm           aB         agreed    at   the      Home     0ffite     visit    the
            reimbursement will cover:-


                         Taylor Inquiry
                         Coroners
                         01aciplinary
                         complaints
                         Criminal Investigation

*>             Thf» "total" expenditure expenditure Incurred to date per latest invoice
               (incl. consequential overtime) can be analysed as attached.

               This include® and will continue to include revenue running coato of
4P             communications and computer equipment.

 3.            It is proposed that the following X administration charge should be wade
               on the total expenditure mindful of the loss of interest incurre
               (estimated at £.60,000 to date) and the magnitude of the inquiry:-


    I           f        Up to £3ta @ 5%                            150,000
        tM r             Further £lm 8 4%                            40,000
         1               Further Llm andabove @ 3%                   30,000 (up to C m )
k'
                                                                  £ 220,000

                                                                                  ■*>                   ^ ^ “ (L
 4.             3 above is proposed on the baais that the existing outstanding bills are"
                paid as soon as possible and that reimbursement is made within 14 days
                of the raising of each bill/ The future bills will bt raised on the day
a              of each four weekly policc Ipay day starting from the 11th October next.

    5,         Capital     Equipment   in   relation   to     TelecoBfl       and Computers    has    been
               purchased/ taken from stock to date as follow®

                         Purchases                     £                  *
                           Telecom                  20f000
                           Computers               229,000           249,000

                         From Stocks                                   13,000


                                                                  £ 262,000



                Rscotda are being kept by the Computer Manager of each item ueed and the
                period of u s a g e .

                It is proposed that where an item is used and returned to be used by
                West Midlands a proportion of the annual leasing coat should be charged.
 RCU    BY:                              ;26- 9-89   2:54PM ;                0226 7304424         0742523409;# 6
       ; a y y y / 2 6 14-.by    •Qwi'm-tmwi                        s*y. j. s.

K*kl.M .P O L I C E A U T H O R I T Y T E L   No,                                20.09,89   lb-'b'r7   P . 03
                                                                                                                L
                                                      ■»   2   *•

                However, where an item such as the Ho Id s b Computer and associated
                software is used over a long period of time (i.e. possibly 3 years or
                more) to the extent that It is not eventually required by West Midlands
                Police Authority then the full capital cont or le a s i n g charges should be
                recovered from the Inquiry subjcct to disposable values.

       6.       The total expenditure on the Inquiry is being charged to a separate cost
                centre and will be Bubject to the scrutiny of the West Midlands Police
                Authority's internal and external auditors.    It has also been agreed
                with the Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority in the presence
                of Mr, Addison, Home Office that an accountant from South Yorkshire
                could visit the West Midlands Treasurer to examine the reasonableness of
                the expenditure reclaimed if required*

   J W •            brief the objnctive, of these proposals are that reimbursement of
   w            outstanding bills is made so soon as possible, a "reasonable" charge is
  r             made to South Yorkshire and that no costs arising from the above
                inquiries (at (1) above) fall on the West Midlands Police Authority.




       S. T* Hattner
       For the Treasurer to the Police Authority
        3

                   o    r                                                WEST MIDLANDS P0L1C2 AUTHORITY
                                                                              HILLSBOROOCH ENQUIRY
                                                                        )   PERIOD S BMDING 02.09.89

                                                                                           fiirect            Total
                                              llmiaghaa     Sheffield     Liverpool     Unallocated       EHrect Coats       Con sequentlal    Grand Total
                  cr>                             £            £              £                                  £                 £                  i
                  co    Police Overtime         234,930      206,302       224,983                           666,215            520,084        1,1*6,299
                 <73                            16,570        23,833        36,062
                 O      P.H.L.                                                                                76,465              8,567            85,032
                 O      Allowances                    20           15                                                 35             64                ' 99
                 <N
                        AFT & C                  27,200       4,796          2,292            696             34,984                448            35,432
                        tenp* Staff               1,133        2,424                        1,307              4,864                                4,864
        'St             Manuals Overtime         1,473                                                         1,473                                1,473
                        & 4 H of Buildlags            653                                                            653 *                             653
                        Kleetricity/Gas          1.213                                                           1,213 -                            1,213
        'A
                        R 4 H of Vehicles           10             78              24                                112 -                             112
                        Petrol                   1,200        6,228          6,890                            14,318 '                             14,318
                        Hired Transport           3,130        5,499        17,124         30,467             56,220 »                             54,220
                        Travel Expenses          3,613        3,440          2,516                            14,574 -              313            14,887
  cn                                                            2056              292
i eoi                   Car larking                   673                                                        3,021 -             13             3,034
  cn t         _J                                                            2,771
   I 3T                 Car Allowances            5.213       6,181                                           14,165-                              14,165
  VD                                                                              127       6,482
  (M >-
  ■ I
                        Equipment                28,541       18,659                                          53.809 '                             53.809
     CD
                        Caterlag                      176     4,126          1,488                               5,790 -                             5,790
               CX                                                                 271
               CD       Stationery Etc.           3,894        1,147                                             5,312-                              5,312
                        Telephone Etc.           13,134      16,095          3,361          1,219             33.809 -                             33.809
               ■I                                31,892      173,650       136,948          4,521            347,011 ^
        pH              Subsistence                                                                                                  33           3 4 7 ,M 4
        -O LJ
        wvi—i inl~->
                   i    Miscellaneous                  69     1,867                28                            1,964 *                             1 ,9 6 4
              _J                                                           435,177
        m o                                   £ 379,742      476,396                       44,692          1,336,007            529,522 ^      1,865,529
        s> 2:
                        Jfationsl Insurance                                                                                                       130,833
        • *->;                                                                                                                                £ 1,996,362
  CJ          it i
  a:             ,*
                        T 1iun«a                                                                             >
                                         SO! ?'JH YORKS! I HKt.
                                         POI.KT. A l ’TH Oltf I \
R.C:. Johnston B.A., LP.F.A.                                                                                                             P.O . Box 37
Cleric and Financial Officer                                                                                                            Regent Street
                                                                                                                                             Barnsley
                                                                                                                            South Y orkshire S70 2 P Q
                                                                                                                Tc   spiionc      'Tistev 10226) 733222

                                                      Youf Kef:                                                        Datt •
T im       r.v    d m f j w ijh   In                                                                                   Telephone e::tr:




                                         F A C S I M I L E                  T R A N S M I S S I O N

       TO:                                MR £ ,HAYES

                                         .d e p u t y C H I EF . CO NS T AB LE
                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE' POLICE




       from:      ........... .m s ,n ,c                                           «**■»*** .j,
                                                                                              i       4*

       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiw % M Q j . m m n i . 9 f n m . . . . . . . . . . . . .

       ................... s o u m ,               w m m t .         pout*.        m     m    m     , .......

       Datei      ..... . . . . ??. m u m n . j m .                                                         ** * **                       £f i « *

       No. o f Pages (inc. t h i s page)                      . . . . . . . . . . ,'HR,. . . . . ............

       Our Fax Number                  0226/730442


       In the event of bad receipt please c o n t a c t 0226/733222 Ext:                                                ,        ,,

                       kJ    &J 3lv \             ■fw                   O
        BY:           %*                       J27- 9-89            9:36AM ;                  0226 730442-*                         0742523409; U 2
        »y wy/zr wy:3i>                  © W 226-Y3W442..                      y. y.    j.   s.                                                    wmz



                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                         POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                                                                        P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                                                                        Regent Street
                                                                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                                                              South Y orkshire S70 2P Q
                                                                                                   T e le p h o n e Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Rtf;         RCJ/VS                            Y o u r R t f:
                                                                                                          n a tf    27 S e p t e m b e r 1989
This m a iirr t.\ br*ng dealt with b y
                                                Mr R C Johnston                                           I t ie p h t in c cxI:
                                                                                                                                         341



                Dear Mr A s t i i n g

                HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
                F u r t h e r to m y lett er of 21 S e p t e m b e r I h a v e no w been a b l e to s a t i s f y rnyserf
                as to t h e a r r a n g e m e n t s the H o m e O f f i c e h a ve m a d e to r e i m b u r s e South
                Y o r k s h i r e f o r U s p a y m e n t s to West M i d l a n d s in r e s p e c t of the above inquiry.
                I have t h e r e f o r e i n s t r u c t e d the a p p r o p r i a t e s t af f to p r o c e s s the p a y m e n t s
                accordingly.

                On the basis that t h e W e s t M i d l a n d s will be able e f f e c t i v e l y to r e c o v e r lost
                in t e r e s t u n d e r t he g u i s e of t h e p e r c e n t a g e a d d i t i o n for a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
                ov er h e a d , I w i 11 t i m e t h e S o ut h Y o k s h l r e p a y m e n t s to m a t c h our e x p e c t e d
                r ec e i p t s from t h e H o me O f f i c e ( a l t h o u g h of c o u r s e we will not r e c e i v e
                r e i m b u r s e m e n t in full). P a y m e n t of y o u r f i rs t two ac c o u n t s s h o u l d t h e r e f o r e
                r each y o u by 6 Oc t o b e r .

                T h e p a y m e n t s will be m a d e "on a c c o u n t        subject, to t h e c o n d i t i o n s set out in
                m y l e tter of 21 Se p t e m b e r ,

                I h o p e this l e t t e r will e n a b l e you to g i v e the go ahead to y o u r C h i e f
                C o n s t a b l e on t h e u r g en t next steps r e l a t i n g to the c r im i na l i n q u i r y .
                Yours       sincerely




                              Y
                R C Johnston
                Clerk and F i n a nc i al O f f i c e r




  ^           f or t h e A t t e n t i o n of Mr C T o m l i n s o n               “1
               Mr A V A s t i i n g
               C lerk
               West M i d l a n d s Po            Authority
               P o l i c e He a dquartei
               Room 819 Lloyd House
 [_           Colmore Circus                                                       _j
               Quee ns w ay , B I R M I N G H A M     B4 6NQ
