POLICE FEDERATION                                                    Federation Office
                                                                     Police Headquarters

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLI                                                Snig Hill
                                                                    Sheffield       S 3 8L Y
JOINT     BRANCH      BOARD
                                                                    Telephone (0742) 768522
                                                                    Fax. No. 0742 523243



                                                                    YOUR   REFERENCE




 TO:   All Members of the So                                        O U R RE FER EN CE

       Police Joint Branch Btar                              13 September 1989.

 De ar Member,

      The third quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
Thursday, 31 August 1989, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
Sheffield, commencing at 10.0 a.m.

      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
1.      ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                       R.   Lax
                                                        M.   Young
                                                        A.   Young
                                                        J.   Bui 1 iman
                                                        I.   Selwood
                                                        G.   Sykes
                                                        D.   Hickinson
                                                        G.   Smalley*
                                                        j.   Wood


        * Denotes non-attendance.

        The Chairman stated that before he commenced with the agenda he
        would like to welcome three new members to the Board. These
        were Mr. Ian Selwood, the Inspectors' representative for "E"
        Division, replacing Mr. Booth, Mr. Graham Millett, the
        Inspectors' representative for "A" Division, replacing Mr.
        Turnbull and ^           ^      |the S e r g e a n t s ' representative
        for E Division, replacing]                    Members noted that Mr.
        Andy Young who had replaced Mr. Cooper as the Inspectors
        representative at "B" Division had tendered his apologies as he
        was on a pre-retirement course.
2-      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEFTTNG

            _ _ _ _ _ Iproposed and]         (seconded that the minutes
        of the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed.
                                                         6.

  Provincial. He explained that wherever an officer was on the
  incremental scale for his rank, the National and Provincial
  would use the scale two higher to determine the maximum
  amount of mortgage he could have, plus gift vouchers to the
  value of £70 in major outlets such as Marks and Spencers.
  All these details had been published on the Circular.
K) Dental Charges. The Secretary reported this had been
   resolved and asked for this item to be removed from the
   agenda. The bills would be paid and the details had been
   published on Force Orders. All members agreed to remove this
   item from the agenda.
L) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported he had written
   to the Chief Constable on our behalf giving him full support
   and he had since replied. Copies of both letters having been
   circulated to the members for their information. The
   Secretary said he had even received copies of minute sheets
   from Sub-Divisions and Divisions with officers' signatures
   thereon which had been sent to the Chief Constable also
   giving support.
  A letter of support had also been received from Mr. John
  Fort of North Yorkshire and the Chief Constable was extremely
  grateful for the support we had given.
  Upon the announcement that further enquiries were going to be
  conducted by West Midlands, the Secretary said he had spoken
  to Mr. Alan Eastwood asking for something to be sorted out
  to protect our members because there could be a lot of our
  people interviewed. As a result, Mr. Eastwood brought in
  extra staff to deal with the specially designed posters which
  were printed immediately, giving members information on
  assistance if needed. Mr. Middup said he distributed these
  posters to the Force immediately first thing on the Monday
  morning, which he followed up by a telex to the Force.
  Mr. Nick Holroyd, a senior solicitor at the Leeds Office of
  Russell Jones and Walker had been deputed to deal with this.
  Mr. Middup said there had been more discussion with Mr.
  Jones, the A.C.C. from West Midlands in charge of the
  operation and what has been established is that we have an
  agreement that we will be kept up to date with the interviews
  for our members. Our solicitors will be informed by Mr.
  Jones in advance. There will be regular dialogue between our
  solicitors and Mr. Jones. It has also been agreed that our
  people will be able to stop the interview if they wish and
  contact our solicitors on the telephone numbers specially
  printed on the posters. This agreement had been put in
  writing.
  Mr. Middup said the earliest date for our federated members
  to be interviewed would be October. However, prior to these
  interviews taking place, the Chairman, Secretary, Mr. Jones
  and our solicitor would meet to discuss the situation
                                                             7.

beforehand.
           informed members that a Superintendent and an
inspector from Greater Manchester were already looking for a
certain officer who fits their description. Mr. Middup said
he was completely unaware of this and would immediately look
into it.
               stated it appeared as if some officers had
aireaay maae statements but have since been approached again
to make a new statement but this time to leave out anything
of a sensitive nature. |              | said he had told his
members not to make a new statement or sign anything if they
did not want to or felt unhappy with it.
Mr. Sykes replied this had been happening from the beginning
and numerous officers at "F" Division had refused to sign new
statements.
The Chairman commented it appeared as if attempts were being
made by West Midlands to manipulate our officers to put less
contraversial evidence into their statements.
               said we should record the people who have been
asked to change their statement, because we shall need the
ammunition.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ said he could not see an interview being stopped
if it became nasty. The Secretary replied a good police
officer should stop it and be aware that he is entitled to
stop an interview if he so wished.
Mrs. Wood agreed with the Secretary and said that should be
the case but was inclined to confirm)_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ remarks
saying some of our officers were intimidated by a senior
officer especially from another Force.
Mr. Middup replied we had done all we could, we even had the
promises made in writing. He added that in fact this system
was the same one used for the Wapping dispute.
Mr. Young asked whether we could engage our own legal
representative to collate all the information that had not
been brought to light - the information that had had the blue
pencil put through it. He stressed this had got to come out
and be opened up. Mr. Middup said he would discuss this
aspect with Mr. Eastwood. The Chairman agreed and said we
had got to pull it together, even if it meant forming a small
group to do it.
The Chairman then reported on the Police Committee meeting.
He said the Chief Constable had given a statement to the
media and had sent a report to the D.P.P. As a result of the
recommendations of the Taylor Report, contracts had been
prepared to be signed by the police and the football club
   which set out mutually agreed duties and responsibilities.
   Four out of five clubs had signed their contracts but
   Barnsley had returned theirs for clarification but assumed it
   had now been signed. The costs would almost certainly
   increase but this was being reviewed and we were waiting the
   outcome.
   Mrs. Wood said she had seen a copy of a document about the
   policing at various clubs. She added the policing between
   Doncaster Rovers and Sheffield Wednesday did not compare.
   The Chairman asked Mrs. Wood for a copy of that document.
   The Chairman gave an update of the recommendations discussed
   at the Police Committee meeting.
             suggested we should publish some of the issues
   discussed at this meeting for the benefit of the membership.
   Mr. Middup agreed.
M) Sickness - Stress. The Secretary reminded members that the
   Force were seeking to reduce the time limit for officers off
   sick with a stress related illness to three weeks from three
   months before being referred to the Staff Surgeon. He added
   a meeting had been arranged for Friday, 1 September 1989, so
   he could report on this matter after that meeting. Mr.Middup
   said at his request, Dr. Duckworth would also attend the
   meeting.
N) Force Canteens _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ The Secretary reported the
   Force did not have canteen committees any longer owing to the
   privatisation of the Catering Department and any problems
   concerning the canteens were directed to the Divisional
   Administrator and if satisfaction was not reached then the
   Secretary would pursue the complaints.
                  was satisfied with this procedure and
   recommended the item now be removed from the agenda.       This
   was agreed by the membes.
0) Sheffield Marathon. The Secretary reminded members this item
   had been discussed previously and concerned officers engaged
   on duty at the annual Sheffield Marathon on the Sunday of
   their weekends off. This had happened for the last three
   years and was to be for a further four years, involving the
   same officers' weekend off.
   Mr. Middup said he had written to Mr. Jackson on this asking
   for something to be done. He explained to Mr. Jackson that
   these officers had had their weekend off spoilt for three
   years and the prospect was for a total of seven years.
   Chief Inspector Edmundson was on the Marathon Committee and
   he would attend the meeting and request for consideration
   that the marathon day be moved one week either side of the
   date which is usually chosen.
