                                                                                       Federation Office

   POLICE FEDERATION                                                                   Police Headquarters
                                                                                       SniQ Hill
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLI                                                *   U.j-3       -Sheffield
                                                          o nU IB,"V\1\\ | | y ^nrtephone
                                                                                L
                                                                                                    S3 8LY

  JOINT             BRANCH        BOARD                                                   (0742) 768522
                                                          I      V '                                  729126
                                                                                        Fax. N a 0742 72!


                                                                                                    :NCE
                                                   *r>\


       TO:                                     £
                                           orksl
                 All Members of the South Yorkshire
                 Police Joint Executive Committee
                 and Branch Board
                                                   ■V
                                                                                   8
                                                                                        OUR REFERENCE

                                                                                       August 1991.



       Dear M e m b e r ,
            The third quarterly meeting of the Joint Executive Committee was
       held      ISwSJIidJy.
                          31 July 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
       High Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
            The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
       information and retention.

       1,           attendance
                                                                              R. Lax
r                   P. Middup                                                 M. Young
■v".




       2.           MTNIITES OF THE LAST MEETING
                                                      seconded that the minutes of
                    the last9meeting were a true record. This was agreed by the
                    members.
        3. (A) TREASURER'S REPORT
                    The Treasurer reported on the state of the accounts. He also
                    stated that we had now commenced the new rates of subssonptio ,
                    that were discussed at Conference, as from the 1 July 1991.

                 (B) TRUSTEES REPORT
                                reported a Trustees meeting had taken place and the
                     funds were in order.
         4   .       MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
                     A) Police Committee Report. The Chairman said he had nothing to
                        report. There had been no recent meetings.
                     r   ^ Trprhp Far.ilities. The Secretary asked f o r this item to be
                                  ,ra^            ,        ^ had agreeci to the removal
                           removed. He added t h a t —           1 °.'.               -,•+
                           because it was far too expensive to put into operation - it
   requires a million pounds just to set up.                                          All members agreed
   to remove the item from the agenda.
C) Part-timers. Job Sharing and R eturners. The Secretary said
   there was nothing to report from the last meeting. The
   national negotiators were still trying to negotiate.
D) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported that at the
   J.C.C. meetings on the" 10 July 1991, Michael Shersby, M.P.,
   had attended to update members at the meeting. During the
   question time, after which he had given his report,
   Mr. Middup said how disgusted he was with the long delay that
   our members had been waiting to learn whether or not they
   were to face discipline charges - 15 weeks since the Inquest
   report of accidental death. We had been promised we would be
   informed just 48 hours after the Inquest. Mr. Middup said he
   had received immense support from the J.C.C. that something
   had to be done about this so he spoke to Michael Shersby at
   tea-break. As a result, Michael Shersby put a written
   question in the House for answer by the Minister and
   forty-eight hours after this we had received a reply. The
   Secretary said this was no coincidence, it was because he had
   spoken to Michael Shersby about the matter.
   The Secretary said the Chief Constable had been extremely
   annoyed with him and tried to imply that because of
   Mr. Middup, both Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
   Superintendent Murray were facing discipline charges. The
   Chief Constable had preferred to let the Police Complaints
   Authority nibble away at it. Mr. Middup said he had spoken
   to Mr. Stuart, the Secretary of the Superintendents
   Association and Mr. Stuart had said the Chief Constable s
   remarks were ridiculous, it was obvious from the beginning
   someone was going to be charged at sometime. The Chairman
   agreed the Chief Constable's remarks were diabolical.
               said he would like letters of appreciation to be
    sent by the Secretary, to both Mr. Nick Holroyd and the
    OCII I   u v   OIKS   J   t   w w   - .........................................    #   V

    junior barrister,                        This was agreed.
 E) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - U n n e c e s s a r v Deviations. The
    s u rvey throughout the Force will be carried out in the near
    future. Other than that there was nothing else to report.

 F) Sale of Police Houses. This subject had been discussed at
    length and reported on fully on the last J.B.B. minutes.
    Members were reminded that Mr. Middup had prepared a letter
    stating that the Policy Review Committee had reneged on their
    decision. It was agreed that the Secretary should forward
    this letter to Mr. Jackson expressing our anger. Mr. Middup
    said he was extremely proud to report that because of our
    action - the letter apparently upset the P.R.C. very
    considerably and their only face saver was to allow Chief
    Superintendent Lowe and himself have another look at the
    matter. Because of Mr. Middup's strong representation, the
