POLICE FEDERATION                                           ^ ^^olt^^adquarters

SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                 aneweia S3 8LY
J O I N T BRANCH     BOARD                V                     telephone (0742) 768522
                                                                Fax. No. 0742 729126
                                              V\       >■
                                              ^w ' W
                                                                YOUR REFERENCE




                                      ,   .                     OUR REFERENCE
TO:   All Members of the South Yorkshire
      Police Joint Branch Board                        26 November 1990.

Dear Member,
     The fourth quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
Wednesday, 21 November 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
Sheffield, commencing at 9 a.m.
     The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
information and retention.
1.      ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                   R.      Lax
                                                    M.      Young
                                                    G.      Millett*
                                                    R.      Hooley
                                                    J.      Bui liman
                                                    I.      Selwood
                                                    G.      Sykes
                                                    K.      Vickerage*
                                                    P.      McGinley*
                                                    J.      Wood

*Denotes non-attendance.
2.      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
        Mr. Stuchfield proposed and Mr. Hague seconded that the minutes
        of the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed.
 3. (A) TREASURER'S REPORT
        The Treasurer gave a full report saying the £20,000 had now been
        sent to the Joint Central Committee as a donation from our funds
        in compliance with the J.B.B. decision. He said he was now
        preparing for the Auditors.
        The Secretary informed members that                  a retired
        national Chairman and his wife, Gwen, had had an accident whilst
        on holiday in     I where a car had ploughed them down. Both
        were very badly injured and              returned in a
                                                         3.

  potential problems and at the same time hold back people who
  were impulsive and who were wanting these changes regardless
  of the consequences. This was where the matter (job sharing,
  part time working, returners) spilled over into Ottawa. They
  are determined we are going to have these changes as it is
  aoinq to save money on overtime and there would be a greater
  level of flexibility. Mr. Middup said this was a very
  serious problem. The Secretary added that Miss Neild had
  been working very hard on this matter and he would keep
  reporting on it at the meetings.
  Members noted that part time workers would work shifts and
  would also be on call the same as full time workers.
  Mr Middup said West Midlands had a system where officers
  finished at 30 years, with full commutation their pension
  frozen and they rejoined in the same rank and on full salary.
  There are about a dozen people who have taken this up.
  The Secretary said that the Constables' Branch Board was
  looking at this and would be bringing their findings to Joint
  as soon as possible then if members wished we would try to
  negotiate this for our Force.
C) Rent. Allowance. The Secretary reported that the "Idiot's
   Guide" due to be published to cover the vast amount of
   anomalies had not yet materialised. It had been delayed
   because the person preparing the guide had had a very serious
   illness within his family.
   Mr. Middup said that as far as the compensatory grant was
   concerned officers would see very little difference to the
   amount they received. In this Force, the majority of people
   were not affected but the problem lay with the anomalies.
0 ) Hillsborough Disaster. The Chairman suggested that members
   read the copies of the letter sent to Sir Jack Layden f rojP
   the Chief Constable, which had been distributed prior to the
   meeting. This letter had been sent to Sir Jack Layden
   following the Police Authority's decision not to fund the
   legal proceedings for our officers involved. The Chief
   Constable had been extremely disappointed at this decision.
   The Secretary reported that originally 143 claims for
   compensation had been made by our members and this number had
   gradually decreased to around 80 due to, in the Secretary s
   belief, intimidation. He added that he did not think the
   Police Authority would refuse to pay the legal expenses for
   our officers but they did.
    As soon as this refusal was known, Mr. Stuart, the Secretary
    of the Superintendents' Association had telephoned Mr. Middup
    from a meeting in Corby, Northants. and Mr. Roger Greenwood
    who had visited the Federation Office had wanted to speak to
    the Secretary. Both Messrs. Stuart and Greenwood were
                                                      4.

wanting to commence a Judicial Review.
The Secretary stated the Superintendents' Association at
national level asked for our help. It was noted that the
first stage of the legal proceedings costs £750 and it was
not known how high the figure would be ■a fterwards._ The
Superintendents managed to raise £1,000, which obviously was
not nearly enough. Mr. Middup said the Federation as an
organisation would pay the costs.
The Secretary said with regard to the Police Authority's
refusals he believed these to be delaying tactics - a clever
ploy by their lawyers by refusing but keeping the issue open.
Mr. Middup said but this time we would not be withdrawing
from the Court listing.
Mr. Middup informed members that Mr. Nick Holroyd of Russell
Jones and Walker, who was doing a first class job, had
requested a meeting to advise our members prior to the
Inquest the following week and this was held on Thursday,
November, in the Lecture Theatre at Headquarters.
           stated that he had attended that meeting because
of his involvement with Hillsborough and about forty members
were present. He added it was a worthwhile exercise and Mr.
Holroyd obviously thought it important this meeting should be
held. Mr. Holroyd also took the opportunity to introduce a
junior barrister,               I, who was working for our
members. Mr. Holroyd gave the members very sound advice,
which was both helpful to the officers and to the Deputy
Secretary.             said Mr. Holroyd was certainly on the
ball.
 The Secretary reported that at the H.M.I.'s lunch for members
 of the Police Authority, at the end of the inspection on the
 day prior to the Police Authority meeting to reconsider, Mr.
 Sampson tried to persuade and urge the Police Authority
 members to finance the legal proceedings.
 The Chairman stated that in a recent issue of Police Review,
 an article had appeared which said finance should be
 mandatory by the Home Office and not a decision by the Police
 Authority. All members agreed this should be pursued through
 the J.C.C. Mr. Middup suggested forming and sending a motion
 to this effect for next years' Conference. All members
 agreed to sending a motion to Conference on Home Office
 Circular re supporting officers financially in legal
 proceedings.
            said we should send a letter to the Police
 Authority informing them of our disappointment. This was
 agreed. The Secretary said because it was a letter of great
 importance, it should have the signature of both the Chairman
 and the Secretary of the Board.
             suggested releasing a copy of this letter to the
  "Star" newspaper because the majority of people in South
  Yorkshire were supporting the police. Mr. Middup replied we
  would have to take proper advice from our legal advisors
  before either sending the letter or releasing it, for the
  timing if nothing else.
  The Chairman said we ought to be showing our membership that
  we are doing something as an organisation. He suggested we
  listen to the Chief Constable when he attended our meeting
  later to see what he had to say and to modify our decision
  if necessary.
  Secretary's Note: The Chairman and Secretary had a long
  discussion the following day with Mr. Holroyd of Russell
  Jones and Walker, news had just been received that we had
  been granted leave to seek Judicial Review on the Police
  Authority's decision and the Judicial Review would most
  likely be heard on either 14 or 20 December. Under the
  circumstances, Mr. Holroyd advised against writing to the
  Police Authority until after the Judicial Review had been
  decided.
E) Ottawa Shift System fP.N.B. Working Party on Regulations)..
   This item had been dealt with under "Creche Facilities .
F) loral Government ft Housing Act. The Secretary reported we
   were still only talking about the pedantic side - the Police
   Authority rescinding their policy. The Equal Opportunities
   Working Party were dealing with it and then the matter would
   be pursued through the Police Authority.
G) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations,..
   Mr. Middup said he had copied and circulated every report
   giving examples he had received to the members,
   commented that one of his members who had sent in a report
   giving examples, had suggested that a C.P.S. member be
   invited to our Open Meeting.
                           .        r   . iL.
                                             said we ought to
                                                -i   i   l 1:   _____   j   _______ _      1         i   i   . i   4> a
   publicise this as it would make good publicity   to attract
   our members. It was agreed to invite
   VJU I   IIIU lllU U 1 -j •   A                         who               4   I_________________________ -j— . ________________ I

   had attended one of our J.B.B. meetings some time ago.
             said he would ask the Chief Constable when he
   attended the meeting later if we could have a Forcewide
   survey on this matter.
   Secretary's Note: The Chief Constable agreed to have a
   Forcewide survey over a period of two months. He said that
   he would discuss it with other people and make the
   arrangements.
H) Sale of Police Houses. The Secretary reported the report
   from the Working Party had now been prepared, completed and
   distributed to members of the J.N.C.C. Mr. Middup said it
   had not been distributed further because it was a J.N.C.C.
