 POLJSE FEDERA TION                                              W\
                                                                       Federation Office
                                                                      Police Headquarters

 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                               Snig Hill

                                                           A V        Sheffield   S 3 8L Y
 JOINT     B RA NC H   BOARD
                                                 V\
                                                  s\             _'H"^lepjron'e (0742) 768522
                                                                    \F^\|Tot0^2 523243
                                                            ■X
                                               Cv. * V . V \ )\\&     YOUR REFERENCE
                                                       w
 TO:   All Members of the South Y o r k ^ n j ^ J ^                   OUR REFERENCE
       Pol ice Joint Branch Board                                27 April 1989.

 Dear Member,

 * • A n o n Cia1 J° int Branch Board Meeting was held on Wednesday. 19
 April 1989, at the 'Pickwick11 Restaurant, High Green, Sheffield
 c o m m e n c i n g at 10.0 a.m.                            "iciu,
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.

            ® Deputy Chairman, _ _ _ _ _ _ _ opened the meeting on behalf of
 + u 0 4. ?u-rnian' ^      been delayed, at some serious incident, savina
 that this meeting was of a slightly unusual format. He stated it was
 an extra meeting of the Joint Branch Board which had been called
 because o f the events at the weekend.

+ rI-6^ Cre]:a [y reP?rtPd that at 11*30 a.m. we would be joined by
the Chief Constable, who had taken time out from all his numerous
appointments to talk to us.
     Mr. Middup said because of the tragedy at Hillsborough on
Saturday, he contacted the Chairmen of the Separate Boards to see if
they had any major items on their agendas and if not, he thought it
better to get together in order to discuss Hillsborough. Mr. Middup
said he wa s most grateful for their co-operation.
         Mr. Middup said he would endeavour to give a chronological account
                                    iuCi dunt at Hillsbor°ugh happened. He added
that the Chief Constable had been most grateful for the support we had
given as he had been in a difficult position. Mr. Middup said he
w a n t e d t o tell the J.B.B. members and the people he represented what he
had tried to do, putting our side of the trauma over to the press and
+u         • ^ c o m m e n t e d it was a measure of the immense esteem in which
the Chief Constable held this Board, that he had agreed to attend our
meeting, considering the terrible pressure and going from job to job.
     The Secretary stated he had included Conference on the agenda
because there were a couple of issues to discuss and there would not
now be another meeting until after Conference. Mileage allowance had
a so been included because we were experiencing problems with
       not adhering to the negotiated agreement.
                                                             4.

be resolved at that level, the matter would have to go to the
J.N.C.C. and the claims would have to wait pending the result.
Nr. Middup said there was a draft new Standing Order which
removed completely the authority of the supervisory officer to
allow casual user and we never agreed to this. Mr. Middup
stated this Order was going to be published before he had even
seen it.
They had an allocation of mileage to give to an individual on
an ad hoc single journey basis - not en bloc.
Mr. Middup said we would either have to negotiate or start
again.
FOOTBALL TRAGEDY - HILLSBOROUGH
The Secretary said he wanted to try to draw out today what our
thoughts were on Saturday, as he wanted one or two points
clearing up.
Mr. Middup stated that on Saturday teatime at 6.15 p.m. he had
received a telephone call f r o m !          stating that he
assumed the Secretary was aware of the disaster at Hillsborough
but nevertheless thought he ought to talk to him. M r. Middup
replied that he had known nothing about it all until
call. As a r e s u lt of this information, Mr. Middup said he
immediately rang                    Welfare Officer but she had
already been called out.
Mr. Middup said he then immediately made his way to Headquarters
and attended a press briefing at 7 p.m. with the Chief
Constable. He had tried to contact f             |and was unable
to do so but had managed to contact f      "      The Secrtary
said he then went to the temporary mortuary where he met Dr.
Duckworth. Fortunately, Dr. Duckworth had been attending a
Conference in Sheffield and he had been pulled out.
Mr. Middup said from there he had visited West Bar and then onto
Niagara and the Ground itself. The Secretary stated the
officers were in a terribly distressed state. Some officers
were injured and some stories were told to the Secretary which
were horrific. One story being that a policewoman who was
giving resuscitation was urinated on. Other police officers
were verbally abused and had stuff thrown at them and spat on.
Some officers saw people picking coins up from the floor which
had obviously come from the victims. Mr. Middup said that was
how it was portrayed to him that night by individuals under
tremendous strain.
Mr. Middup said the press and media coverage had been immense.
He added he had initially been interviewed on radio - Radio
Sheffield - which had been successful and it had snowballed from
there. Mr. Middup read the lengthy list of the reporters, radio
and T.V. people who contacted us and interviewed him. He stated
                                                              5.

he had been proud to put the members' case forward. However,
the people of Merseyside were now complaining at some of the
Secretary's comments made in his interviews, even though he had
tried to say how distressed we were but the Secretary had been
invited to these interviews to speak on our behalf.
Mr. Middup said TV-am. had rung him at 2.20 a.m. that very
morning - Wednesday - and he had received his first and probably
would not be the last, abusive telephone call Tuesday night.
The Secretary said because of these comments he had made, he was
hoping people would say what they said on Saturday night. He
asked for the names of people who were abused because the
Inquiry will want to know them.
          said he would like to congratulate the Secretary and
applaud him for his comments. He added there was always
sympathy for the crowd but never sympathy for the police. This
was unanimously agreed by the members.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ questioned why had it always been the Secretary to
support the members - the senior officers had been lacking and
abysmal, as if they had something to hide. He said it had all
been down to the Secretary.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ stated he had visited the Traffic Division and the
Mounted Branch and the problems could be categorised under three
headings - Emotional Problems, Problems created by the Media
Coverage and Media Criticism to the Police. He added that his
members had been very grateful to the Secretary. The Mounted
Branch having been pointed out very considerably and there had
been no response from the senior officers and they had felt very
strongly about this.                  said we are constantly being
barraged at home by newspaper coverage as it had been said there
was some organisational criticism.                  commented that
some of the officers went home and got considerably drunk and it
appears that when they feel exceptionally emotional and anxiety
coming upon them, they reach for the bottle. He said he was
trying to get them to talk about it but hopefully they will do
later because this is a safety valve.
It was noted that a letter regarding stress had been circulated
early Monday morning, even the vans from Division were held up
in order to get these letters out immediately. The letter was
asking members to come forward if they needed counselling.
Mr. Sykes said he was in charge of serials on Saturday and he
stressed his deepest sympathy to Mr. Roger Marshall, who gave
the instruction to open the gate. This was unanimously agreed
by the members.
Mr. Middup stated the Chief Constable had said the truth could
not come from him but had given the Secretary a totally free
hand and supported him. The Secretary commented that never
before have so many senior officers sought him out and thanked
                                                               6.

him.
          |suggested sending a letter of support to Mr. Marshall
from this Board to his home. All members agreed to this.
           ]said that Chief Inspector Clive Warne had been
tremendous in talking to his officers and even wives,
            said the emergency was dealt with in the highest
professional way.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ stated the victims were the innocents, as they were
 the ones who had arrived early to get a place.
          said that some fans were arrested early on Saturday
morning. He added they had been throwing empty whisky bottles
out of their vans. _ _ _ _ _ r — added
                                     - - that
                                         - - some of the
                                                     — fans
                                                         • — had
been drunk from early morning when they arrived and some had
been at the Midland Station all night.
          said he had taken some of the brunt of wrath, as he
had been abused and kicked by the Liverpool supporters. The
supporters had also been spitting in officers' faces,
said he did not react he just took it. This had been after when
the bodies had been removed and when the fans were coming out.
          stated that the policewoman who had been urinated on
had supposedly rung the "Star", saying the welfare aspect had
not been adequate and as a result of this she was going to be
interviewed. Unfortunately, no one knew who she was.
               also stated that whilst he was attending to the
injured people, he was verbally abused and the supporters were
shouting, "Murderers."
Mr. Bulliman stated that whilst he was not actually present on
Saturday, he had spoken to his shift on the Monday, who had been
right in the thick of it, getting people off the terraces,
giving the kiss of life and whilst the officers were carrying
this out, they were being kicked and punched. They even ripped
the cover off one of the victim's faces and shouted an obscenity
at the dead person.
Mr. Sykes confirmed that two of the quotes, which were printed
in the press, were his. The first being about the police horses
and the supporters diving underneath the bellies and through the
legs of the horses. He added that the horses were inoperative
as they were penned in. The second being when the supporters
were called into the Ground and were at the back of the
terracing, then they all got booted out at the back. Mr. Sykes
said that is when he was carrying a young girl out who was
virtually dead. Her "T" shirt had come over her head and her
breast was hanging out, when some supporters shouted, "Throw her
over here, let us ..." and then added another obscenity.
                                                              7.

Mr. Sykes stated the supporters were booting him whilst he was
giving artificial resuscitation.
            repeated what he had said earlier by saying that
some officers felt greatly let down by the senior officers. He
added they were tremendously upset and no matter what the
excuses were, there was a general feeling of being let down.
             said it was right what Mr. Jacque George had said in
his interview, some of the supporters were beasts,
stated that some of the supporters had even requested a refund
and added that the police were taking ale off supporters and
throwing it away down drains.
Mr. Sykes stated he never saw the looting of bodies. However,
he and other colleagues ended up with ten bodies and the bodies
had nothing on them at all, not even a handkerchief.




Mr. Sykes commented a man was arrested for cannabis.     This man
also said he had had his wallet stolen.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ stated that several victims were wet with urine on
the upper body. He had originally thought it was how the bodies
had been laid and the fluids had drained that way. He
confirmed that a lot of the bodies had nothing on them
Mr. Middup said there were still two points which had not been
clarified and they were that he was told the supporters were
seen to be picking up items from the floor and the policewoman
was urinated on.
          stated that one of his men said he had witnessed
people picking stuff up from the floor around the dead bodies.
Mr. Middup said this was what was said to him on Saturday.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ stated that the Crown Court officer and some West Bar
officers were urinated on.
It was noted that some members said they did not see the
Superintendent in charge of the Ground. One member said he had
heard that Mr. Duckenfield had been in the Director's Box
hanging his head.
Mr. Sykes said he had seen Mr. Duckenfield when he had been
dealing with the dead.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ |stated that out of fifty Special Constables, three
had finished up with bodies and a Special also got abused and
kicked. He said in his opinion they were worse off than the
regulars, as some were young, not much service and only did
                                                               8.

 about 4 hours training in the classroom per week.
The Secretary stated that this morning a man had challenged him
to go to Liverpool and he was intending to tell the Chief.
           |said this problem was one of the headings he
mentioned earlier about the comments made to the media
criticism.
        1 asked why were the senior officers not seen to be
supporting the Force.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ (commented that this year there had been a 10% cut in
manpower at the match compared to last year.
Nr. Turnbull reported that his officers had said they had been
kicked and spat on. Mr. Turnbull however had been interrupted
by the announcement the Chief Constable had arrived.
The Chairman welcomed the Chief Constable to the meeting and
thanked him for finding the time to come along at a most
traumatic period. The Chairman admitted he had only just
arrived himself and had heard some of the terrible things
reported.
The Chief Constable reported that criticism was coming at us
through the media and the replies we had given had not stopped
the criticism. He said that after we had discussed the
situation the J.B.B. membership could go back and talk to their
members.
Mr. Wright stated he had not known of this meeting today but had
asked the Secretary for the opportunity to attend to speak to
the members. The Chief said he was generally taking views from
the representative body and he would be visiting Doncaster after
this meeting to express a few views.
Mr. Wright said we have seen individual officers almost
traumatised and the Force itself was in a trauma. He said he
was trying to break the trauma but it was not easy.
Mr. Wright stated we had been praised at former matches and the
policing this year had been exactly the same. The Chief
Constable said this time they were forced to open a gate and as
a result 95 people died.
The Chief Constable said everything that happened that day has
to be said, events leading up to it and afterwards would be
under scrutiny. He said there would be a Judicial Inquiry -
like the Bradford Fire disaster - and he knew this was coming.
Mr. Wright stated he had to say on the Saturday night we opened
a gate in order to save lives outside. He said he had received
all sorts of horrendous stories and he had shown a complete lack
of response from them. Mr. Wright stated he had made a
                                                          9.

conscious decision not to talk about these things - the
behaviour of the fans. The mass of the crowd was the reason for
opening the gate. He added he did not think there was any
purpose or merit to respond in this way. Although Mr. Wright
admitted he would have liked to have been able to make the
comments which Mr. Middup had made.
Mr. Wright said one of the measures should be making notes on
paper from recollections of events on that day - giving an
indication of what happened on that day. The only people to
influence were the Judicial Inquiry.
Mr. Wright said one of the Inquiry team would be Mr. Brian
Johnson the Chief Constable of Lancashire and the other would be
Mr. Geoffrey Dear the Chief Constable of West Midlands and they
would be there to gather evidence. He said we need people to
stand back from view to address it in a proper way. Mr. Wright
stated to offer yourself to the media would be on spot for a lot
of questions. The Chief said his answers were pertinent to the
Inquiry and he had taken a low profile deliberately as this was
the best tack.
Mr. Wright said we had to look at it ourselves - n o t just the
Inquiry - because we had a football match to police this weekend
and the weekend after. He said he was therefore asking all the
officers who were on duty at the Leppings Lane end to come and
talk about it today, this afternoon. We are looking for
evidence collectively from the officers who were there. He said
we were in it together. Mr. Wright said we want the feel of it
from those who dealt with the problem.
Mr. Wright said we had dealt with it in a positive way although
someone will be looking at it differently in nine months time
and people will say it should have been dealt with this way.
Mr. Wright said there was no shortage of police cover on the
day.
Members noted from the Chief that the information received of
what happened was not right and he found himself on two
occasions acutely embarrassed on aspects that were incorrect.
One of these occasions being that it was said one of the
victims - a girl c a l l e d ) [had died.  [however turned out to
be a boy and was not dead. He stressed all the stories had to
be right it was essential we confirmed everything.
Mr. Wright said the officers handling the bodies in the mortuary
and trying to handle the relatives were superb. He said
arrangements had been made for only one person to enter the
mortuary at a time. Photographs had already been taken of the
victims and pinned to a board. The relative would look at
photographs of the victims and pick out their respective
relation this was establishing whether the person was actually
dead rather than just injured and a casualty in hospital. They
then had to identify the actual body.
                                                                  10.

Mr. Wright then asked for questions from the members.
The Chairman thanked the Chief Constable adding what he had said
was first class.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ (informed the Chief Constable that both the Divisional
 Commander and his Deputy were not visible at this tragedy, which
 has affected the feelings of this Force. He said they had to
wait for another Commander.                ~~| stated they were told
 that the Divisional Commander, under the Chief Constable's
 instructions, had been taken away from the Ground.
The Chief stated he first knew of the disaster at 4.10 p.m. and
said he did not know the Divisional Commander was not visible, °
although it was obvious a major disaster was on officers' hands.
Apart from that, he said he could not comment.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ (asked the Chief Constable about the 10% cut in
manpower and added this information could be dangerous if
someone outside became aware of it.
The Chief Constable replied that at the de-briefing when looking
at the last semi-final, there was a general consensus of opinion
there were too many officers. Although he admitted it was easy
to say there are too many police when there was no trouble. Mr.
Wright commented it was not a fresh look at it. Mr. Duckenfield
had only been Divisional Commander at Hammerton Road for three
weeks but he still was not new to policing football matches.
Mr. Wright added that in fact with unfamiliarity someone could
be more on their mettle than compared with a possible
complacency of an established Divisional Commander.
Mr. Wright reminded members the radio had also broken down.
           [said this year there was only one special train and
this was not met and the supporters had wanted to go drinking.
The Chief Constable stated all we were doing was filtering
information through.
The Chairman informed the Chief Constable and members that fans
who had travelled across Woodhead had left a trail of beer cans.
A video car had therefore been sent round the whole route and he
likened it to driving through confetti, driving through the beer
cans.
The Chief Constable replied we had got to catch it whilst it is
hot.
The Chief Constable stated he had heard that one officer had
said he would be responsible for opening the gate.
Mr. Wright said we must pull our case together and present our
case to the Inquiry team.
                                                                                                                                                         11.

          said he was involved from early morning and he had
already qiven a graphic report to the Board earlier and did not
want to repeat it, as we had heard it all before. He said one
of the problems was the extremely long hours in the mortuary
without relief and asked whether anything in the future could be
done about that. One particular officer had never seen a body
had worked in the mortuary for 12 hours.
The Chief Constable said if we start biting now it may bring
repercussions - what we did is what matters. We had got to
absorb it at the moment.
Mr. Wriqht said he felt a tremendous responsibility to get
ourselves moving. Grasping of the responsibility and anyone who
acts in good faith would get as much support as possible.
          stated a man, whom he knows a s        and is a well
known attention seeker, to 1d |           how he f o u g h t ^ _ ^ ^ w a y
through the crowd, kicking and punching to get out, whilst he
was saving lives. However, a couple of days later.
said he was approached by a man who showed him a picture in
        saying he recognised the person _ _ _ _ _ in the picture
                           •J     **       . . .                    i■            •.   i   l *       .               ^4-                 m 3 + r n        h a
as one of his neighbours. He said he was not at the match he
was at home.
           said when conferring stories about the disaster with
another officer, this officer told of a traffic accident on
Herries Road, involving a police vehicle. The officer spoke of
consolinq a youth, the description of which fits the man,
               had told the officer how he had saved injured
people by dragging them from the G r o u n d . _ ^ ^ ^ a l s o said he had
witnessed the accident involving the police car, when all the
time he was talking to the officer and looking in the opposite
direction.
Mr Jacques told the Chief Constable his men were generally
concerned about the senior officers' response to this. He said
it was upsetting them as much as the stress. They were
genuinely concerned what happened and the truth of what
happened.
 The Chief said he could not get a straight story yet.
 Mr. Wright said we are preparing a defence and we had got to
 prepare a rock solid story. Centrally we are working
 tremendously hard on the history and saga of Hillsborough.
 Once we have the history we can then produce the facts.
              said he had worked all his service at FI and had
 attended every semi-final. He said this year he was in the
 tunnel and what sticks out in his mind is at 2.40 p.m. he
 suddenly thought where were all the Liverpool supporters.
                           L - l i u u y n C      V V
                                               HI I V I   V  A            ~ ■ ■                                        •           L           L   • 1

          said there was plenty of room. Uci
 -------- —   ----- **-1         . .
                                          He Csaid
                                         ..    ain  rhp hill
                                                    the build
                                                          _ _
                                                               up
                                                                .
                                                                          X..

                                                                         . i      n
                                                                                           ^/-N/-MT1

                                                                                            •    i       n   . « J    .    ^ J a       /n -P
 was at the turnstiles. At the Penistone Road side of the
 Ground, 1000 plus supporters got through every turnstile
                                                            12.

compared to 500 at the Leppings Lane end.               |said
some supporters were going there trying to buy their way in.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ said he had mentioned earlier in the meeting this
subject could be categorised into three headings. Two of them
being the emotional problems and the third being the media
criticism. He said in his men there was a feeling of a strong
sense of injustice at the comments made by the press and of the
critical lack of response. He commented because of this,
seventy odd journalists should be burned and would like to see
something come back from the Inquiry supporting us.
The Chief Constable was delighted the Inquiry had started and
believed we would be exonerated.
 _ _ _ _ _ _ Istated to avoid any further operational criticism,
the pro-formas which had been distributed throughout the Force
must be completed properly, with everyone's experience,
otherwise the Inquiry team would not get the proper facts.
          commented that although hearsay, he had received
disturbing information from an off duty sergeant, present at the
match as a spectator and who attended every away match for
Liverpool. This man was in tears but had managed to get the
story out of him, that there were a hard core of 2000
supporters who never have a ticket, who go down at the last
minute, smash their way through the turnstiles and blast through
to the terraces.
Mr. Wright said this information should be fed in that there was
a hard core of supporters who come every time. The question was
asked that if this was correct, why wasn't the information
passed to us. Why wasn't there a sift?
Mr. Wright commented that when looking at the video, it was very
difficult to see a policeman. He said there was immense
pressure on the turnstiles and the fear of being crushed and
lost in the crowd.
The Secretary told the Chief Constable about the Special
Constabulary officers who were on duty.             had already
done some counselling. He said our scheme tor stress
counselling did not cover them but he had nevertheless
authorised it because we could have hardly left them out. This
was agreed by the Chief Constable and meets with his approval,
Mr. Middup said incidents were reported to him by officers that
have caused a lot of interest within the press. He stated that
prior to the Chief Constable's arrival, colleagues present at
this meeting have confirmed what the Secretary has said when
interviewed.
It was noted that at Attercliffe it was thought the welfare
facilities were not sufficient. Mr. Middup said he had asked
for West Yorkshire to help.
                                                               13.

Mr. Middup said he wanted to thank the Chief Constable for his
support which was important because he could not function
without such support. He added that, perhaps, when the time
comes, when it was clear, the hit back should come from the
Chief Constable.
Mr. Wright said with regard to Mr. Marshall, he had got very
annoyed at Mr. Marshall being interviewed at home. He added
that if Mr. Marshall felt he had to say something, Mr. Marshall
should have come in and sat with him and it would not have
shown he was alone in his house. Mr. Marshall should  have come
to Headquarters and showing the strength of the Force
demonstrably by his side.
The Chief Constable said he was hoping there would be a series
of interim reports as he would hate to have to wait to the end
of the Inquiry.
Mr. Wright stated the Inquiry team could be directed but if we
sit back and let them collect the evidence, we would lose it.
We have to do it ourselves. He added that already writs were
being brought on us and the Football Association. The F.A. were
protecting their position. Mr. Wright stressed we were not to
be negative but we still had a Force to run.
Mr. Cooper stated that some officers had said they never wanted
to police a match again and wanted an assurance that they would
not be made to. The Chief Constable replied he would honour
this, if an officer did not want to.
           said with regard to football liaison we have to go
through Mercro. (Merseyside C.R.O.)
            stated that the public witnessed drunkeness in
Wads ley Lane at 12.30 p.m. and outside a public house supporters
were twelve deep. At. 2.30 p.m. he passed the same public house
again, the Liverpool supporters were still twelve deep and still
drinking.
The Chief Constable said to give this information to the
Incident Room to make sure it is logged.
The Chief Constable said he also wanted _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ statement
about the special train fed in, with the 100 supporters making
their own way up to Hillsborough and trying to find drink. It
was noted there were thousands of supporters outside the
Gateway supermarket drinking.
          said hundreds of supporters did not have tickets to
get into the match.
The Chief Constable replied if anybody should be blamed, it
should be the drunken ticketless individuals.
                                                                  14.

     Mr. Jacques said on the pro-formas circulated throughout the
     Force there were corroborated accounts of vile, repulsive
     behaviour from Liverpool fans - hundreds of them.
                asked about the special Police Committee Meeting on
     Friday.
     The Chief Constable replied he was hoping it would be alright
     as he had asked for it, so the information could be fed in and
     the Inquiry team could start thinking about it.
     The Chairman thanked the Chief Constable, once again, for coming
     along and said he had given us a positive way to deal with it.
     The Chairman emphasised we were with him all the way. The
     Chairman added that if the Chief Constable spoke to Mexborough -
     his next visit after this meeting - and other stations as he had
     done today at our meeting, we would not have any problems. It
     was agreed by everyone we had to get the message -
     togetherness - across to the Force.
     The Chief Constable then left the meeting.
5.   ANY OTHER BUSINESS
     There were no further items.
6.   DATE. TIME AND VENUE OF NEXT MEETING
     The next Joint Branch Board Meeting would be Wednesday, 7 June
     1989, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green, Sheffield,
     commencing at 10.0 a.m.
7.   CLOSURE
     There being no further business the meeting was concluded.




          P. Middup, Secretary.                   R. Lax, Chairman.
