                                                            :    Federation Office
     LICE FEDERATIO                                              Polic^Hatedquarters


    IITH YORKSHIRE POLIC                                          S te ffi**!   S3 8LY
    NT B R A NC H BOARD                                 r       sS^Stephone (0742) 768522
                                                                  Fax. No. 0742 729126



                                                                 YOU R REFERENCE




                                                                  OUR REFERENCE
      All Members of the South Yorkshire
      Police Joint Executive and Branch                13 November 1990.
      Board.
■




 ar Member,
    The fourth Executive Committee meeting of the Joint Branch Board
   held on Thursday, 1 November 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
igh Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10.0 a.m.
       The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
    formation and retention.
         ATTENDANCE
         P. Middup                                      R. Lax
                                                        M. Young


         MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
         Mr. Fidler proposed and Mr. Barnes seconded that the minutes of
         the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed.

         TREASURER'S REPORT
         The Secretary reported that he had spoken to the Treasurer and
         complied with our policy for £500 to be sent to the widow of
         the murdered policeman in the Metropolitan. Disappointingly,
         we had not received an acknowlegement.
         The Treasurer reported on the state of the accounts. He added
         he would be sending £20,000 to the Joint Central Committee as a
         donation from our funds in compliance with the J.B.B. decision.
         A Trustees meeting had been arranged for Friday, 2 November.

         MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
         A) Police Committee Report. A meeting of the Police Committee
            had been held on the 19 October 1990, of which
            gave a full report.
                                                                 2.

B) r.rpr.he Facilities. Mr. Middup said there was very little he
   could say on this because F          ^ as dealing with it in
   the committee of Equal Opportunities. She was the only one
   competent to report on it.
               enquired about the recent situation in
    Nottinghamshire in respect of the police officer who had
    accused the Force of being racist because he was unacceptable
    in the C.I.D. Mr. Middup replied this incident would
    exercise the minds of those at national level and he would
    try to glean details when he attended the J.C.C. meetings
    next week.
n   Rent. Allowance. The Secretary reported guide notes were
    being p r e p a r e d ^ lied the "Idiot's Guide” , giving details and
    examples of different variations of the anomalies. He said
    the principle was settled but the problems lay with the
    anomalies.
    Mr. Middup said that both            ^nd himself had heard
    Mr. Waddington state categorically in the House, which had
    also later been published in Hansard (page 121) that police
    officers would not be any worse off. Mr. Middup stated that
    if the compensatory grant was stopped then, obviously,
    officers would be.
    Mr. Middup said he would endeavour to get something sorted
    out for the next J.B.B. He added e v e r y o n e appeared to have
    different versions, including Mr. Lyn Williams and Miss
    Neild. Mr. Middup said he could not say for certain that his
    version was right.
D) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported that
   approximately 140 claims had originally been made and this
   figure had gradually decreased to around 80. He added this
   was down, in the main, to intimidation.
    Mr. Middup said he was annoyed with some of our members who
    had not replied to the solicitor's letters. He continued by
    savinq these people had no idea of how expensive legal fees
    were. He said it would be a different matter if they were
    paying the bill.
    Mr. Holroyd of Russell Jones and Walker had requested another
    meeting for all those officers likely to be called at the
    inquest, in order that he could advise them in advance. The
    Coroner was playing it close to his chest which officers he
    would be calling, which was baulking Mr. Holroyd.
     Mr. Middup said he had arranged a meeting at Mr. Holroyd1s
     request for 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 15 November. He said it
     we could not obtain the Lecture Theatre then another venue
     would have to be sought.
                                                                  3.

   The Secretary added if the solicitor wanted and thought this
   meeting to be necessary then it would be arranged.
   Mr. Middup said he was satisfied with the way Mr. Holroyd was
   handling the matter.
E) Ottawa Shift System (P.N.B. Working Party on R e g u l a t i o n s ^
   The Secretary reported he had nothing to say on this other
   than we were looking at now joining them in a joint Working
   Party. He added he would not know until next week at the
   J.C.C. meetings whether the Staff Side of the P.N.B. of
   Committee "C" would be accepting the invitation to go into
   the Working Party.
   The Official Side were wanting changes and the Secretary said
   we would get these changes whether we wanted them or not.
                 a member of the Police Committee, was attending
   the P.N.B. as he was also a member of the A.M.A. and they
   believe that these particular Regulations are costing too
   much money.
   The Chairman said in that case, assuming everything was the
   same, he wanted to put something in his speech at the Open
   Meeting about certain people wearing different hats anc
   selling us down the river - in other words telling L
            in no uncertain words what we thought of h i m . The
   Chairman said he would also like to confront
   before he attended the P.N.B. to inform him of our feelings,
   as              was affecting our conditions of service.

    A lenqthy discussion took place between the members as to
    whether confronting         x ^ l W O u 1d be  I m°a h*T'
    Mr. Middup said it would be futile because the A.M.A. had
    already decided. It was agreed to discuss the item at the
    J.B.B.
 F) Local Government & Housing Act^ This item had been taken to
    the J.N.C.C. It would be going to the Equal Opportunities
    Working Party and then to the Police Authority. The
    Secretary said we would have to wait until the next J.N. l .l .
    to obtain a full report.
 G) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations.. The
    Secretary reported it had been decided at the last J.B.B-
    meeting to collate examples and depending on the response,
    whether we would be able to pursue the matter. Mr. Middup
    said disappointingly, he still had not received many
    examples.
     Members were aware that the Chairman had made s t r o n g comments
     at the J.B.B. that examples would have to be obtained but the
     results were not coming in. Mr. Middup commented that this
     would look very amateurish when we saw the Chief Constable.
