POLICE FEDERA TION                                              Police Headquarters


SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                           szbly
JOINT   BRANCH       BOARD                              ^               (0742) 768522
                                                                            729126



                                                               YOUR REFERENCE




                                                               OUR REFERENCE


TO:   All Members of the South Yorkshire
      Police Joint Executive Committee and                  6 February 1990.
      Branch Board

Dear Member,
     The first Executive Committee meeting of the Joint Branch Board
was held on Thursday, 1 February 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
High Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
     The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
information and retention.
        ATTENDANCE
        Mr. P. Middup                                   Mr. R. Lax
                                                        Mr. M. Young


2.      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
        The minutes of the last Executive m ee t ing on the 26 O ctober
        1989, were proposed by                  and seconded by
        as a true record. This was agreed by the members
3.      TREASURER’S REPORT
        The Treasurer reported he was in possession of a draft of the
        accounts as all the books were now at the Auditors and he hoped
        they would be returned to him in a few days. The accounts would
        then be forwarded to Surbiton by next week.
 4.     MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
        A) Police Committee Report. The Chairman reported he had
           attended the Police Committee meeting on Friday, 5 January
           1990, at Barnsley and there was nothing of any significance.
           He added that, once again, Mr. Clive Betts was getting out of
           hand but the Chief dealt with him very well. The Chairman
           said he would be attending the Finance and General Purpose
           meeting shortly where budget cuts had been included on the
           agenda.
                                                            3   .
F)   Civilianisat ion. The Secretary said at the moment there was
     no movement. He added it had been included on the agenda
     because of talk of increasing it by employing more civilians.
     This had now been shelved because of the financial
     restraints. Members recommended to remove this item front the
     agenda but to bring it back if necessary.
G) Rent Allowance. Mr. Middup reported that the Home Secretary
   had very seriously interfered with the arbitration award on
   rent allowance.
     The Secretary informed members that Miss Vee Neild and
                 [had put points over to the Home Secretary arra^
     made it-clear the areas we were concerned about especially
     the interference.
     Mr. Middup said people in police houses would have to pay
     poll tax and water rates, so they were really very much
     worse off. It would be a decrease in their salary of about
     £1000 per year.
     Mr. Middup said we were waiting for a reply to those queries
     and expected it to be any time now so much so this particular
     meeting - the Executive - could have been postponed.
     Dependant on the outcome, the J.C.C. will decide what to do
     next. If the replies are not satisfactory to those queries,
     Michael Shersby, our Parliamentary Advisor would be asked for
     his assistance in obtaining support from the House, where all
     the story would be related on how shabbily we had been
     treated.
     Mr. Middup said an area that would be pursued was a Judicial
     Review although he did not think there was much chance there
     but we had got to be seen to be doing something. Mr. Middup
     stated we would conduct whatever campaign we can but the
     J.C.C. would decide this at a special emergency meeting.
     Mr. Middup emphasised the "red circled" allowance is on the
     individual not on the property.
     The Secretary reported we were waiting for the Home Secretary
     to respond on what was said.
     Mr. Middup said the review on pensions was still ongoing but
     as yet we had not received a reply and it was not known when
     the result would be known.
H) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary said the Report was out
   and he was quite pleased with it. He believed Lord Justice
   Taylor had tried to redress some of what was said in the
   Interim Report. Some of the paragraphs were very good.
   Mr. Middup said we had got to thank Mr. Dick Coyles and Tony
   Judge had assisted him.
                                                          4   .
   Mr. Middup said he would like to mention the great help we as
   a Board gave and Mr. Michael Shersby. Mr. Middup added he
   was disappointed when Eldon Griffiths retired, as he did not
   like change but Mr. Shersby had been excellent.
   The Secretary said the Report came out on Monday afternoon at
   3.30 p.m. On Tuesday afternoon a copy of the Report and the
   Home Secretary's speech to the House had arrived in the
   Federation Office. Also faxed through was what Mr. Shersby
   had said in the House. Mr. Middup said Mr. Shersby's service
   had been very good.
  The Secretary read part of the Report on crowd control and
  hooliganism to the members for their information. Justice
  Taylor paid tribute to the police for the service they gave
  Saturday after Saturday, saying the job they did was
  thankless and many sporting events would not take place
  without the police. The Report stated that extremely large
  crowds were at best difficult to control but fans who had
  consumed alcohol would be even more difficult to control as
  alcohol diminished any inhibitions. This was a big change
  from what was said in the past and the Secretary believed
  this was from our representations.
  The Secretary believed what we did by having the seminar had
  redressed the balance. He added it had all been planned here
  and we had done exceptionally well.
  Mr. Middup said he would contact Michael Shersby after this
  meeting today and ask him to make sure he mentioned the
  drinking of Liverpool supporters was contributable to the
  tragedy when the debate took place in the House.
   The Secretary asked for Michael Shersby to be invited to our
   Open Meeting. All members agreed.
I) Optimum Utilisation of Manpower. The Secretary recommended
   this item now be removed. It had been intended doing a
   comparison between Doncaster and Barnsley but there was now
   neither the manpower nor the money. All members agreed to
   the recommendation to remove the item from the agenda.
J) Constitution (Alan Eastwood). This item had been fully
   reported on and minuted on the last J.B.B. minutes, where the
   J.C.C. had tried to get new Regulations through bypassing
   Conference.
   Mr. Middup gave the latest update and reported he had written
   to Mr. Eastwood after the J.C.C. meetings, withdrawing his
   invitations to both the Open Meeting and the Dinner because
   he had renaged on his promise about the new Regulations, as
   instructed by the Executive at their pre-J.N.C.C. meeting on
   12 January 1990.
