:pf)
                                                               Federation Office
POLICE FEDERA TION                                             Police Headquarters
                                                               Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE.                                        Sheffield       S3 8LY
JOINT     BRANCH            BOARD                              Telephone (0742) 76 8522
                                                               Fax. No. 0742 729126



                                                               YOUR    RE FE REN CE




                                                               O UR   RE FER EN CE

                                        \
TO:     All Members of the Sou
        Police Joint Branch Board                       18 December 1989.

Dear Member,
     The fourth quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
Wednesday, 6 December 1989, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
 1.       ATTENDANCE
          P.   M id d u p                                R.   Lax
                                                         M.   Young
                                                         A.   Young
                                                         I.   Selwood
                                                         G.   Sykes
                                                         D.   Hickinson*
                                                         G.   Smalley*
                                                         J.   Wood



          * Denotes non-attendance.
           The Secretary said as far as the meetings were concerned
           next year, the agendas had got the wrong dates on. The
           2 and 3 of January had been typed in and it is actually
           the 3 and 4 of January. The first meetings are on
           Wednesday, 3 January, commencing with the A.G.M.
          The Chairman introduced the new Constables' representative for
           'E" Division,                   /vho had replacedL
                       upon his retirement.
 2.       MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                    commented on the last Executive minutes regarding the
          item on tape recording of interviews. The minute said that "F"
          Division would commence editing tapes next year. He said this
          was incorrect and wanted to alter the word "editing" to "using",
          This was noted by the members.
                                                         9.

  using this new system - 65/35, the Retail Price Index and the
  Building Society system. We would settle the Force new rent
  allowance on the new system - it will be updated using the
  new index and that will be the new allowance.
  Mr. Middup said our Force will come in for an update because
  we have not received one within the last 12 months. Those
  Forces that have not been updated within the last 12 months
  would be as outlined. The other Forces who have been updated
  within the last 12 months will not come in for an
  enhancement.
  Mr. Sykes enquired whether we would receive the compensatory
  grant for this year. Mr. Middup replied he did not know. He
  added there were many bits and pieces that have to be
  settled, e.g. 2 officers, man and woman who are married to
  each other, both receiving half of the rent allowance, the
  female goes on maternity leave - what happens then?
  Mr. Middup asked members not to forget what Douglas Hurd had
  said - we would not receive a compensatory grant and it would
  not be incorporated in pension, so forget the calculations.
  Mr. Middup said he did not know if the new Home Secretary -
  David Waddington - would follow Douglas Hurd's statement
  through.
  Mr. Middup said when he received anything more coherent he
  would put it out to the members.
J) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary said the only apsect of
   this item to report on was the press statements that were
   published and which was embargoed until 2.30 p.m. on 30
   November 1989. The Chief Constable had been advised by his
   solicitors to pay compensation to the families of the
   bereaved and injured people. Whilst paying the compensation
   out, South Yorkshire Police did not accept responsibility for
   the tragedy. However, from this advice, there had been
   controversy, insomuch, people had said how can we not accept
   responsibility for the individuals killed but paying
   compensation out at the same time. Mr. Middup explained that
   somehow, in law, this declaration did matter.
   Mr. Middup read a report which was extremely confidential,
   which had been distributed to all Chief Superintendents on
   the 30 November, to the members for their information.
   The Secretary stated he was called in to see the Chief
   Constable at 8.30 a.m., along with Superintendent Stuart that
   day - 30 November. He added that showed a recognition of our
   organisation and the trust that was placed on us.
   It was noted that a 12 minute video had been made of the
   Chief Constable with him explaining to the Force why he had
   done certain things.
                                                          10.

  Mr. Middup informed members we had only received just over
  50 civil claim forms from members involved at Hillsborough,
  who had made application, out of a possible 300. Mr. Middup
  said it appeared the solicitor's letter had upset many
  officers, as it stated we were suing the Chief Constable.
  The Secretary said he had approached the Chief Constable and
  he was not at all upset but was amused about the officers'
  concern because he knew it was not personal.
             [commented that some of the officers involved at
  Hillsborough were young men and were more concerned about
  their promotion prospects and did not want to be seen
  suffering from psychological problems which they thought
  would jeopardise their careers.
  A discussion ensued about why some officers, particularly
  those who were counselled, had not made a claim. ^
  said many of his officers at "E" Division thought it was a I I
  part and parcel of being a policeman. This was agreed by the
  members who also shared the same problem with their officers.
             |said on behalf of his officers at Doncaster, he
  would like to thank the Secretary for arranging the Seminar
  and organising it. He said it was very professional and very
  successful.
K) Sickness - Stress. At the last Executive meeting, members
   had noted that, in Dr. Lee's opinion, our men were not as fit
   as they ought to be and supervisory officers should
   encourage them to be fit. Dr. Lee had compared our members
   with the Fire Brigade, who he thought were much fitter.
   Mr. Middup said he did not think people should be subjected
   to it.
             |stated that in his Division, there was an
   extremely obese officer but was a good policeman - which was
   the main thing - but he had been seen by a Superintendent and
   told to lose weight by January, otherwise, he would be
   referred to the Staff Surgeon.
   The Force were trying to actively encourage officers to be
   fit which was being left to the discretion of the
   Superintendents.
             Isaid fitness was a personal thing, it could be
   encouraged but it was personal - supervisory officers could
   only point people in the right direction.
   After discussion it was decided not to support Dr. Lee's
   suggestion that supervisory officers should get further
   involved in instructing/persuading officers to take exercise
   and keep fit.
