                                                                  Federation Office
      LICE FEDERA TION                                             olice Headquarters
                                                                    a Hill
  UTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                              Afield      S3 8LY

 :m t     branch        board                                                 (0E42) 768522
                                                                                      29126



                                                        ^ ^ ^ V    o Or   reference




                                                                  OUR REFERENCE

 10: All Members of the South YorksP^r
         Police Joint Executive Committee and                     22 May 1990.
         Branch Board

^®ear Member ,
      The second quarterly meeting of the Joint Executive Committee was
 held on Thursday, 17 May 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
 High Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
          The Secretary reminded members of the presentation to
           and his wife, the arrangements made and the invitation for them
 -o     join us for lunch.
           ATTENDANCE
            P. Middup                                      R. Lax
                                                           M. Young

            The Chairman said he would like to welcome Mr. Taylor to his
            first Executive meeting.
            MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                       proposed and             ;econded that the minutes of
            the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed.
            TRFASURER1S REPORT
            The Treasurer reported that on previous occasions he had
            presented the members with a breakdown of the accounts. He said
            he would no longer be doing this because the accounts were now
            consolidated. The Treasurer said he intended to keep a small
            amount in the current account. He finalised by saying that the
            accounts were in a healthy state, even though we had a large
            amount of expenditure for Conference, this would have little
            effect on the funds.
  the fiqure would be 18.2%. Miss Neild had also faxed a
  letter through prior to this meeting from Mr. Roy Hattersley,
  who had written to the Home Secretary, dated 15 May. This
  letter was read to the members for their information.
  The Secretary informed members of a problem involving an
  officer P.C.
  officer, P C.        who
                       — had
                           ■ moved
                               - - - into his new. home
                                                    . on the
  31 March 1990, which should have entitled him to be
  "red circled", but there was no rateable value for the
  property. The Council had refused to give a rateable value
  due to the abolition of the rates. Mr. Middup said he had
  made various enquiries and found the Metropolitan had got
  round this by obtaining a similar property and using that
  rateable value for this purpose.
   Mr. Middup said an item had been published on Orders that
   officers would be receiving back pay of the increase (on the
   rental element only) from April in the July pay.
D) HilU h n r n u o h Disaster. The Secretary reminded members of the
   letter Peter Wright had forwarded to the President of
   A C.P.O. a copy of which had been sent to him (Mr. Middup)
   for his information. Mr. Middup said he had been extremely
   angry with the content of the letter because of the factual
   inaccuracies and the way the Chief had timed the letter
   would be received by the Secretary after the Chief had
   actually retired. Mr. Middup believed this "timing was no
   accident.
   The Secretary said he had taken the letter to Miss Neild and
   had discussed it with her and told her of his fears. The
   Secretary stated that from that discussion he was now in the
   midst of preparing a letter which was half-drafted.
   Mr. Middup said we had also introduced this matter as an item
   at the J.N.C.C., where Mr. Hayes refused to discuss it as he
   did not want the embarrassment. Mr. Hayes had wanted to see
   the Secretary in private.
   Mr. Middup said he did not believe it was an accident that he
   received the Chief Constable's letter on the Monday when the
   Chief had actually retired.
E) Ottawa Shift System. This had been discussed at length at
   previous meetings and fully minuted. The Secretary said
   there was nothing to report and was just a case of keeping it
   on the agenda if anything came up.
F) Security Headquarters. It had been decided by the J.B.B. at
   their last meeting to take this matter to A the J.N.C.C. for j-j 0
                        ..   ...   .i   ii   -i   W \ i          Mv»
   discussion, after the item had been raised by Mr.
   had been concerned that every time there was a bomb scare an
   officer was designated to be on the entrance gate to the
   underground garage to check people. This only lasted for
   about 48 hours before the officer was taken off again which
