                                                                        Federation Office
POLICE FEDERA TION                                                      Police Headquarters
                                                                        Snig Hill
SOOTH YORKSHIRE                                                         Sheffield   S3 8 L Y

JOINT     BRANCH          BOARl                                         Telephone (0742) 768522

                                                                 !\\    Fax. No. 0742 729126


                                                                a•      i
                                                                        YOUR REFERENCE




TO:                                          *
      All Members of the S ^ t l X ^ K s h i r e
      Police Joint E x e c u t i v e T o m m i t t e e and
                                                                        OU R REFERENCE


                                                                 3 February 1992.
      Branch Board

Dear Member,
     The first Executive Committee of the Joint Branch Board was held
on Wednesday, 29 January 1992, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
High Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
     The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
information and retention.

1.       ATTENDANCE
         P. Middup                                           J. Wood*
                                                             G. Sykes


*Denotes non-attendance,
Due to the absence of the Chairman, who^was away on^a course, the^
Deputy Chairman,           1 took the chair. He welcomed Mr. Sykes to
his first Executive committee meeting.
2.       MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                    proposed and            seconded that the minutes of
         the last meeting were a true record. This was agreed.

         TRFASURER'S REPORT
          There was no report as the Treasurer was off sick.
          MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

          A) Police Committee Report.             Ireported he attended the
              last two Police Committee meetings the most recent being on
              the 24 January, where there had been a financial discussion.
              He commented that it was usual for these meetings to commence
              at 11 a.m. but was surprised to learn that this meeting had
              started at 9.30 a.m.
 I- - - - - - - - - said we had received a 17% increase in our budget.
    There had also b e e n a presentation b)!
    The Chief H.M.I. had been present. This increase in
    budget had been accepted and would provide greater
    facilities.
d\    part-timers .lob Sharing and Returners.. The Secretary _
      'reported we'were now at arDitration ° ^ t h 1 s p articular is su .
      We already had the conciliation which was the first step just
      before Christmas and this had failed. Mr Middup said the
      problems still revolve around the hours of work,
      Darticularlv recalling and rostered working. He said that
      o n e aspect had been settled at .conciliation this was about
       job sharers rather than part-timers.
      The Secretary informed members the Federated ranks would
      receive one extra day annual leave as an interim award untnl
      things were sorted out. Mr. Middup said the Government
      legislators were now on their sixth draft of these
      Regulations - so far the drafts have been illegal.
n      HillsborouohDisasteii. The Secretary reported there was an
      impending meeting on Friday, 31 January. This j j ^ i n g wa
      for the lawyers to have another discussion about the
      o f f i c e r s 1 claims. There was no necessity for ^ to be
      present but as a matter of courtesy, we have been invited.
      Mr. Sykes said he would attend as a watching brief.
n) c p s. - Court. Attendan ces - Unnecessary Deviation^    The
   Secretary said he had nothing else.to report tronTtne last
   Executive meeting but f r o m discussions it shows that there
   was something very much amiss.
 c\    sal® of Pnlire Houses. It was noted that this subject was
 E)          ahead very w e ~ .We last heard that over thirty
       g o in g
       officers had made definite requests to buy the houses.
       P a rk e d   Meals. There was nothing to report other than
                        had got this matter in hand.
       Mr. Sykes said the sandwiches were now far superior, e.g.
       French bread sticks instead of ordinary bread.
       Members agreed to recommend the removal of this item at the
       next Joint Branch Board meeting.
    q) Dv»npncpH npw R e f l a t i o n s . The Secretary said he had nothing
     } pise to report.      He adlid it was all in the melting pot with
       negotiations still going on at national level. Hr. Middup
       ca-iH thp Official Side were desperate to obtain an agreement.
       Stan tte matter of part-timers Kad been settled this item
       could then be finalised as they were wanting to rope the
       whole subject together.
