                                                             Federation Office
 POLICE FEDERA Tito                                          Police Headquarters
                                                             Snig Hill
 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLIO                                       Sheffield S3 8LY
 DINT    BRANCH      BOARD                                   ITelephone (0742) 768522
                                      MF                      al. No. 0742 729126

                                                              iL
                                                             YOUR REFERENCE




                                                              OUR REFERENCE
'3: All Members of the South Yorkshire
    Police Joint Branch Board                           17 June 1991.


Dear Member,
     The second quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
iednesday, 12 June 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
     The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
information and retention.
        ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                      R.   Lax
                                                       M.   Young*
                                                       G.   Millett
                                                       R.   Hooley*
                                                       B.   Walker*
                                                       I.   Selwood*
                                                       G.   Sykes*
                                                       A.   Timms*
                                                       P.   McGinley*
                                                       J.   Wood


♦Denotes non-attendance.
2.      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                   proposed and               seconded that the minutes
        of the last meeting were a true record. This was agreed by the
        members.
3. (A) TREASURER'S REPORT
        The Treasurer reported that Conference cost approximately
        £6,700, which when taking into account the distance, etc., was
        quite good. He said all the main expense of the year had gone
        unless there was something unforeseen. The Treasurer then
        answered questions from members after which his report was
        unanimously accepted.
(B) TRUSTEES REPORT
              said there had not been a meeting but that one would
   be arranged in the near future
   MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
   A) Police Committee Report. The Chairman said he had had to
      return early from Conference due to other commitments, so he
      was able to attend the Police Committee meeting. He stated
      there was nothing at all of interest.
    B) Creche Facilities.             said there was nothing to
       report.
    C) Part-timers. Job Sharing and Returners.            1 said there
       was nothing to report.
    D) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported this item was
       particularly important due to recent events. He said all
       members had received copies of Bob Westerdale's report in
       "The Star" newspaper on Tuesday, 4 June, in an interview with
       the Chief Constable.
       Mr. Middup said he had first become aware of this article
       when he was travelling back from a meeting in London when
                      had contacted him to say the press were
       wanting to speak to him
       Mr. Middup said this interview with the Chief Constable was
       quite disgusting and that did not even begin to describe the
       wrong of this article.
       The Secretary said he had been informed this matter had
       arisen because of the Chief Constable inviting Bob Westerdale
       for an end of year chat and this, was one of the subjects
       discussed, which Westerdale had made a special article. The
       Chief Constable had said in the article that he hoped his
       officers who had made claims had not done so for the money -
       just to "cash in" on the disaster.
       Due to the Chief Constable's remarks, Mr. Middup had appeared
       on both T.V. channels and local radio deploring the Chief
       Constable's comments.
       Mr. Middup said we have since had two members of this Board
       and one other officer write to the Chief Constable expressing
       their disappointment with his comments.
       West Yorkshire have also asked the Secretary when he was
       present at one of their meetings recently to express their
       good wishes to the Board and distaste of what the Chief
       Constable has done.
                                                                             3.

 It was noted that one member's newsagent had 9^eetecl the
 member with, "I see your Chief Constable has stabbed you in
 the back."
 Mr. Middup said that Tony Judge would be printing an article
 in the July issue of "Police" magazine about this matter.
  It was noteu
  ix        noted tha^
                   uiai]       71i wife pf P.C. L       j        f
  se verely affected by Hillsborough, had w r it te n to the Chief
  Co ns ta ble saying that her husband became suicidal the week
  the Chief Con stable cam e out with his remarks.
  Mr. M i dd up said the Chief Con stable had upset a lot of
  people.
  The Secretary said on Friday, 7 J u n e , he went to see the
  Chief Constable and was with him for fifty minutes, <^ e r e
  they agreed to differ. The Secretary told the Chief in hTS
  view it was a subtle psychological attempt to get members
  withdraw their claims.
  The Secretary reported he had prepared a letter to the Chief
  Constable on behalf of the Joint Branch Board, expressing how
  we deplored his comments and this would be forwarded to him
  upon the Board's approval.
             said we cannot contest medical evidence that some
  officers were very severely affected and neither could Mr.
  Wells. He said the timing was atrocious.
  Mr. Middup said it had now been 11 weeks since we were
  expecting the decision of the P.C.A. on the discipline
  proceedings. We were told at Easter we could expect to
  the decision forty-eight hours after the Inquest. The
  Secretary said the Chief Constable should be making this
  known in public and be seen to be pressing for this and
  nothing else.
                    said we ought to support the S ec ret ar y' s letter,
   as w e owe it to our membership. He said in his opinion,
   f u r t he r action ought to be taken.
   All members endorsed the Secretary's actions and agreed to
   the letter being forwarded to the Chief Constable.
   Me m b e r s noted the Chief C on stable could not attend this
   m e e t i n g as he was awa y for the week.
   Mr. M idd up asked m e m b e r s to allow time for the Chief
   C o n s ta bl e to see the letter first before th ey p u b l i she d
   copies of it to their members - just as a m a t t e r of courtesy.

E) C.P.S. - Court A t t e n d a n c e s - U nn ec es sar y D e v i a t i ons^. The
   S e c r e t a r y re po rt ed w e wer e w a it in g for the result of the
   s u r ve y w h i c h w as being carried out within the Force.
