                                                              Federation Office
POLICE FEDERATION                                             Police Headquarters
                                                              Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL                                           Sheffield   S3 8LY

JOINT    BRANCH        BOARD                                     lefrone (0742) 768522
                                                                    o. 0742 729126


                                          Cvfft               YOU R REFERENCE




                                                              OU R REFERENCE

 TO:    All Members of the South Yorkshire
        Police Joint Executive Committee                  8 February 1991.
        and Branch Board.

 Dear Member,
      The first quarterly meeting of the Joint Executive Committee was
 held on Wednesday, 30 January 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
 High Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
 1.       ATTENDANCE
          P. Middup                                   R. Lax
                                                      M. Young


 2.       MTN1ITES OF THE LAST MEETING
                         proposed and            seconded that the minutes
          of the last meeting were a true record. This was agreed by the
          members.
          TRFASDRER'S REPORT
          The Treasurer reported the Balance Sheet and accounts had come
          through the post only the day before and he would give the
          auditors the go ahead for them to be typed out. The Treasurer
          also added that he was waiting for the remainder of the papers
          which would be signed by the Chairman of the J.B.B. and himself
          and then forwarded to Surbiton.
          MATTFRS   ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

           A) Police Committee Report.                  reported that he had
              attended the meeting on Friday, 18 January. All the Chief
              Superintendents were present, Members discussed the
              breakdown of crime figures. [                said the only
              problem was from a Doncaster man when  he asked  for the crime
              figures for Doncaster for stolen vehicles.   (Apparently,   his
              son had had a vehicle stolen). This   person had  wanted to
              know how many were stolen and asked what the recovery rate
                                                                                              2.

      was   It was noted that the Chief Constable had handled the
      situation excellently on what had been a most unfair
      question.
             -                        Thp Sprretarv said there was
B)    nothing happening as far as ne was awai c.• haT
                                                    ■d>■h«
                                                        *. . ■ r..
                                    ««1<I need one million pounds to
      launch.      Obviously, this was not feasible.
      The Secretary said he would, however, rep°r-t on par-t-'tinier5
      It this particular juncture. Members noted that Item C on
      the next Joint agenda would deal with job sharing a
      part-timers.
      The Secretary reported a full meeting of the P.N.B. was going
      S b e h e l d S a t Bay. Usually the P.N.B. meets in Separate
      Committees but it is to be a full «eting. ^ jj*’? *'"**d
      nationally the J.C.C. had been looking at j o b : s h a n n g a n d
      nart-timers, etc. A circular had been sent to all members ot
      the Staff Side of the P.N.B. for a special meeting.
      Assurances were given that the draft regulations would not
      form part of this discussion paper and certain y would not be
      tabled at the meeting on the 30_^an“® ^ ’offile Se?e
      have reneged on that promise. The Home Office were
      determined to get this up and running by April. There was a
       lengthy discussion on the matter of par -timers covering the
      whole spectrum and the problems surrounding it. The
       Secretary said that he would keep members updated on the
       situation.
 r\    Bent Allowance.            The Secretary recommended this item be
       " ^ ^ i j t t t           shortly 2 M     d S          fd be
       distributed to the J.B.B. members. Members recommended
       removing this item from the agenda.
 m Hillsborouah Disaster. The Secretary reported that
  V       |had done a co~HIiderable amount on this for us and
    recently had been attending the inquest.
                       Continued
                        continued uy        by, s>yj
                                                  scry m"9 y he had attended the inquest      -           on
       numerous occasions and had been most ^ P ^ ^ s e d with our
       barrister. He added the inquest appeared to be going in our
       favour with officers being allowed to introduce all t
       evidence! I                         ] sai3 there had been aj o t e n la p r o » em
       with8one*officer who was mentally unstable with the Coroner
       reauestinq evidence from him. However, our barrister,
                     Sad
                     rldU Iintervened
                             M L c r v c l i c u saying
                                                  o a j r m y this
                                                              «*»    o ficer was
                                                                               ,,   no -n a c fit
                                                                                    A«P«Pirov>’
       state
       S t a X e to Mgive
                       lV “  “evidence
                               V lU C IIvv      and
                                                U IIU U  a ^statement
                                                         wm     wv>»v ■ - from the office—
                                                                                      |------------------
       ° u          3    . . .      . _____ i _____kw                      Pnrnnpr.
       doctor     was   obtained          and accepted by the Coroner.                I
       said he had been extremely impressed by the barrister s
       actions
                                                          3.

   Mr. Middup said everything he said in the press and on T.V.
   at the time of the disaster had now been vindicated.
E) Local Government & Housing Act. The Secretary stated he had
   nothing further to report. He reminded members we had been
   strong again at the J.N.C.C. for it to actually be pursued
   through the Police Authority recommending that the policy be
   changed. All members agreed to remove this item from the
   agenda.
F) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations. The
   Secretary said there was no further update from the J.N.C.C.
   but we were aware that the Chief Constable was trying to
   resolve the matter.
G) Sale of Police Houses. Mr. Middup said he had checked prior
   to this meeting and we were still waiting for a reply from
   Doncaster about the houses they have and when we receive
   this information an approach will be made to the Police
   Authority to obtain their approval for what we are looking
   for. Members were reminded we were seeking the right to buy
   and at the same time trying to make the Police Authority see
   they would save money by allowing these houses to be
   purchased.
H) Prescribing Drugs to Prisoners (Mr. Sykes). The Secretary
   reported he had written to Dr. Leigh inviting him and Dr.
   Everson to our next Branch Board meeting but as yet no reply
   had been received.
I) Radio Batteries. The Secretary reported that this matter had
   been dealt with and recommended the item now be removed from
   the agenda. Members agreed to this.
J) Diaries. The Secretary said he had nothing to say on this
   subject other than he was personally disappointed with the
   sales. Mr. Middup said it had been decided to order 1000
   less diaries this year and nobody had any more diaries to
   sell than last year. Mr. Middup then said that after
   Christmas and the New Year, diaries were being returned to
   the Federation Office in their hundreds. "E" Division
   returned nearly 400 diaries. The Secretary said in his
   opinion, he did not think representatives were trying to sell
   them. He added he was extremely disappointed with the level
   of sales and felt that more could have been done within the
   Divisions to sell them. He recommended the item now be
   removed from the agenda which was agreed by the members.
K) Shift Patterns. The Secretary reported that members were
   aware this item had been taken to the J.N.C.C. The Chief
   Constable had been disappointed because he had been mislead
   by the Chief Superintendent's Conference. The Chief was also
   disappointed that the Federation would not agree to changing
   the shift patterns and were adhering to our views that we did
   not agree. The matter has now been put on hold until the
