                                                                             deration Office
             'OLICE FEDERA TION                                            Police^^flquarters

            tiU T H YORKSHIRE POLIC
            JOINT     BRANCH      BOARD                                          ne (0742) 768522
                                                                    v.   ,'^ax. No. 0742 729126



                                                                          YOUR REFERENCE




                                                                          OUR REFERENCE
                 All Members of the South Yorkshire
                Police Joint Executive Committee and                17 August 1990.
                Branch Board

        Dear Member,


      iUigh Green, S h e f f i e l d , commencing at 10 a.m.
               The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
      ^ f o r m a t i o n and retention.

  if.          ATTENDANCE
:-5            All members were present.
V;-
       2.      mtmhtfS   OF   thf last   MEETING
                                                        iseconded that the minutes
                               proposed and^    rftKordJ This was agreed by the
                of the last meeting were a true re
                members.
                TPFflciiRFR'S REPORT


                    accounts were in a very healthy state.

        4.          HATTEBS-ffiiaffi FBnM THE M1Nlg£S-                         the next



                        imWA \«k                   WJ t\\«
                     B) Creche Facilities               The Secretary said it was
                        difficult to report other than what has already been said.
                        He added the matter was mainly with the Home Office and the
                        P.A.B. and was going to be a big project as the issue was
                        more than creche facilities. Mr. Middup said the original
                        paper           prepared included job sharing, returners and
                        creche facilities and this project is to encompass all that.
                                                            2.

  Mr. Young said that new police buildings should bear creche
  facilities in mind when being built. He added the new
  Ecclesfield police station should have made these facilities
  available and Attercliffe was still in the process of being
  erected. He said that a room should be made available.
  The Secretary replied that our policy was to wait and see
  what the P.A.B. say on it. We had to see what call there
  would be for these facilities and in any case the facilities
  would have to be funded by the members.
C) Rent Allowance. The Secretary reported the only thing to say
   about this now was there were a number of anomalies. He said
   he had written to Miss Neild with three anomalies for clarity
   and she had had to take them to the P.N.B.
   Mr. Middup stated that one o f m e m b e r s , a ^        >
   policewoman, had a query insomucn inai sue had been obtaining
   the maximum allowance and since the 1 April, her husband had
   joined the Force. She was wanting to know what she was
   entitled to now her husband was a police officer.
   Mr. Middup stated that our Judicial Reviews are due in either
   September or October but our solicitors do not believe we
   will be successful.
              gave a report on the debate in the House of
   Commons, which took place on Monday, 25 June.
D) Hillsborough Disaster.  The Secretary reported there were 143
   claims still running. He was pleased with the w a y Russell
   Jones and Walker were dealing with this. Mr. Simon Allen had
   been excellent.
   Mr. Middup commented that the Court case which took place on
   Tuesday, 31 July, did not affect us. It mainly concerned
   relatives who had watched the disaster on television.
   Suspensions of officers were discussed at the last J.B.B.
   meeting and it was decided that we could ask the Chief
   Constable at the next J.B.B. meeting what his policy will be
   regarding suspended officers attending police clubs.
              stated that the Inquiry with West Midlands had
   now finished.
E) Ottawa Shift System (P.N.B. Working Party on R egulations),..
   The Secretary said this subject was going pretty strong
   throughout the country. He asked members to bring the paper
   prepared by Mrs. Wood to the next J.B.B. meeting and added
   this paper was very good.
    Mr. Middup said the P.N.B. had set up a Working Party which
    will also include the job sharing aspect.
