                                                           Federation Office
POLICE FEDERATION                                          Police Headquarters
                                                           Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                   L Sheffield S3 8LY
JOINT   BRANCH       BOARD                                  ^Telephone (0742) 768522
                                                              Fax. No.
                                                                X. N O . 00742
                                                                           7 4 2 729126




                                                              A
                                                              Y .O U If tto W E N C E
                                                            £ i>

                                                              OUR REFERENCE
TO:   All Members of the South Y
      Police Joint Branch Board                             19 July 1991.

 Dear Member,
      A special meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on Wednesday,
 17 July 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green, Sheffield,
 commencing at 10 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
 1.     ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                      R.    Lax*
                                                       M.    Young
                                                       G.    Millett
                                                       R.    Hooley
                                                       B.    Walker
                                                       I.    Selwood*
                                                       G.    Sykes*
                                                       A.    Timms*
                                                       P.    McGinley*
                                                       J.    Wood

 *Denotes non-attendance.
 In the absence of the Chairman the Chair was taken by the Vice
 Chairman,
 2.     PROMOTION BOARDS
        The Secretary asked members to discuss the subject of Promotion
        Boards at their separate rank meetings immediately following
        this meeting. We have been asked by Staff Services for our
        views on the whole subject of Promotion Boards including who
        should sit on the Boards, how many Boards should be held, etc.
        The Secretary asked for any views to be forwarded to him as soon
        as possible and he would collate them and submit them.
FOOD SAFETY ACT 1990
The Secretary explained that this piece of legislation became
law on 1 July 1991 and affected everyone involved in serving
food to other people. It is now a criminal offence to serve
food which has something wrong with it. The Secretary had
attended a meeting of J.B.B. Secretaries at Surbiton the
previous day and had been briefed by the Federation lawyers.
The Act is wide ranging and would include our members serving
food to prisoners. Even if the officer only collects the food
from a canteen and delivers it to the prisoners - if there is
something wrong with the food the officer commits a criminal ^
offence. Mr. Middup said this is an extremely serious situation
and he has arranged for it to be discussed at the J.N.C.C.
meeting on the 23 July 1991. The General Secretary of the
Police Federation and the lawyers would be preparing a J.B.B.
Circular on the subject in the near future. A discussion took
place where members expressed their deep concern and hoped that
the J.N.C.C. could find a way of protecting our officers.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
The Secretary reported that on Wednesday, 10 July 1991, he had
had a discussion with Mr. Michael Shersby, M.P., during his_
update to the Joint Central Committee and again afterwards in
private about the inordinate length of time that our members had
been waiting to learn whether or not they are to face discipline
charges - 15 weeks since the Inquest verdict. Mr. Shersby
agreed to put a written question down in Parliament that day to
the Home Secretary asking why the delay. The question was put
that day and the following day the force was told the decision
of the P.C.A. and an announcement was made publicly the
following day - Friday, 12 July 1991!! All our members were
told that there would be no action taken against them. Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray are to face
discipline charges but at least - because of our action - the
P.C.A. were forced to bring the long, unnecessary and cruel
uncertainty to an end.
P.C.
The Secretary reported that, at his request, Mr. Michael Shersby
had also asked a Parliamentary question on the subject of car
chases. This had been brought to a head in our force because of
the serious criminal charges currently hanging over P.C. _
Wheeler. The question will be answered by the Minister in due
course.
 B.U.P.A. - COMPLAINT FROM CONSULTANT
 The Secretary reported that he had received a letter of
 complaint from Mr. D. C. Cumberland, Consultant Cardiovascular
 Radiologist at the Northern General Hopsital, Sheffield. Mr.
 Cumberland had also written to the Chief Constable and to
 B.U.P.A. The complaint is about the wording used in a note by
