©
POLICE FEDERATION
                                                           Federation Office
                                                           Police Headquarters
                                                           Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                            Sheffield   S3 8LY

JOINT    BRANCH        BOARD                               Telephone (0742) 768522
                                                           Fax, No. 0742 729126


                               Mp
                               wVs                         YOU R REFERENCE




                                                            O UR REFEREUCE

  TO:   ATT Members of the South Yorkshire
        Police Joint Executive Committee and                 31 May 1991.
        Branch Board

  Dear Member,
       The second quarterly meeting of the Joint Executive Committee was
  held on Thursday, 16 May 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
  High Green, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
       The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
  information and retention.

  1.      ATTENDANCE
          P. Middup                                        R. Lax
                                                           M. Young


  2.      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                     proposed and            seconded that the minutes of
          the last meeting were a true record. This was agreed by the
          members.

  3.      TREASURER'S REPORT
          The Treasurer gave a report on the state of the accounts. He
          said there was one point he wanted to mention and that was he
          had had correspondence from           Jthe national Auditors
          stating that when we came to the end of the period we were owing
          money to the various Separate Central Committees - this had now
          been paid but £29 had been overpaid to the Inspectors' Central
          Committee. The Treasurer said this amount was hardly worth the
          postage requesting the refund so asked members if they would
          give their endorsement to making this amount a gift to the
          Inspectors' Central Committee. All members agreed to this but
          asked that the Joint Branch Board endorse their action.

          MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
          A) Police Committee Report.      ^      stated he had attended
             the meeting and there was nothing of any significance to
             report.
                                                          2.

B) Creche Facilities.   There was nothing to report.
C) Part-timers. Job Sharing and Returners^. The Secretary
   reported there was no update. He reminded members the matter
   was now at national level and negotiations were being carried
   out but there had been a delay. Mr. Middup said we
   understood that the proposed regulations had fallen short of
   the full legal requirements and had to be returned for
   redrafting.
D) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported that claims
   have been submitted tor fifty-one officers but we did not
   know what the present situation was. He added that he was
   annoyed and disappointed that some of our people wer e not
   replying to correspondence sent out to them by the
   solicitors.
   A lenqthy discussion took place on the expenditure of legal
   proceedings and the potential and adequate increases in
   subscriptions to cover these expenses. Mr. Middup said from
   the J.B.B. Secretaries meeting, recently, a plea had been
   made to all Joint Branch Boards asking for any excess monies
   to be sent to Surbiton.
E) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations., Nothing
   to report.
F) Sale of Police Houses. The Secretary said we had no further
   report. He reminded members we were seeking the right to buy
   and at the same time trying to make the Police Authority see
   they would save money by allowing these houses to be
   purchased. This policy had been agreed at the J.N.C.C. but we
   were still waiting for a reply. A chaser had been sent to
   Doncaster Borough Council. The Secretary said if we still
   did not receive anything then we would by-pass Doncaster and
   go forward without it.
 G) Prescribinn Drugs to Prisoners (Mr. Svkes). It was agreed to
    wait for removal of this item until a document had been
    agreed at the J.N.C.C.
 H) S pecial Constabulary. The Secretary reported he had
    distributed a further paper on this subject to the m embers
    for their information. This was b e c a u s e ^     [had
    requested more detail as to what the headings entailed on the
    original paper from the Policy Review minutes. Mr. Middup
    said he had contacted the Chief Constable's Staff Officer
    about this and the Staff Officer had forwarded a report
    qiving more detail for some of the headings listed on the
    Policy Review minutes. This had been provided but some
    headings that had been listed on the paper were missing and
    these were the most important issues. The Secretary had
    complained and had then been provided with the full document.
    The members went through the list of recommendations
     contained in the paper as to whether they agreed or disagreed
