        'OLICE FEDERA TION                                          B
                                                                         Federation Office
                                                                         Police Headquarters
                                                                         Snig Hill
    :OUTH YORKSHIRE POL                                                  Sheffield    S3 8L Y
tp iN T       BRANCH      BOARD                                         ■ftleijhone (0742) 768522
                                                                                   0742 729126

                                                                        1« 1 % .
w                                                               *        YOUR   REFERENCE




                                                                         O U R REFERENCE
    IC:     All Members of the South Yorkshire
            Police Joint Branch Board                        17 September 1991,

          r Member,
        The third quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
  Ifednesday, 11 September 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
; ligh Green, Sheffield, commencing at 9 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
jBtforruation and retention.
            The Chairman reminded members that Chief Inspector Sue Woolfenden
           jbeen invited to this meeting to give a talk on Force sickness,
        lief Inspector Woolfenden had attended Police Headquarters in June to
         m a talk on this subject but unfortunately, we were unable to attend
           to one of our statutory J.B.B. meetings.
              Ivere also attending for a presentation and lunch,
                            said he was extremely disappointed with the poor
           noance o t representatives for this meeting, especially the C.I.D.
            sentatives and he wanted his comments reflected in the minutes,
         is was seconded by               |nd agreed by the members present.
             ATTENDANCE
             P. Middup                                     R.       Lax
                                                           M.       Young*
                                                           6.       Millett
                                                           R.       Hooley
                                                           B.       Walker
                                                           I.       Selwood*
                                                           G.       Sykes*
                                                           A.       Timms*
                                                           P.       McGinley
                                                           J.       Wood*

    A   vacancy existed for "C" Division Sergeants.
    ♦Denotes non-attendance.
   MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
              proposed and               seconded that the minutes
   of the last'meeting were a true record This was agreed by the
   members.
(A) TREASURER'S REPORT
   The Treasurer gave a full report of the state of the accounts.

(B) TRUSTEES REPORT.
               reported there had been a meeting and everything was
    in order.
    MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
    A) Pniirp Committee Report, The Chairman reported he was- unable
       to attend the last Police Committee meeting but believed
       there was nothing of any consequence to us.
    B) Creche Facilities IRL,            was not present to give
       any update.
                      ;ommented that he knew someone involved with
       one of the large banks and it was so expensive that he could
       never see it being implemented in this Force. Members agreed
       to remove this item from the agenda.

    C) Pav't-'H m p r s . .lob Sharing and Returners, The Secretary
       reported there had been a meeting on the 9 September and the
       third draft of the new Regulations had been prepared.
       Apparently, we had got an agreement on everything except for
       non-working days. This may mean going to arbitration thus
       delaying implementation even further.
    D) m i u h n r n u n h Disaster. The Secretary reported there was no
       further update. The solicitors were still going forward to
       Court with over 40 officers. The Secretary said we would be
       lookinq at some very large claims with some officers who had
       been medically retired - we were looking at recovering a
       quarter of a million pounds at least.
          The Secretary said in last month’s "Police" magazine, on page
          9, there was an article headed, "A Chief talks of
          Conscience." All members recalled how the Chief Constable
          had been quoted in "The Star" about his well paid officers.
     £) c.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations.    The
          Secretary said there was nothing to report until a further
          report was given to the J.N.C.C.
     P)   sale nf Police Houses. Members recalled how the Policy
          Review Committee had reneged on their decision and because of
          Mr. Middup's strong representation this Committee decided to
