                                                              Federation Office
POLICE FEDERATION                                             Police Headquarters
                                                              Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL                                            heffield S3 8LY
JOINT    BRANCH      BOARD                                         phone (0742) 768522
                                                                     o. 0742 729126



                                                              YOU R REFERENCE




                                                              OU R REFERENCE
TO:   All Members of the South
      Police Joint Branch Board                       14 February 1990.

Dear Member,
     A Special Pre-Conference Meeting of the Joint Branch Board was
arranged for Wednesday, 7 February 1990, to discuss and make final
arrangements in respect of the Annual Conference.
     The meeting was held at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
     The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
information and retention.
1.      ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                R.   Lax
                                                 M.   Young
                                                 R.   Hooley
                                                 G.   Mi 1 lett
                                                 J.   Bui 1iman*
                                                 I.   Selwood
                                                 G.   Sykes
                                                 P.   McGinley*
                                                 D.   Hickinson
                                                 J.   Wood

        *Denotes non-attendance.
        The Secretary said the meeting had been delayed because of a
        long telephone call he had had with Mr. John Webber of Russell
        Jones and Walker of London. He said he was hoping that he had
        persuaded Mr. Webber to attend this meeting to come and speak to
        us over an extremely serious matter which had deeply upset him.
        Mr. Middup had tried telephoning Mr. Webber prior to the
        commencement of this meeting and had been informed he was at the
        Leeds Office that day to interview clients. If Mr. Webber did
        attend our meeting this would mean that all these clients would
        have to be turned away and he had specially travelled to Leeds
        to see them. Mr. Middup told Mr. Webber that he considered this
        to be the most important issue in all the time he had been
        Secretary.
                                                          2.

Mr. Middup explained reminding members that after the
Hillsborough disaster, the solicitors urged him to contact the
officers involved in the tragedy to make civil claims against
the Health and Safety Executive and or the football club.
Mr. Middup said he had a problem with knowing who these
particular individuals were because the known officers were the
ones who had been counselled by I               the Welfare
Officer and because of confidentiality she was determined not to
inform the Secretary who these people were. It was suggested
because of this that the Secretary should prepare a letter to
every individual, 200 in all who had been counselled, explaining
why they should be making a claim. This letter, together with
civil claim forms would be sent to the 200 officers by the
Welfare Office.
However, it was realised that there were many other officers who
had not sought counselling and who were just as entitled to make
a claim. Therefore the assistance of the representatives was
requested in finding out who these individuals were at their
Divisions and urging them to make claims.
However, as time passed, arrangements were made for these
officers who had made claims to be interviewed by our solicitor,
Mr. Simon Allen of Leeds. The wording in the solicitor's letter
to the officers changed over the coming weeks from suing the
Health and Safety Executive and or the football club to suing
the Chief Constable. This had caused some officers upset and
then there was great reluctance in submitting claims.
Mr. Middup tried to explain that the Chief Constable was only
the figurehead and that we sued him regularly over various
issues, e.g. road traffic offences, etc..and that we were not
suing Mr. Wright personally. This satisfied some officers but
officers were still not keen on making a claim so nothing could
be done to persuade them otherwise, the decision was up to the
individual. We had carried out our responsibility in informing
them they were entitled to make claims.
Mr. Middup said the matter came to a head when the Chief
Constable announced his retirement on Monday, 5 February. It
was obvious that in some quarters, such as Liverpool, they were
convinced that the Chief had resigned because of the Final
Report of Lord Justice Taylor and not retired.
Mr. Middup said he had been inundated by the media and he had
explained that the Chief was retiring not resigning, something
the Chief had intended to do at the age of 60 anyway, which had
been last year but because of the Hillsborough disaster, was
unable to do so.
            [had contacted the Secretary saying that Chief
jupci iMicnJent John Nesbit at "F" Division was issuing veiled
threats to officers having made claims or thinking of doing so,
trying to persuade them any way he could not to make claims.
                                                                                                      3.

                had even feared his own job. Officers were believing
     that writs had been served on the Chief Constable and that was
     his reason for leaving.
     Mr. Middup said that since having this conversation w i t h ^ ^
             he had been livid with one Detective Sergeant w h o h a d
     telephoned him and did nothing but verbally abuse him.
     Detective Serqeant                           sai d t h a t the S e c r e t a r y s h o u l d be
     f            sacked and all the people who had made claims should be
     f            sacked also. It was believed that John Nesbit had
     i n s t i g a t e d this, p r e s s u r i s i n g p e o p l e that, in his o p i n i o n ,
     m e m b e r s s h o u l d no t m a k e c l a i m s a g a i n s t the C h i e f C o n s t a b l e . Mr.
     N e s b i t had t r i e d to i n f l u e n c e p e o p l e not to m a k e c l a i m s a n d the
     S e c r e t a r y s t a t e d it w a s e x t r e m e l y i m p o r t a n t our l a w y e r s a t t e n d e d
     t h i s m e e t i n g to e x p l a i n the p o s i t i o n to the m e m b ers .

     Mr Middup said he had persuaded Mr. John Webber, Head of the
     solicitors of Russell Jones and Walker, together with Mr. Simon
     Allen who dealt with all our claims in South Yorkshire to
     attend. These lawyers had abandoned their days work to be
     present with us. Mr. Middup said this was very important and he
     had wanted it sorting out today.
     Mr. Middup said it was totally unfair that some members had
     blamed him this way when he had been following the advise from
     the solicitors and taken the action that he did. John Webber
     had said that if the Secretary had not taken the action he had
     advised the Secretary to take by urging members to make claims,
     then he could have been prosecuted for neglecting his duty. Mr.
     Webber would be telling everyone here today of that fact.
     The meeting continued by discussing the Pre-Conference
     arrangements as per the agenda.
2.   ACCOMMODATION
     The Secretary reported he had reserved accommodation at the
     Riviera Hotel, Scarborough, arriving Monday, 21 May for dinner
     and leaving after lunch on Friday, 25 May 1990. Mr. Middup said
     the rooming arrangements would be sorted out nearer the time.

3.   TRAVEL ARRANGEMENTS
      The Secretary reported that, once again, he had been successful
      in obtaining authority for casual user allowance for delegates
      carrying passengers in their own vehicles. Mr. Middup said the
      driver must be a delegate.
4.   VOTING ARRANGEMENTS
      Mr. Midddup said it had always been the policy for this Board
      that we go on a free vote and listen to the debates. All
      members agreed to continue with this policy.
                                                       6.

the Chief.   All members were in favour.
Mr. Middup said consideration would have to be given to the
amount we were going to spend.    Mr. Middup said we were
looking in the region of £150.    Mr. Young proposed
approximately £150. The Secretary said we were talking about
£150 to about £200. The Chairman suggested that the amount
should be left open at between £150 - £200 maximum. This was
agreed by the members.
Mr. Middup said he would like to leave the agenda for the
time being and go right back to the beginning of the
Hillsborough problem.
After the aftermath of Hillsborough, Mr. Middup was
approached by Mr. Mike Marshall from the Leeds Office of
Russell Jones and Walker. He dealt with the Bradford fire
disaster and he asked the Secretary what we were doing about
claims for members involved at Hillsborough. The Secretary
said both he and the Chairman were considering it. The
Secretary said he had talked to Mr. John Webber about claims
and Mr. Webber said now was the time to be doing something
about it.
Mr. Middup said he had difficulties because of the
confidentiality with the Welfare Officer. She had been
involved with those who had been in the real depth of it.
The Secretary said he could not get to these people because
he did not know who they were. The Chief Constable had
refused to put an item on Orders to this effect because of
the sensitivity of upsetting Liverpool people. Mr. Middup
said he then thought about publishing an item on our
Publications newsheet but then had second thoughts because
there was the possibility of this being leaked by the "mole"
to the press. It was agreed between Mr. Middup and the
Chief Constable that the Secretary should prepare a letter to
these individuals who had been counselled together with civil
claim forms and for the Welfare Officer to send these out in
order she could retain her confidentiality. This was done.
There were 200 in all.
Mr. Webber had stated we would be suing the Health and Safety
Executive and/or the football club. Mr. Middup said he had
made this fact very clear in his letter to the 200 officers
counselled. The completed forms were then sent to the
solicitors and then, like any other claim, it was a
solicitor/client relationship. The Secretary said the Chief
Constable was only a figurehead we were not suing him
personally and we were submitting civil claims everyday of
the week. The Chief Constable had accepted this and that was
the position.
                                                       7.

Mr. Middup said that Mr. Webber had been with the Chief
Constable at a Christmas lunch and Mr. Webber had informed
the Chief that writs would be starting to come soon and the
Chief said he had expected it.
The Secretary said the problem of informing members who were
involved at Hillsborough and who were not counselled
remained. Therefore, during discussions at one of our J.B.B.
meetings, it was decided that the representatives should go
out and encourage these people who suffered to make claims.
On the day the Chief Constable announced his retirement, the
Secretary was summoned to his office. Mr. Middup said he
thought it was about his retirement but instead the Chief had
set into the Secretary about these claims made against him
and that he did mind. The Chief denied that he knew anything
about these claims. However, the Secretary eventually made
the Chief admit that he was aware of the claims.
Mr. Middup wanted the Force lawyers and our lawyers to meet
but the Chief and his senior officers were not sure whether
or not they wanted to have been seen to have had discussions
in any way. The Chief Constable had telephoned the Secretary
of the J.C.C. Miss Neild and discussed the issue of officers
making civil claims against him and the Force. Miss Vee
Neild said that she would have talks with John Webber about
the matter and she would ring the Chief back with the
replies. The Chief Constable did not want to be telephoned
and asked her to ring the Deputy Chief Constable.
Mr. Middup said that he had been informed that Mr. Nesbit
had had every officer at his Division who was making a claim
in his office to tell them they should not be making any
claims and putting immense pressure on members. So much so,
that one member jumped into his car to make his way to Leeds
to withdraw his statement. Then upon hearing the truth of it
at the solicitors, changed his mind. Mr. Middup said because
of this pressure being put on members he immediately saw the
Deputy Chief Constable who luckily was with the Chief
Constable and requested the Chief to ask Mr. Nesbit to stop.
The Chief asked Mr. Hayes to telephone Mr. Nesbit and
hopefully, Mr. Nesbit would be kept in check now. It was
noted that Detective Sergeant         who had verbally abused
the Secretary had said that there was rumour that the Chief
Constable had resigned over these writs.
Mr. Middup said he had asked Mr. Hayes to attend this
particular meeting to put the record straight but he refused
because he thought what he had to say could be interpreted
wrongly. Mr. Middup said the senior officers wanted our
support in this but in a subservient kind of way - they were
going over our heads to Surbiton. Mr. Middup commented that
Mr. Webber did not think much about what the Chief Constable
was doing.
            said he canvassed at his Division for members to
submit claims and he had been told recently to watch his back
as Mr. Nesbit was after him.              said he had since__
spoken to Mr. Nesbit and he could not have been nicer but
        said he had then heard that he has been called from a
pig to a dog. The majority of the criticisms came from the
C.I.D. They believed that by submitting claims this was
causing the Chief Constable distress and because of the
amount of writs on the Chief's desk, that was why he was
retiring.
Mr. Taylor commented we had sought the correct advice and why
the Chief Constable had drawn this conclusion now he did not
know. He added that John Nesbit had made himself champion of
the Chief Constable and he did not know why he had done that
either. We had done everything correctly by the book so w hy
was the Chief Constable getting so uptight about it?
       said it was oppressive conduct by Mr. Nesbit.
At that point in the meeting, Mr. John Webber and Mr. Simon
Allen arrived. The Chairman thanked them both for breaking
off from a very busy schedule.
Mr. Middup gave a quick scenario which he had done earlier
in the meeting to the members informing them why claims were
originally suggested and been made.
However, when the claims were underway and Mr. Allen started
discussing claims with the members involved there was a
little bit of concern that the Chief Constable had been named
in Mr. Allen's letter as well as the Health and Safety
Executive.
Mr. Middup reminded Mr. Webber and Mr. Allen that he had
suggested that Mr. Webber's lawyers and the Force's lawyers
should meet to talk about the problem these claims were
creating but our Force did not wish to do so until they had
spoken to an advisor. The Force were so frightened of being
seen taking any action.
Miss Vee Neild was contacted by the Chief Constable for
advice and when she wanted to ring the Chief Constable back
she was told not to ring the Chief Constable but to ring the
Deputy.
Mr. Middup said he had asked the Deputy, Mr Hayes, to attend
this meeting today to explain that the Chief was in fact
retiring and not resigning but he refused.
The Secretary explained the verbal abuse he had received from
a certain Detective Sergeant and because of this it was
agreed that the Deputy Chief Constable should ring the
Divisional Commander who was causing the trouble and putting
extreme pressure on officers who have or who were considering
making claims. This was why the Detective Sergeant had
                                                          9.


behaved in such a manner because the Divisional Commander was
making them believe that we were suing the Chief Constable
personally.
Mr. Middup said he was in a difficult position if members
felt it was all his fault when he was only acting on the
solicitor's advice and asked Mr. Webber to confirm that had
he, the Secretary, not advised our members to make claims
then he would have been negligent in his duty and open to
possible legal action at some further date by a disgruntled
member or members. Mr. Webber said that what the Secretary
said was true and that his actions and those of the Board
were perfectly correct and necessary.
           said at his Division
     (a serving constable) had been saying that Mr. Middup
and the Welfare Officer had served 26 writs on the Chief
Constable and this was the reason why the Chief Constable
had decided to go.
Mr. Middup told Mr. Webber that no doubt he could see what
the position was and asked him where he (the Secretary) stood
and the Board and what we should be doing.
Mr. Webber said these were difficult questions to answer but
said he would try to explain as best he could.
Mr. Webber stated the most common civil claim against a Chief
Constable was for a road traffic accident. The Chief
Constable was sued in all sorts of areas, e.g. training for
riot situations. Mr. Webber said the Chief Constable was the
figurehead - a name provided for lawyers for the litigation.
Ultimately, the Chief Constable was not the one who pays out
the money.    It is paid by the insurance company.
Mr. Webber said regarding legislation he could remember
officers receiving damages on the rescue principle. He added
we were talking about members who had got involved caused by
someone else's negligence. The Court provides compensation
to that individual because he has been put into that position
because of someone else's negligence.
Mr. Webber said that Mike Marshall had explained to the
Secretary the legal basis on which claims could be put
forward.
Mr. Webber talked about our Seminar on Hillsborough and
stated it was apparent some of those officers in that room
that day were quite clearly going to be discharged. Some of
these people who had not made a claim may not get the
opportunity again if they were discharged. Therefore,
because of this reason, it was decided to take some steps to
protect members in this way. He said he knew that the Chief
Constable may become implicated. These defendants were going
                                                           10 .

to bring in the Chief Constable on this at some stage. Mr.
Webber said that following the outcome of the Taylor Report
it was quite clear the Chief Constable would be involved. He
said we were trying to avoid the initial action on the Chief
and hoped it would be the others - the Health and Safety
Executive, Sheffield Wednesday and the Sheffield City
Counci 1.
Mr. Webber said the Chief Constable did not want to go
through the Inquiry, Coroner's, etc., so by settling the
cases they were avoiding that issue, so they made a decision
that was conveniently placed.
Mr. Webber stated he had told the Chief Constable when he had
been in his company at a function prior to Christmas that
there would be claims from police officers but the Chief made
no reply at all.
Mr. Webber said that claims had been dealt with by the Chief
Constable's insurers. He added that officers had a perfect
right under the rescue principle to claim damages.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ informed Mr. Webber that there were going to be
some officers withdrawing their claims because they did not
realise the Chief Constable would be upset. Members thought
he would accept them. Mr. Webber said if officers wanted to
withdraw their claims then they must write back saying they
do not wish to pursue but these officers must be made aware
of the consequences. If they have made a good recovery and
that is their decision then it must be accepted but if the
officers cannot cope with the situation and sometimes it
takes a long time for this kind of incident to come to the
fore, then they would forfeit the right to make a claim
 later. Mr. Webber explained that if a claim was made by the
Sheffield Wednesday football club it would eventually go to
the Chief Constable.
Mr. Simon Allen explained that the Chief Constable would be
upset if a coach load of officers were seriously injured in
a coach crash and was sued because it was a police vehicle.
Mr. Allen said all the members had done so far was to submit
claims to him, no writs have been issued. Before making a
writ the people involved would have to be contacted before
going ahead.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ said that anyone thinking of withdrawing his claim
must think of his future.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ said Mr. Nesbit had put pressure on officers and
also his own position which was tenuous. Mr. Nesbit was
making it generally known that if officers submitted claims
there would be no future in the Force for them. These
comments were confirmed by Mr. Sykes who stated that he had
received a telephone call saying that if he went ahead with
                                                              11 .


his claim then he could forget about Chief Inspector Sumner's
job, who was retiring shortly. Mr. Middup told Mr. Webber
this was extremely serious and no doubt he could see what we
were up against. The Chairman said it was a communications
problem. Mr. Webber said if this was so it was the job of
the Federation to communicate with the members.
               asked what the legal position was in obtaining
copies of statements. Mr. Allen replied that if officers
could obtain a copy before an interview with him it would
save time if one was to hand.
                     suggested making a video to explain it to the
m e m b e r s . M r . Webber said once the J.B.B. members present
here today understood what he and Mr. Allen were saying, a
video would not be necessary.
It was noted that officers with only 3 or 4 years' service
were being told a black mark would be put on their career,
obviously senior officers were going to be successful in
dissuading members making a claim.
Mrs. Wood said it appeared that there was over covet
harrassment by senior officers, a lack of understanding by
our members and also the Superintendents and above. Mrs.
Wood said could we not write to the Superintendents'
Association and spell it out to them as it had been explained
to us this morning? The Secretary replied it would be
extremely difficult attempting to put it in writing but
suggested that both the Chairman and himself together with
Mr. Nesbit who had recently been elected Chairman of the
Superintendents' Association and Mr. Stuart who was the
Secretary should meet and tell them instead. He said he
would organise a meeting. All members agreed to this.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ;aid someone could be liable for prosecution for
 telling officers not to claim. He added this was the case
with appeals for discipline.
            stated that senior officers were causing distress
to these members because many of them had given great thought
and pains in deciding whether to make a claim in the first
place.
Mr. Allen said if members wished to discuss the matter first
without making a claim he could do at his Regionals. He said
he could then explain the position to them.
The Chairman said he was extremely concerned about the
pressure of the senior officers and the communication
problem.
Members were informed that writs would not be
issued until the new Chief Constable was in office.
                                                             12 .


     which explodes the myth completely that writs are
     being issued against our Chief Constable.
     The Chairman thanked Mr. Webber and Mr. Allen for attending
     our meeting and invited them to lunch.
     Mr. Sykes commented that the explanations given by the
     lawyers were first class. Members felt they were now able to
     return to their Divisions and explain the position.
                said he was pleased no writs had been served and
     when they were they would be on a new Chief Constable.
                said remembering               comments earlier
     that Mr. Nesbit ought to be to Id that he may be liable for
     trying to talk members out of making claims.
     The Secretary reported that Lord Justice Taylor had modified
     what he said in the Final Report from the Interim. Mr. Dick
     Coyles had greatly assisted us in this respect because
     apparently Mr. Coyles had recognised in the Report verbatum
     what he - Mr. Coyles had said.
                   said a letter should be sent to Sergeant
              informing him of our feelings and should be spoken to
     by one of the C.I.D. Representatives. He said the man was a
     disgrace.                continued by saying he was sick and
     tired of the Secretary getting the flak. He had been a
     member of this Board for many years and he had seen it
     regularly.
                     the Sergeants' representative for
     said he would personally see Sergeant         as he was his
     member.
     The agenda was proceeded with.

C)                - Retirement, The Secretary reported that most
     of the members would know that at the last Executive meeting,
                  announced his retirement.               rias had
     one extension but unfortunately, his heaIth wouId not al low
     another. The Secretary suggested presenting
     with the Federation Plate.
                  was asked to leave the meeting and a discussion
     ensued with a vote taken.               Jwas then asked to
     return to the meeting, whereupon, the Chairman informed him
     he was delighted that the members had agreed overwhelmingly
     to present the Federation Plate to him.                was
     invited, together with his wife, to attend the next J.B.B.
     meeting, where the presentation would be made.
