                                                            Federation Office
POLICE FEDERA TION                                          Police Headquarters
                                                            Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL                                         Sheffield S3 8LY
JOINT    BRANCH        BOARD                                  le\hone (0742) 768522
                                                                    o. 0742 729126



                                                            YOUR    REFERENCE




                                                            OUR    REFERENCE
 TO:    All Members of the South W k s h i r e
        Police Joint Executive Committee and                29 May 1992.
        Branch Board

 Dear Member,
      The second Executive Committee of the Joint Branch Board was held
 on Wednesday, 13 May 1992, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
 Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
       The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
 1.       ATTENDANCE
          P. Middup                                   G. Sykes
                                                      J. Wood

 All members stood for a minute's silence for P.C.            who
 died the day before. This officer had been killed in a road accident
 when he was travelling to work on his motor cycle.
 The Secretary said he wanted to keep a watching brief on this and if
 there was any blame w hatsoever on the driver of the articulated lorry,
 whom P.C.             collided with, then he would pursue a civil claim.
 It was noted that this was the first Executive meeting for both the
 Chairman anc^              Members welcomed them to the meeting.
 3. (A) TREASURER'S REPORT
          The Treasurer reported that the state of the finances was very
          sound. He said we had now had the audit and our auditors had
          been very pleased with the way things were going as last year
          there had been a bit of growth. The Balance Sheets had gone
          through to the national committees. The Treasurer said we had
          an expensive time coming up with Conference but after this funds
          would increase.
          The Treasurer advised that we should keep a sizeable amount in
          case of unforeseen expenditure.
                                                                  2.

     (B) TRUSTEES REPORT
        The Chairman of the Trustees, Mr. Sykes, reported a meeting had
        been held on the 28 April and members were satisfied with no
        points raised.
4.      MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
        A) Police Committee Report. The Chairman said she had attended
           and there was nothing to report.
                       said he had attended a previous meeting and an
           apology had been made to the Federation because there had not
           been or even any attempt made in obtaining a senior member of
           the Police Committee to address our Open Meeting. Sir Jack
           Layden had originally been going to do this but was later
           unable to do so and no other senior Police Committee member
           had been deputised to deliver their speech.
                        informed members that Mr. Danny George had_
            retired trom the Police Authority and at his last meeting a
            presentation was made to him.
        B) Part-time Working and Job Sharing. The Secretary reported
           this went to arbitration because of two particular areas we
           could not agree on in an attempt to formulate Regulations.
           We won half and the Official Side won half. The problemjay
           with the recall to duty between two tours of duty which is a
           minimum of 4 hours for full time officers but the Official
           Side said only 2 hours for part-time officers. We were
           successful on this.
            The other was the problem of the differentation of rest days
            and non-working days. This was lost.
            There was a schedule of 104 rest days for these people but at
            any other time they would be called back depending what the
            job is. If called out on a trawl the officers would receive
            the full amount of compensation. If officers were called out
            other than that they would not receive it.
            The Secretary informed members the Government legislators
            were now on their eleventh draft of the Regulations - at
            least nine of the previous drafts which had been checked were
            illegal.
            Mr. Middup suggested removing it from the agenda as there was
            nothing further to report for some time. All members agreed
            to recommend to the J.B.B. this item's removal.
         C) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported there had been
            nothing to report since last time when a report was given
            from the meeting at the Grosvenor Hotel.
                                                                                                                               3.

     The Secretary said a recommendation should be made to the
     J.B.B. that this item should be removed as he would not have
     anything further to say for some considerable time. If there
     was anything to report the matter could be brought back.
D)          - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviation^. The
     r . P .S.
     Secretary said we were all aware of what had been done in
     this regard. He said we had asked at the last J.N.C.C. that
     we proceed as Northumbria have on the bail issue - we knew of
     no other Forces that have done the work we have done.
     This research wants making available to the country but it
     had eminated from South Yorkshire.
                suggested having a Federation representative at
                                 .                           . • _____________________________A A r* 4 - v >        K n + aH
     each Court when new questionnaires are distributed.                                                       *1




     Members also agreed for us to make a plea to the membership
     for support, informing t h e m h o w vital it was and it was
     certain we would obtain their assistance.
     The Chairman said we ought to inform Sergeant
     I lie   m   a i l m   a n       o a i u   mv   .      - who                                                    ,
     had been involved in preparing the research for this
     subject - for him to redraft a questionnaire, so that
     everybody who attends Court on the specific date, should
     complete the questionnaire.
     Mr. Barnes said it would be better if our representatives
     qave the officers the form personally and we could ]ncJ^de
     this information in the circular to be distributed to the
     membership.
E) Proposed New Regulations. The Secretary reported he had
   circulated a letter to the members prior to the commencement
   of this m e e t i n g , f o r t h e i r i n f o r m a t i o n . The Secretary said
   the Federation had agreed on the 14 April 1992, to the
   package on this. The letter from Michael Cann, who is the
   Assistant Official Side Secretary, went out the following
   dav - 15 April - on Alternative Shift Systems and Leave
   Arrangements. Mr. Middup said it was the worst negotia ion
   since we decided to dispense with retiring at 25 years and,
   of course, the negotiations with rent allowance.
      Mr. Middup said at the last J.C.C. meeting he actually stood
      up to speak on this - which was very unusual - saying it was
      the worst deal, together with rent allowance and asked
      members present at the J.C.C. to consider asking for the
      resignation of the General Secretary. There was no support
      for her resignation but Mr. Middup said he had expected this
      anyway.
      Mr. Middup said after the three day meetings, he had
      telephoned               i who hdd been one of the
                 * .         '
                             ------ 1----- .--- h—      i—   J i                                 A A t- r» r-»r\r\ -i in +■
      negotiators, to tell him how angry and disappointed he was
      with these negotiations.          ^ did not even realise what
      he had actually agreed to. Mr. Middup said we had picked up
