                                                                Federation Office
P o l i c e f e d e r a t io n                                  Police Headquarters
                                                                Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                    * tN   ''X
                                                                Sheffield   S3 8LY
J O I N 7 BRANCH       BOARD                                    fefep%iU0742) 768522
                                                                F^OWTO742 729126
                                                               %
                                                                YOU R REFERENCE




                                                                OUR REFERENCE

 TO:    All Members of the South Yor|s
        Police Joint Branch Board                      24 September 1990


 Dear Member,
      The third quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
 Thursday, 13 September 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
 Sheffield, commencing at 9 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
 1.       ATTENDANCE
          P. Middup                                       R.   Lax
                                                          M.   Young
                                                          G.   Millett
                                                          R.   Hooley
                                                          J.   Bui liman
                                                          I.   Selwood*
                                                          G.   Sykes
                                                          K.   Vickerage
                                                          P.   McGinley
                                                          J.   Wood*


  *Denotes non-attendance.
  2.      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
          Mr. Young proposed and            seconded that the minutes of
          the last meeting were a true record This was agreed by the
          members.
  3. (A) TREASURER'S REPORT
          The Treasurer gave a report of the state of the accounts.         This
          was accepted by the members.
       (B) TRUSTEES REPORT
                     reported that the Trustees met on the 6 July 1990 and
          everything was in order. He stated that the Trustees were
          thinking of sending money to Surbiton towards the end of the
                                                                                                       2.

year. He added a lot of money was needed by the J.C.C.
especially with the expense of Hillsborough. The Trustees had
suggested £20,000 be sent before the end of the year. This was
unanimously agreed by the members.
MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
A) Police Committee Report.. The Chairman reported he had
   attended the Police Committee meeting on the 3 August 199°.
   at Barnsley. This was the second meeting for the new Chief
   Constable. The Chairman stated that members from Sheffield
   were starting to be obstructive and sounding the Chief out on
   various issues including crime. The Chief dealt with and
   answered them very well.
      ^ 11    |       ^ |l
                       .<
                              The Chairman
                             III   V C I   j      said
                                               Vi w   I  that
                                                          I •   i l l v       w   ■ • •• ^              ^

   would be attending the  next• meeting
                                    _ J ___ U
                                              on Khis
                                                   />nal
                                                        behalf on Friday, j



   14 September.
      Mr. McGinley reported that all the Chief Superintendents
      would be present at future meetings to answer questions
      particularly on crime.
B)                    Facilities
      C r ee cr nh ee rat
      ir                  i i iu i^ j 1.
                                 H L1 1_________ ^ reported
                                                     1
                                                     •      there
                                                               11 a .
      should have been a meeting last week but it was cancelled.
      Mr. Anderson had been the Chairman of the Equal Opportunities
      and had now been replaced.
      The Secretary said this was moving nationally and the lead
      would come from this. He said we would be getting job
      sharing and returners. Job sharing and part time workers
      were being looked at nationally and an enormous amount of
      work was being done even with a lawyer employed full time on
      this subject. It was noted that with regard to job sharing
      and part timers, experiments would be carried out using the
      Metropolitan, a rural Force and a town Force.
       The Secretary commented that West Midlands officers are
       retiring with 30 years' service, on a Friday and returning
       the following Monday, doing exactly the same job but
       irrespective of the rank they were before, officers were
       returning as a constable. These officers were going with
       full commutation.
 C) Rent Allowance. The Secretary reported we                                                were still having
    problems in this Force. It was noted that                                                the Irish Judicial
    Review had not yet given a judgement. Our                                                own Judicial
    Review would not commence until next month                                               or even later in
    the year. Mr. Middup said he did not know                                                when Scotland s
    proceedings were commencing.
 D)     Hi1lsborounh Disaster. The Secretary reported this was still
        ongoing with 143 claims outstanding. The solicitors just
        dealt with it as and when they could process the claims.
                   commented on the 24 hour protest against the
        D.P.P. decision not to prosecute any police officer outside
    v f
*




                                                                        3.

            Headquarters recently. He added a large number of officers
            had been totally disgusted with the way these            ,
            were treated, with Headquarters supplying refreshments and a
            rest area. These feelings were the general °P1[n °n °!,t . .
            other members but it was not known exactly who had authorised
            this.
            Mr. Middup said we were talking about specially opening
            Police Headquarters, when the building usually closed at
            4.30 p.m. on Fridays and making shower, toilet and
            refreshment facilities available to the protestors.
            It was decided to discuss this matter with the Chief
            Constable when he arrived.
          E) Ottawa Shift System (P.N.B- Working Party on Regulations,!^
             Mr. Middup said because of the pressures that have been
             throughout the country, the Federation were trying to find a
             way round the problem by allowing those who wished to work
             the Ottawa system to do so and for those who only wanted to
             work the eight hours to continue do do so. With regard to
             the Ottawa system the Regulation dealing with rotas and
             eight hour shift would cease immediately.
             Mr. Middup said the only attraction to the Ottawa system
             these officers were interested in were the extra days o t t .
          F) w u r i t v Headquarters. The^ecr^MrXJ[eported this item had
             originally been raised by              frnd hiad been
             the J.N.C.C. The matter had been discussed at that Coimittee
             and support had been received but because of lack of finance
             there was no chance of employing anyone full time on the
             underground car park gate. All members agreed to now remove
             this item from the agenda.
          G) Additional Members to the J.B.B., The Se(:1f®tary/ ® 5 H 1Jt5Snaiat
             the new Regulations legitimising the position of additional
             members to the Branch Boards (The Police Federation
             (Amendment) Regulations 1990) became operative from 1
             September 1990. Mr. Middup said that he had a-ftentied a
             J.B.B. Secretaries meeting in Surbiton on 11 September 1990,
             which had been addressed by Mr. Webber of Russell             and
             Walker on the implications of the Regulation. He had told
             the Secretaries that if their Boards now wished to hold
             another election for the positions held by addtional members
             then they could do so and the additional members currently
              holding those positions could stand for election. If the
              Boards concerned did not want to hold an election then the
              status quo remained. For all future elections thereafter
              additional members would be entitled to stand for election.
              If they were not successful in future elections then they
              would no longer be members of the Board.
              The Chairman asked the members if they wished to have an
              election for position of Secretary to the Joint Branch
