                                                                    Federation Office

POLICE FEDERA TIOH                                                  Police Headquarters
                                                                    Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE P O L M                                         /■MhSheffield   S3 8LY

JOINT       BRANCH        BOARD         I                       ^ -'’Helephone (0742) 768522
                                                                    Fax. No. 0742 729126




                                   CONFID                                  EFERENCE




                                                                    OUR REFERENCE
 TO:       All Members of the South Yorkshire
           Police Joint Branch Board                          15 January 1991.


 Dear Member,
           The Annual General Meeting of the Joint Branch Board w as held on
 T h u r s d a y , 3 January 19 9 1 , at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
 Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.

 1.          ATTENDANCE
             P. Middup                                R.    Lax
                                                      M.    Young
                                                      G.    Millett
                                                      R.    Hooley
                                                      J.    Bui liman
                                                      I.    Selwood
                                                      G.    Sykes
                                                      K.    Vickerage*
                                                       P.   McGinley
                                                       J.   Wood


  *Denotes non-attendance.
  2.         CHAIRMAN'S ADDRESS OF WELCOME
              The Chairman wished a happy New Year to everyone. He said we
              had not done too well in the past - we had got a P o l ^ e
              Authority who did not give a damm about us and he would make
              sure this was brought out in his speech at the Open Meeting.
              The Chairman added the Government also appeared to be against
              us. He commented we did not Have many friends. .

  3.          ADOPTION OF STANDING ORDERS       '
              These Orders were adopted by the members.
  4    .     ADOPTION OF JOINT BRANCH BOARDl EXPENSES RULES
              These Orders were adopted as written by the members.
                                                                         4   .
6.       SPECIAL CONSTABULARY
         The Secretary reported this subject had already been dealt with
         and it was just to inform members that the matter was to be
         dealt with at the C o n st ab le s 1 Central Committee at their next
         meeting.
         The Secretary said that he was deeply concerned about the
         additional cost of Specials. Our budget could end up being five
         million pounds short of the amount needed just to run the force.
         If this does happen all recruiting, both police and clvl1™ "
         will stop. This will eventually effectively reduce our strength
         by about 250. The Metropolitan Police and several o t h e ' r f j ^ e s
         are to commence an experiment of paying bounties of about £900
         each to Specials and all the additional money has to be found
         from within the ordinary police budgets. There is to be no
         extra money. We cannot afford it.
                   said we should tell the public what is going on
                            __ •
         because they are suffering andi t have
                                           __ ________
                                                     a right to know. MHeO added
         it was always discussed and dealt with "in house .
         said when the calculations were made, the Chief Constable
         been told that the Chairman and himself would inf°rrn the P ^ l i c .
         The Chief Constable had been put on hold and when the figures
         are at hand that is the intention.

7    .   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
          The Chairman r e p o r t e d at the latest Police Committee meeting,
          Messrs. Gallimore and Axe had walked out of the meeting before
          the vote had been taken on whether to fund the ]® 9 al expenses
          for our police officers. The Chairman added we had not got any
          friends on that Police Authority. He commented that Sir Jack
          Lavden had tried to use his powers of persuasion resulting in
          our success - the Police Authority would now finance the lega
          expenses. The results of the vote however, were only marginal
          but because of Sir Jack's assistance, his days were now
          numbered.
 8   .   PROPOSED NEW REGULATIONS
          The Secretary reported this item    was brand new and he had
          circulated copies to the members    of the proposed new Regulations
          for their information. He added     that members would also find
          details of this subject in their    "Police" magazine - there was
          an excellent article.
          Mr. Middup said this was an extremely serious matter. The Home
          Office had tried to slip these new Regulations into the Police
          Advisory Board when the proper place was the P o l i c e Negotiating
          Board. The Federation had tried to stop this by taking legal
          advice and we were prepared to go to Court. The Home Office
          have now conceded and the subject will go to the P.N.B.
