POLICE FEDERATION y&P %,                                             p°iceHead,>uarters
SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                                 ss sly
JOINT   BRANCH       BOARD                                                    <0742>768522
                                                           \   ^     K t No. 0742 729126

                                                 %v;   \
                                     . f A ^ v\Ny i                  YOUR REFERENCE




                                                                     OUR REFERENCE

TO:   All Members of the South      kshire
      Police Joint Branch Board                                    19 June 1990.


 Dear Member,
      The second quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
 Wednesday, 13 June 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
 Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
      The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 information and retention.
         The Chairman said before we go into the agenda proper he would
 like to welcome two new members of the Board, M r . Keith Vickerage^who
 was the C.I.D. I ns pectors1 representative a n d ^                  the
 S e r ge an ts 1 representative for Doncaster. The Chairman hoped they would
 be with us for a long time and hoped they would take an active part.
      The Chairman also reminded members of the new Chief Constable's
 attendance, Mr. Richard Wells, at the meeting later on in the morning.

 1.     ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                 R.   Lax
                                                  M.   Young*
                                                  R.   Hooley
                                                  G.   Millett
                                                  J.   Bui liman
                                                  I.   Selwood
                                                  G.   Sykes
                                                  K.   Vickerage
                                                  P.   McGinley*
                                                  J.   Wood


         *Denotes non-attendance.

 2.      MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                      proposed and           seconded that the minutes of
         the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed
                                                             3.

  The Secretary reported the grievance procedure under equal
  opportunities was discussed at the last Executive meeting and
  minuted in full on those minutes.
  Mr. Middup said he had discussed with I
  n r .   m u u u y   a a iu   lie   nau   U   ^
                                                  the grievance
                                                      r;          J

  procedure and she had had some misgivings about the procedure
  but the Secretary did not think there were any problems with
  it. Mr. Middup added the grievance procedure was only in
  respect of complaints concerning racism or sex, so it was
  very basic and limited anyway. The Secretary added if anyone
  had a genuine complaint there would be no reluctance for the
  complaint to be recorded. The Home Office would stipulate
  this anyway, so there was no way round it.
            said she was frightened that if anyone was going on
  a Promotion Board, this could go against them - that they had
  been complaining.
  After further discussion members decided to accept the
  grievance procedure bearing in mind our only fear as
  discussed and if the procedure was abused then we would
  immediately raise the matter at the J.N.C.C. M e m b e r s _
  accepted the paper with the provisos of watching how it
  worked.
C) Rent Allowance. The Secretary reported he could now inform
   the members of what the new allowance would be. The new
   housing allowance is £32.88 per week with the increase of the
   R.P.I. of 16.6%, making the amount £38.33. Mr. Middup said
   the "red circled" amounts would have the 16.6% increase on
   that amount. So if members were on maximum rent allowance -
   £51.54 per week with the addition of the 16.6% increase, they
   would then receive £60.09 per week. Mr. Middup emphasised
   this was not backdated for 2 years but was from the 1 April
   this year and the backdated money would be in the July pay.
   Mr. Middup said whatever the R.P.I. increase was we had
   believed it would be on the rental element only. He stated
   that members would have noticed that our Force had made the
   increase on the full amount of £51.54. Mr. Middup said
   because of this, he had spoken to Mr. Cripps and Mr. Cripps
   had reaffirmed the Secretary's belief that the increase was
   to be on the rental element only. Mr. Middup said it was not
   known whether the Force had made a mistake on this
    interpretation.
   The Secrtary stated that the J.B.B. members were the first to
   be made aware of these details and now the figures would be
   published after this meeting.
D) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported that currently
   143 claims had been made against the Force on behalf of our
   col leagues.
                                                                  4.

Mr. Middup said he had distributed copies of a letter from
Mr. Wriqht to Mr. Dellow, President of A.C.P.O. and
Mr. Middup's reply letter. The Secretary stated he did not
like Mr. Wright's letter or how he had received it -
immediately after the Chief had actually retired. Mr. Middup
said this letter of the Chief's had been written behind his -
the Secretary's - back.
Mr. Middup said that members would see from the minutes of
the last Executive what he had done and how he had done it.
He emphasised that Mr. Wright knew we were taking action.
When it was only against the Club or the Health and Safety
Executive the Chief could not have cared less. Mr. Wright
was not interested when we were going to sue other peop I .
He only started getting interested when his name was
mentioned and that the Force was going to be sued. This had
been his own fault because he more or less accepted
responsibility when he decided to pay the compensation.
All members were in favour of the Secretary's actions.
The Secretary informed members that Mr. Hayes had sent
individual letters to officers involved not to book holidays
for the period from 6 October because that was the date when
it would be decided who was to pay the damages. Mr. Middup
said he thought this was a thoughtful gesture.
          stated he did not agree that one suspended Chief
Superintendent was able to enter Niagara sports club when a
Federated member would not be allowed to. He said he though
this was wrong and a lot of his members thought it wrong
a 1s o .         proposed that we make it known to the people
in authority tnat w e do not want this suspended Chief
Superintendent to be allowed into Niagara. This was seconded
by Mr. Sykes.
                counter proposed that all suspended officers
                           ____
 should be able to go to Niagara.  TU/n
                                   The CA^afav>\/
                                        Secretary v>on1lpH
                                                  replied this
 could not be done as it was such a sweeping statement. This
 meant it would be allowing all kinds of officers in for
 anything they have been suspended for - really serious
 suspensions.
 Mrs. Wood said that there should be equity and that if our
 members can't go in then they shouldn't be allowed to do
 so.
             said the Rules should be adhered to and all
 officers should be treated the same. No discrimination
            said that suspended officers can go to police
                          1   I   .   I   .   * J_   J - U -4 +    t.l*
 premises with permission and that it was wrong that we were
 trying an officer by kangaroo Court.
                                                             5.

   After much discussion member's decided to go for
   clarification and to bring the matter back to the next
   meeting.
E) Ottawa Shift System.   The Secretary said there was nothing to
   report.
              reported he had attended a fringe meeting at
   Conference and he had been surprised at the number of Forces
   trying this system out.             said because of this he
   thought we ought to look at the matter further. He added
   that we should prepare.
   Mr. Middup said the former Chief Constable, Mr. Wright, had
   made a firm policy that there would be no change in this
   Force at the moment.
   Mr. Bulliman agreed with              p aying that we should
   be looking at it.
              reported that he had had a meeting at Barnsley and
   no one had wanted the system at that Division.
   Mrs. Wood stated she had been looking at the system in her
   office of Research and Development and said the system had
   not been tried in a rural area but in any case this system
   would not work without manpower.
   Mr. Middup asked Mrs. Wood to prepare a paper on this subject
   using her expertise for the benefit of the members for the
   next J.B.B. meeting. It was agreed to wait and discuss Mrs.
   Wood's paper at the next meeting.
F) Security Headquarters. The Secretary reported this item had
   arisen from a paper by Mr. Kennedy about the security in the
   car park at Headquarters. Every time there was a bomb
   outrage we had 48 hours security and then the security was
   taken off again. This matter had been taken to the J.N.C.C.
   where we had received good support. Mr. Stuart had felt very
   strongly. Mr. Hayes, who had been acting Chief Constable,
   had implied that we could not pursue the matter purely
   because of finance. Members noted the subject was being
   processed but it did not look terribly hopeful.
G) Additional Members to the J.B.B. The Secretary reported this
   matter concerned the new Regulation which would become law by
   the end of next m o n t h , legitimising additional members of the
   Board, because of t h e p a g a
H) Conference. Mr. Middup reported Conference had gone very
   well. Our members, particularly the daily observers, were
   very good, they had had their photographs taken as instructed
   without any problems and received their subsequent
   identification badges.
