ICE FEDERA TION                                      Federation Office
                                                     Police Headquarters

I YORKSHIRE POL                                      Snig Hill
                                                     Sheffield    S3 8LY
BRANCH       BOARD
                                                     T^leMjione (0742) 768522
                                                     Fax. No. 0742 729126

                                                     Julies
                                                     YOUR   REFERENCE




II Members of the South Yorkshire                    O U R REFERENCE

-lice Joint Executive and Branch Board          12 November 1991.

  ~er,
  fourth quarterly meeting of the Joint Executive Committee was
 Thursday, 31 October 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant,
~3n, Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
   minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
 :ion and retention.
ATTENDANCE
P. Middup                                         R. Lax
                                                  M. Young

MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
           proposed and             seconded that the minutes of
the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed.
TREASURER'S REPORT
The Treasurer gave a full report on the state of the accounts,
He added he could not foresee any large expenditure for the
remainder of this year. A decision would be made later
regarding sending money to the J.C.C. at Surbiton.
TRUSTEES REPORT
           reported a meeting had been arranged for the 22
 3vember 1991.
WATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
A) Police Committee Report.              reported he had attended
   the last Police Committee meeting and gave a full report     He
   said one of the items mentioned and which he would draw
   members' attention to was a discussion on poll tax. He said
   there had been opposition between the Chief Constable and the
   Pol ice Authority about the involvement of the police in the
   execution of warrants for non-payment.             Iadded we
   should not be taking this on.
   Mr. Young commented this was a national issue and not local.
   He stated the poll tax needed watching as it would decimate
   the manpower levels within the Service without a doubt.
B) Part-timers. Job sharing and Returners. Mr. Middup reported
   he had not received any further update on this subject. He
   said he had contacted Surbiton hoping to obtain some kind of
   update. Mr. Middup said the sticking part was on non-working
   days and rest days. The P.N.B. Staff Side insist that all
   non-working periods outside their contractural time is a rest
   day. He added we were held up at the moment because of
   non-working days and rest days and we were not getting
   anywhere on it.
C) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary said that there was
   little to report. He said there had been discussion with
   Counsel at the beginning of October and we had been given
   authority to instruct a Q.C. to take over the proceedings
   which will take place at the end of October when we would
   be going forward with the cases.
  Mr. Holroyd, solicitor with Russell Jones and Walker, was
  very helpful and the cases may be settled out of Court.
D) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations. There
   was nothing further to report on this matter. The Force
   survey is under way and it is now just a matter of waiting
   for the result to be made known.
E) Sale of Police Houses. Mr. Middup reported he was extremely
   pleased with the result of this matter because despite all
   the problems and because of his attempts we had now been
   successful. It is anticipated that this matter will now go
   through without any difficulty at the next Police Committee
   meeting. It was decided to leave the subject on the agenda
   until confirmed.
F) Packed Meals. A small Working Party had been set up to
   discuss this subject after               had brought this
   matter to the J.B.B.'s attention.
   Mr. Young said packed meals were now kept in cold storage at
   Headquarters and not waiting to be collected from West Bar
   as before. He stated this was because of the Food Act. We
   were now waiting for                 to report on it. At
   least an attempt was now being made.
 G) Proposed New Regulations. The Secretary said we had more or
    less covered this when discussing an earlier item -
    "Part-timers, Job Sharing and Returners." He said these
    two items were interlinked and Annual Leave was linked with
    this also. Negotiations were carrying on - nobody's going
    back to arbitration on Annual Leave at the moment. The
