                                                                      Federation Office
      POLICE FEDERA TION                                              Police Headquarters
                                                                      Snig Hill
      SiUTH YORKSHIRE POLJfi                                          Sheffield S3 8LY
      'J OINT   BRANCH         BOAR                                   Telephone (0742) 768522
                                                                       Fax. No. 0742 729126



                                                                      YOUR REFERENCE




                                                                       OUR REFERENCE
                All Members of they>        shire
                Police Joint Branch                                    18 June 1992.

         Dear Member,
              The second quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
         Wednesday, 10 June 1992, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
         Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
              The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
         information and retention.
         1.
s**
                  ATTENDANCE
                  P. Middup                                      J.   Wood
                                                                 G.   Sykes
                                                                 G.   Millett*
I:
it
                                                                 R.
                                                                 B.
                                                                      Hooley
                                                                      Walker*
                                                                 D.   Riley
                                                                 I.   Selwood*
                                                                 G.   Revill
                                                                 A.   Timms


         ♦Denotes non-attendance.
         A vacancy existed for an Inspectors' Representative for Headquarters.
         All members stood for a minute's silence for Special Constable Glen
         Goodman who had been tragically murdered and Police Constable Sandy
         Kelly who miracously survived. Both officers had been shot whilst on
         duty.
         The Chairman welcomed                      the Constables' Traffic
         Representative, who had replaced
         2.       MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                             proposed and               seconded that the minutes
                  ot the last meeting were a true record. This was agreed by the
                  members.
                                                                                          2.

(A) TRFASURER'S REPORT
   The Treasurer reported the funds were in a very good state but
   we needed to be careful with the money as he did not know what
   was to happen financially from one month to another.

(B) TRUSTEES REPORT
    The Chairman of the Trustees, 1___________
    I 1 1C   is i Ic i   i i   u ia 1 1   i
                                               [reported
                                               i
                                              w< i w
                                                         a meeting had
                                                       i i   ww w w   1   «   ,   .   _    • 4. u

    been held on the 28 April and everything was satisfactory with
    the books.
    The Treasurer said there had been a discussion on the tax
    element on travel expenses. He added that he was in touch with
    the J.C.C. The Treasurer said he would make a proposal to the
    Inland Revenue and it should by the end of the next meeting be
    sorted out. The amount of administration concerned in deducting
    tax for everybody at source would be too great. We were looking
    at the result of negotiations between the J.C.C. and the Inland
    Revenue to come up with a suitable figure which would be
    acceptable to them without the need to deduct tax at all.
    MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
    A) Police Committee Report. The Chairman reported that a
       Committee meeting had been held on Friday, 5 June but she had
       been unable to attend the meeting due to her being on leave
       and the Deputy Chairman had also been unavailable. She
       believed there had been nothing to report.
    B) Part-time Working and Job Sharing (R). The Executive had
       recommended at the last meeting that this item be removed
       from the agenda. The system would commence in the Forces
       that have been selected and when this experiment is finalised
       to bring back the subject and discuss. There is .no
       suggestion of part-time working and job sharing in this Force
       at the moment. The Home Office had given us this assurance.
       On the basis of that information it will not be happening in
       this Force until the experiment is over and assessed.
       Mr. Middup said he did not know how long the system would
       take to become operative in our Force - probably 1 to 2
       years. The Executive therefore, recommended the item could
       be removed and brought back when there was something to
       discuss. All members agreed to this.
     C) Hillsborough Disaster (R). The Secretary reported this item
        had been thoroughly discussed and minuted on the Executive
        minutes. He said it was a long drawn out job and again the
        Executive suggested that it could be removed from the agenda
        but to bring it back when there was something to report. All
        members agreed.
     n) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations,..
        Mr. Middup reported that the experiment being carried out on
        this subject was still ongoing and it may be widened because
