                                                                 federation Office
POLICE FEDERA TION                                                 ilice Headquarters
                                                                  nig Hill^
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLIO                                                       S3 8LY
JOINT     BRANCH     BOARD                                                       :) 768522


                                               rvPL,
                                                 \VW
                                                                           2 729126



                                                                YOUR REFERENCE




TO:   All Members of the South Yorkshire                        OUR REFERENCE

      Police Joint Branch Board                          28 March 1990.

Dear Member,
     The first quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
Wednesday, 21 March 1990, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
     The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
information and retention.
1       ATTENDANCE
        P. Middup                                  R.   Lax
                                                   M.   Young
                                                   R.   Hooley*
                                                   G.   Millett
                                                   J.   Bui liman
                                                   I.   Selwood
                                                   G.   Sykes
                                                   P.   McGinley*
                                                   J.   Wood


        *Denotes non-attendance.
        The C.I.D. Inspectors1 representative to be elected.
        The Secretary said before we commenced with the agenda he wou l d
        like to report on the very sad death of
                He said he was notified on Saturday night by
        and              telephoned him on Sunday. The Secretary said
        he had since written to               this letter was read out
        to the members for their information
                                    ------      Members noted that the
        funeral was on Friday morning and the Secretary said we had
        sent a floral tribute on behalf of the J.B.B. for
        All members then stood for a few moments silence.
        The Chairman announced we would then commence with the agenda.
                                                           6.

  information on the subject and asking them again to vote
  against the Regulations.
H) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary said there were a
   couple of things he would like to report on.
  Mr. Middup said that members would recall the Special Meeting
  on the 7 February when this subject was discussed in depth.
  Things were said about Mr. Nesbit who it was believed was
  behind a lot of pressure with officers making claims for the
  Hillsborough disaster. This was minuted fully and those
  minutes have been accepted today without any dissension.
  Mr. Middup said all the minutes were stamped "Confidential ,
  in red, before they were distributed to the J.B.B. members.
  It h a s s i n c e come to the notice of the Secretary that Mr.
  Nesbit received a copy of some of the pages of our minutes.
  Mr. Middup said this was an act of betrayal beyond contempt.
  He added that he had never before put "Confidential" on the
  minutes and this individual(s) had put us in a position of
  liable.
   At the meeting on the 7 February it was decided that the
   Chairman and Secretary should meet Mr. Nesbit to discuss this
   matter - to find out why Mr. Nesbit was putting pressure on
   officers not to make claims when they were quite within their
   rights, needless to say more importantly, their own interests
   to do so.
   Mr. Middup said that both the Chairman and himself had met
   Mr. Nesbit and Mr.      Terry Stuart, being the Chairman and
   Secretary, respectively, of the Superintendents' Association.
   Mr. Middup said he      had made it clear what we thought. Mr.
   Nesbit was adamant      that he had nothing to do with these
   things we said he had done. Mr. Nesbit was told that legal
   action would be taken against anyone if it was proved he/she
   had put pressure on our members to withdraw their claims.
   Mr. Nesbit accepted this.
   However, on being supplied with a copy of our minutes by an
   anonymous J.B.B. member(s), he had been blazing when reading
   those minutes and he, Mr. Nesbit, was talking about liable.
   After discussion, Mr. Middup said it would be minuted that
   there was insufficient proof to substantiate the allegations
   and they would be withdrawn. Mr. Middup said he had already
   told Mr. Nesbit this.
              said we would have to be extremely   careful in this
   meeting from now on. If we could not discuss    items
   thoroughly at these meetings then it would be    awkward. It
   certainly put a gag on people speaking openly    and    he
   concurred exactly with Mr. Middup's comments.
   Mr. Young commented that Mr. Sumner, the Chief Inspector at
   "F" Division had told him he had received four copies of the
                                                          7.

  minutes, in separate covers.
                 said this was a serious situation and was
  horrendous.
  The Secretary was doubtful whether this could be true and
  thought there might have been some exaggeration.
  Mr. Bui liman informed members that a petition was being
  carried out at Rotherham in respect of the Ottawa system and
  the front page of the papers of the petition was from our
  minutes.
  The Secretary said that in respect of the comments made
  towards Mr. Nesbit whoever the individual was they had made
  a conscious decision that they had put the Chairmain and
  Secretary in a liablous position. He added we had no
  effective means of stopping anybody who was so low as to do
  this.
  Mr. Young said it could simply be members had been careless
  in leaving their papers out on desks, etc., and someone had
  obtained them and photostated them.
  It was suggested this maybe eliminated by sending papers to
  members' home addresses then they could not leave them on
  desks in the office.
  After discussion members decided that if anyone really
  intended informing senior officers for whatever reason of our
  talks and allowing them access to our minutes, then there was
  little that could be done and sending papers to members' home
  addresses would not eliminate it.
  Mr. Middup said he wanted it to be shown that it was an
  unanimous strong condemnation of this betrayal, on the
  minutes. All members agreed.
I) Optimum Utilisation of Manpower (R).               reported
   this matter never came into force because of the lack of
   manpower and finance. It was recommended at the Executive
   meeting to remove the item from the agenda. This was agreed
   by the members.
J) Constitution (Alan Eastwood). The Secretary reported the new
   Regulations had now been drafted and the J.C.C. were trying
   for them to become law by Conference. Mr. Middup said we
   tried everything we could legally do and every other way and
   we would have to accept we have lost.
  The Secretary informed members our amendment to the J.C.C.
  Motion 35 had not been accepted by the C.A.C. He added there
  was nothing tangible now to get our teeth into. Mr. Middup
  asked                who was the Chairman of the C . A .C., why
  our amendment had not been accepted.                  replied
