TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Business considered in Private on 10 July 1989 at the
Regional Health Authority Headquarters   ____________ _


PRESENT:        Sir Michael Carlisle (Chairman)
                Mr D Brown              Mr A O'Brien
                Mrs R E Carmichael      Dr A Z Paters
                Mrs N M Collett         Mrs J Radforc
                Mr M Foy                Dr P F J Sewell
                Mrs B J Keene           Councillor J Thierry
                Mrs P E Latham          Mr N F Townsend
                Mrs A Lathwood

APOLOGIES:      Professor P H Fentem.                                           :


                Councillor P Gaul
                Professor Sir Robert Kilpatrick
                Professor D S Munro
                Mr M Varcoe
                Mrs P B Wildgoose

187   INTRODUCTION

      The Chairman welcomed Mr Malcolm Foy to his first meeting of the
      Authority.   Mr Foy had been appointed to the Regional Health Authority
      by the Secretary of State for the period 1 June 1989 to 30 September
      1990.

      The Chairman also thanked Mr K Punt, Regional Treasurer, for acting as
      Regional General Manager during the absence of Mr Edwards on sabbatical
      leave at Keele University.

188   BUSINESS CONSIDERED IN PRIVATE

      It was

             RESOLVED THAT' to enable the Authority to consider business of a
             confidential nature, the public be excluded from the meeting.

189   MINUTES

      The Minutes of that part of the meeting held in Private on 12 June 1989
      were approved as a correct record.

190   MATTERS ARISING

      (a) Future of the RHA's Computer Division (Minute TAM(89)164 refers)

           The Regional Treasurer reported that it should be possible for the
           RHA Member Sub-Committee to consider the proposals negotiated by the
           Regional Commercial Director within the next month to six weeks. The
           protection of service levels and the limitation of price increases
           for bureau services were of prime importance in any agreement.
                               - 2 -




191   APPOINTMENT OF HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF

      The Authority received a report giving details of proposed consultant
      medical appointments requiring consideration by the Authority in private.
      (TA(89)132).

      1. Appointment of a Consultant in Mental Handicap (Adult and Child)
         for Barnsley Health Authority______                     ■ _____

        The Authority was informed that an Advisory Appointments Committee for
        the above post had been held on 22 June 1989, and after interview the
        AAC had only been able to reach a majority decision of 7-1 in favour
        of an appointment.

        Following the AAC, the Regional Medical Officer had discussed with the
        dissenting member the reasons for the member's decision to oppose the
        appointment, and had undertaken to convey these to RHA Members.
        These reasons centred mainly on certain personal qualities required
        for the post, which the candidate appeared to lack, and the member's
        opinion that if the appointment was made it would be to the detriment
        of service development within this specialty in Barnsley.   It was ,
        however, stressed that there had been only one member of the AAC not
        in favour of the appointment.

        The Authority discussed this matter fully, taking into account both
        the dissenting AAC member's views and also the decisions reached in
        respect of the other candidates interviewed.   An opinion was put
        forward that in the future particular care should be taken to include
        a personnel specification when consultant posts were advertised, to
        avoid similar occurrences.   The Regional Medical Officer confirmed
        that this aspect of the appointments procedure was currently in hand
        and he would pursue the matter further with Districts.   The Authority
        also noted that in another recent AAC, similar doubts concerning an
        appointment had been put forward in respect of a favoured candidate
        and appointment had not been recommended.

        RHA Members acknowledged the difficulties associated with recruitment
        to a shortage specialty in Barnsley, but were strongly of the opinion
        that professional standards should be maintained.   After further
        discussion, it was

              RESOLVED THAT the post of Consultant in Mental Handicap (Adult
              and Child) for Barnsle-y Health Authority be re-advertised, to
              include a personnel specification if at all possible.

      2. Appointment of a Consultant in Accident and Emergency for South
         Lincolnshire Health Authority based at Grantham and Kesteven
         General Hospital______ _____

        The Authority noted that the Secretary of State had given approval for
        Mr L N Chakrabarty to be appointed to this post without the required
        Advisory Appointments Committee.   After discussion it was

              RESOLVED THAT the decision of the Secretary of State to allow the
              appointment of Mr L N Chakrabarty to the post of Consultant in <
              Accident and Emergency for South Lincolnshire Health Authority,
              based at Grantham and Kesteven General Hospital, be noted.
                                 - 3 -




      3. Retirement of Dr H Hunter, Consultant in Psychiatry, Mental Handicap
         Eastdale Unit, Central Nottinghamshire _______________ ___________ __

        The Authority noted action taken by the Chairman, due to the proposed
        closure of the Eastdale Unit.   It was

              RESOLVED THAT the Chairman's action with regard to early
              retirement and redundancy pay in respect of Dr Hunter, with
              effect from 1 April 1990, be confirmed.

      4. Role of the Royal College Assessor on Advisory Appointments Committees

        Following the Authority's discussions on the Medical Appointments
        Paper TA(89)132, one Member requested clarification in respect of the
        role of the Royal College Assessor on an Advisory Appointments
        Committee, in particular whether an appointment could still be
        recommended if a candidate was not acceptable to the Royal College
        Assessor.

        The Regional General Manager explained to Members that new regulations
        for AACs currently being considered could give a Royal College
        Assessor the right of veto.

192   DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES:   HOSPTTAT, MKOTCAT, AND DENTAL S T A F F -
WHITE PAPER IMPLEMENTATION:   PROGRESS REPORT

The Regional Treasurer reported briefly on the following items:-
(1) Self Governing Trusts

   Initially, nine units in the Trent Region had expressed interest in
   self-governing status and as members were already aware details had
   been sent to the Department of Health in a Regional submission.   The
   Secretary of State had recently indicated that he would like to see
   all the proposals move forward to the next stage, which involved the
   preparation of a business plan.

   It was also reported that two Conferences for staff of units
   expressing an interest in SG status had taken place in June, one at
   national and one at regional level.   Chairmen of Health Authorities,
   General Managers and Deans of Medical Schools had also been invited
   to attend the Regional Conference at which an initial guide for self
   governing trusts had been distributed which gave more details of the
   powers of trusts, the financial framework in which they would work
   and certain personnel issues.

(2) Future Funding Arrangements      ;

   Work was being carried out within the RHA on the level of cross
   boundary flows between Regions and between Districts within the
   Region in preparation for next year's resource allocation process.

(3) Contracting

   The separation of buyers and providers of health services and t h e '
   consequent need for contracts was the most important proposal in the
   Government's White Paper. A great deal of work was required to
   ensure that contracts are specific enough to be monitored and
   controlled and this was being co-ordinated through a Working Group
   chaired by Mr Brian Blissett, the DGM of Southern Derbyshire. There
   was particular concern about the contracts for acute services and a
   lot of effort was going into the exploration of DRGs (Diagnosis
   Related Groups) which were potentially the best way to measure and
   cost acute in-patient workload.

(4) GP Practice Budgets

   A report had been prepared on the work carried out in Trent on GP
   Practice Budgets financed by a special allocation from the
   Department.   A copy of the report was available to Members on
   request.

(5) Capital Charging

   More information was becoming available, and it   was hoped that a
   short seminar on capital charging could be arranged forMembers prior
   to the September or October Authority meeting.

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - UPDATE

The Secretary to the Authority reported that the taking of oral evidence
at the Inquiry had now been completed.
                                   - 6 -




        The ChieY Metropolitan Ambulance Officer of the South Yorkshire
        Metropolitan Ambulance Service and his Deputy, who had been present
        during the incident M t h other SYMAS staff,° had now given evidence.
        There was no reason to suppose that the giving of that evidence had gone
        other than satisfactorily.    The Secretary further reported that the last
        round of witnesses had included GPs and spectators present at the match.

        Lord Justice Taylor had asked for final interim conclusions and
        recommendations from the various parties giving evidence, and the
        Authority's submission had now been finalised.   It was noted that the
        Authority's formal evidence to the Inquiry had been submitted in three
        parts, (a) response to questions, (b) recommendations, and (c) general
        comments.   Members were informed that Section (c) contained comments
        expressing criticism of the South Yorkshire Police.   These comments had
        been included, following legal advice, to ensure that the legal position
        of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service was not adversely
        affected.

        Lord Justice Taylor had promised an interim report of the Inquiry
        proceedings, before the commencement of the 1989/90 football season, and
        it was anticipated that this would be completed by the end of August
      ■1989.

195    REVIEW OF SUPPLIES AND PROCUREMENT FUNCTIONS (RE-SUBMISSION)

       The Authority received the Report of the Regional General Manager
       tT A (89)134).

       The Regional Treasurer reported that following the publication of the NHS
       White Paper, Health Authorities had been asked to concentrate on core
       activities, and the Regional Supplies Officer had been asked to submit
       proposals for the Procurement and Supply Functions, to take account of
       this aspect of the White Paper.      '   ' ,
                                                      ■   -p

       A report had been prepared for the June 1989 meeting of the Authority,
       but this had been withdrawn following receipt of advice from the NHS
       Management Executive.   The advice received had now been incorporated
       into Report TA(89)134.

       The Regional Treasurer briefly explained.the content of the Report to
       Members, and emphasised that although the budget for the Supplies and
       Procurement function would be devolved to Districts immediately, it was
       recommended that the freedom to use the budget to provide an alternative
       supplies service should not b e ‘exercised until 1.4.1992, to protect the
       recent substantial investments in Supplies and allow the benefits of the
       final implementation of the Supplies Information System to be fully
       realised.

       At this point Mr N F Townsend left the meeting.

       Members then considered the Report and also the appointment of a Chairman
       of the Board of the Trent Purchasing Agency.   Nominations were
       discussed, and also the question of remuneration to the Chairman.

       Some Members were of the opinion that no remuneration should be paid to
       the Chairman, but it was generally felt that a payment to the Chairman
       was justified.   Following discussion, it was
                                   - 7 -




          RESOLVED UNANIMOUSLY THAT

               (a) The recommendations set out in Section 5 and 6 (iii) and
                   (iv) of Paper TA(89)134 be approved.

               (b) Mr N F Townsend be appointed Chairman of the Trent
                   Purchasing Agency from a date to be agreed.

          AND ON A MAJORITY VOTE THAT

               (c) In recognition of the additional burdens of responsibility
                   that are assumed, a remuneration of £3,000 per annum be paid
                   to the Chairman of the Trent Purchasing Agency in addition
                   to such other allowance or compensation to which there may
                   be an entitlement.   :..
                                                                                  ■■ ■ - ; -:



196   NOTTINGHAM CITY HOSPITAL - DEPARTMENT OF ONCOLOGY AND
                                                                                       ;r:-
      CENTRALISATION OF RENAL SERVICES - MANAGEMENT CONTRACTING

      The Authority received the Report of the Regional Estates Manager
      ■(TA (89)135)'.
               ^ ......      ..    ;
      After discussion, it was                            .

           RESOLVED THAT approval be given for the employment of a Management
           Contractor to carry out the construction of this project (Department
           of Oncology and Centralisation of Renal Services, Nottingham City
           Hospital) and to enter into a form of contract known as a Standard
           Form of Management Contract issued by the Joint Contracts Tribunal
           upon receipt of a satisfactory tender for the management fee.

197   LEICESTER ROYAL INFIRMARY:       NEURO CT SCANNER

      The Regional Estates Manager requested the Authority's approval to accept
      a tender of £95,529 against a budget cost of £59,000 for builders work
      for the installation of a CT Scanner within the existing hospital.

      Members noted that the tender was in competition and reflected the tender
      climate for this type of work, and there was no indication that a
      retender would result in the receipt of a lower offer.   The Scanner
      equipment was on order and the builders work needed to commence to allow
      the installation work to proceed following delivery.   It was also noted
      that there was no opportunity to reduce the scope of the work.

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT approval be given to accept the tender of £95,529 for
           builders work for the installation of a CT Scanner within the
           existing hospital building of the Leicester Royal Infirmary.

      At this point the Officers, with the exception of the Regional General
      Manager and the Regional Treasurer, left the meeting, prior to discussion
      of the following items.

198   EARLY RETIREMENT - DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL SERVICES AND MANPOWER

      The Regional Health Authority agreed, with regret, to the early
      retirement of Mr J S George, with effect from 9 November 1990.


                                                                                              ■rr
                                                                                                -3
                                                                                                .
                                 - 8 -




199   SURVEY OF HEALTH AUTHORITY MEMBERSHIP
                      >
      The Authority received an oral report from the Regional General Manager
      on a survey of Health Authority membership, which was being undertaken by
      the King's Fund Equal Opportunities Task Force, with financial support
      from the Department of Health.                            x

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT the information on ethnicity requested by the Task
           Force should be provided by the Regional General Manager.
