                                                           TAM(89)133-140

TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Business considered in Private on 8 May 1989 at the
Regional Health Authority Headquarters____________


PRESENT:       Dr P F J Sewell (In the   Chair)
               Mr D Brown                Mrs B J Keene
               Mrs R E Carmichael        Professor D S Munro
               Mrs N M Collett           Mrs J Radford
               Professor P H Fentem      Councillor J Thierry
               Councillor P Gaul         Mr N F Townsend
               Mrs A Lathwood            Mrs P B Wildgoose

APOLOGIES:     Sir Michael Carlisle
               Professor Sir Robert Kilpatrick
               Mrs P E Latham
               Mr A O'Brien
               Dr A Z Paterson
               Mr M Varcoe


133   BUSINESS CONSIDERED IN PRIVATE

      It was

             RESOLVED THAT to enable the Authority to consider business of a
             confidential nature, the public be excluded from the meeting.

134   MINUTES

      The Minutes of that part of the meeting held in Private on 10 April 1989
      were approved as a correct record.

135   MATTERS ARISING

      (a) Medical Negligence Claim:      Consultant Anaesthetist

           A question was raised by a Member concerning the outcome of the
           discussion on this item at the last meeting.    It had been his
           understanding that it was the Regional Health Authority's
           responsibility to ensure that the Consultants employed within the
           Region were insured by a Medical Defence Union.    In reply it was
           pointed out that the RHA had a responsibility to ensure that only
           Consultants who carried full insurance were appointed to posts within
           the Region, but it was the Consultant's own responsibility to see
           that he/she remained fully insured.   It was also emphasised that the
           administrative procedure relating to this aspect of Consultant
           employment were well established and fully carried out.

136   WHITE PAPER

      (a) Regional General Manager's Progress Report on Implementation

           A paper had been circulated to Members summarising progress to date
           in preparing for the implementation of« the White Paper (TA(89)109).
                        -   2   -




The Regional General Manager informed Members that a timetable of
events for implementation had been completed and a network of actions
required was nearing completion.   Members would be kept informed of
progress each month and any significant difficulties in keeping to
the timetable would be reported.   Discussion on the following
aspects of implementation took place.

(1) Self-Governing Trusts

   Members noted the Units within the Region which had so far
   indicated an expression of interest in self-governing status.
   It was emphasised that presently no firm commitment was being
   made on either side and the Units concerned had simply "shown
   interest" at this time.   A report on these Units would be sent
   to the Secretary of State at the end of May 1989.   In the spring
   of 1990 a period of formal consultation would begin and a greater
   commitment towards self-governing status would be sought from the
   Units concerned.   In the cases of all those Units indicating a
   preliminary interest a substantial element of medical and
   managerial support had been expressed.

   The possibility of major teaching hospitals becoming
   Self-Governing Trusts, and the implications of such changes were
   discussed.

   The good relations which existed between the University and the
   NHS in the three teaching districts in the Region were emphasised
   and discussion focused on the degree of University representation
   in any future discussions on medical teaching.   It was suggested
   that an acknowledgement should be included in the proposed
   comment to allay the present anxiety within teaching hospitals on
   this question.

   Members were reminded however that the future constitution of NHS
   Hospital Trusts was detailed in the Technical Working Papers
   issued following publication of the White Paper, and the matter
   of such representation was a question which would have to be
   resolved at national level.

   Members were also informed that the Regional Treasurer was a
   member of the Steering Group on Undergraduate Medical and Dental
   Education, chaired by Sir Christopher France, set up nationally
   to consider the problems of medical teaching.   The Authority’s
   views would therefore be put forward to the Steering Group.

   After further discussion however it was agreed that the Regional
   General Manager should stress these views in the Regional comment
   on medical teaching.

      £ Subsequent to the meeting the following Regional comment was
        prepared and submitted to the Department:-

          "The RHA remains very concerned to ensure that proper
          agreements are in place to safeguard the standards of
          medical and dental teaching and research in the Trent
          Region, particularly where major Teaching Hospitals become
          Self Governing Trusts.   Members strongly recommend to the
          Secretary of State that Regional Health Authorities be
                                 -   3   -




                     given the responsibility of ensuring that adequate
                     arrangements are made for the views of the appropriate
                     University to be taken fully into account in framing the
                     contracts of all teaching hospitals within their Region,
                     including those which opt for self governing status.

              Arising from this discussion a Member suggested that an
              opportunity be afforded for all Members of the Authority to
              express their views on aspects of the White Paper generally.   It
              was agreed that a short seminar for Members to discuss the White
              Paper should be held prior to the July meeting of the Authority.
          (2) Family Practitioner Committees

              It was reported that the pilot scheme on information requirements
              for GP budgets was proceeding well and a network of action had
              been circulated with the Regional General Manager's report.

              Authority Members were reminded that they would be appointing
              Members to Family Practitioner Committees, and it was suggested
              that Authority Members should in due course visit FPCs in the
              Region.

              Following discussion, it was

                   RESOLVED THAT the Secretary should co-ordinate appropriate
                   arrangements to enable Authority Members to visit Family
                   Practitioner Committees.

      (b) Review of the Organisation of the Regional Health Authority

          The Authority was informed that the Regional General Manager would
          meet with Mr Duncan Nichol, Chief Executive of the NHS Management
          Board, to discuss the Review.   A report on the outcome of this
          Review would be made to the next meeting of the Authority.

137   DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES:   HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF




138   MEMBERSHIP OF DISTRICT HEALTH AUTHORITIES IN THE TRENT REGION

      The Authority received and noted the report of the Regional General
      Manager (TA(89)97) on membership of District Health Authorities in the
      Trent Region.
                                      -       4   -




      It was

           RESOLVED THAT the ^following be appointed to the DHA shown for the
           period indicated

           DHA                NAME AND ADDRESS               NOMINATING BODY    PERIOD OF
                                                                                 APPOINTMENT

           Central           Mrs F B Stein                   Central            To 30.9.1989
           Nottinghamshire   St Helen's                      Nottinghamshire
           Health            Pinxton Lane                    Health
           Authority         Kirkby-in-Ashfield             .Authority
                             Notts NG17 8LT

139   STRATEGIC REVIEW:    RURAL HOSPITALS

      The Regional Medical Officer informed the Authority that views on the
      role of small Hospital Units within the Region had been discussed by
      Members and it had been suggested that a Working Party should be set up
      to review the role of these hospitals and to develop a Regional strategic
      policy.

      Following discussion, it was

           RESOLVED THAT

           (1) A Working Party should be set up, to include the following
               Members

                      MRS B J KEENE (CHAIRMAN)
                      MRS J RADFORD
                      MR N F TOWNSEND
                      MRS P B WILDGOOSE

                 (The above Members had agreed to join the Working Party,
                 initially for one meeting only, and then subject to
                 availability.)

                    DR A Z PATERSON       -           To be invited to become a member of the
                                                      Working Party

                    COUNCILLOR P GAUL -               Membership subject to future
                                                      commitments

           (2) The following officers of the Authority would also serve on the
               Working Party

                      (a) The Regional Medical Officer

                      (b) The Regional Nursing Officer

                      (c) The Regional Corporate Planning Manager

140   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

      Members received the report of the Regional General Manager on the
      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster on Saturday, 15 April 1989 (TA(89)98).
                             -   5   -




The Secretary and Mr A Hopkins, Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer (SYMAS) reported briefly on the Health Service response to the
incident, and the action taken immediately following the disaster by the
Sheffield Health Authority, the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Service and the Blood Transfusion Service.   The indications were that
the Health Services had responded speedily and efficiently to the
incident and that major disaster plans had been put into practice and had
worked well.

Members were reminded that on 15 May 1989 the official Inquiry into the
disaster, headed by Lord Justice Taylor, would re-open following a
preliminary Hearing on 28 April 1989.

The Secretary and the Regional Legal Adviser also gave details of further
action carried out since the disaster.

     (1)    Under the terms of Circular HC(77)1 the Trent Region would
           undertake an internal Inquiry of its own and a detailed
           Regional/District de-briefing meeting had taken place on 2 May
           1989 with a view to formulating in due course a report for
           submission to the Regional and District Health Authorities and
           the Department and consideration of any operational matters
           which might need dealing with in advance of the official
           Inquiry.

     (2) At the preliminary Hearing of the official Inquiry on 28 April
         1989, the Authority's Solicitors had applied unsuccessfully for
         leave for the Authority to be represented at the Inquiry.   For
         a number of reasons it had been considered that the RHA should
         be represented and instructions had been given to the
         Authority's Solicitors to raise this matter again with Lord
         Justice Taylor.

     (3) Consequent upon the Hillsborough Disaster the Chairman of the
         Trent RHA and the Chairman of the Mersey RHA had agreed that a
         joint conference should be held shortly to consider current
         knowledge on the management of psychological stress after major
         disasters.

Members discussed a number of aspects related to the incident, and a
number of points were clarified by officers.   At the conclusion of the
discussion Members placed on record their appreciation of the staff of
the various branches of the Service who had acted so promptly and
effectively during this tragic accident.




                                                     €
