IN CONFIDENCE - NOT FOR PUBLICATION


                                                         TAM(89)155-167

TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Business considered in Private on 12 June 1989 at the
Regional Health Authority Headquarters______________


PRESENT:       Sir Michael Carlisle (Chairman)
               Mr D Brown              Dr A Z Paterson
               Mrs N M Collett         Mrs J Radford
               Mrs 0 J Keene           Dr P F J Sewell
               Mrs P E Latham          Councillor J Thierry
               Professor D S Munro     Mr N F Townsend
               Mr A O'Brien            Mrs P B Wildgoose

APOLOGIES:     Mrs R E Carmichael
               Professor P H Fentem
               Councillor P Gaul
               Professor Sir Robert Kilpatrick
               Mrs A Lathwood
               Mr M Varcoe


155   BUSINESS CONSIDERED IN PRIVATE

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT to enable the Authority to consider business of a
           confidential nature, the public be excluded from the meeting.

156   MINUTES

      The Minutes of that part of the meeting held in Private on 8 May 1989
      were approved as a correct record.

157   MATTERS ARISING

      (a) White Paper;    Self Governing Trusts (Minute TAM(89)136(a)(1) refers

           At the last meeting Members had discussed Self Governing Trusts, with
           particular regard to the proposed Regional comment on medical
           teaching.   The Authority was now informed that the views of Members
           expressed at the meeting had been considered and a revised form of
           words had been prepared, more clearly setting out the opinions of the
           Authority with regard to the degree of University representation in
           any future discussions on medical teaching.   This revision,
           indicating the concern of Members with regard to medical teaching,
           had now been included in the Regional comment submitted to the
           Department,

           Members were also reminded that the viewp of the Authority would be
           further emphasised by the Regional Treasurer, who was a member of the
           National Steering Group on Undergraduate Medical and Dental
           Education, chaired by Sir Christopher France.
(b) Review of the Organisation of the Regional Health Authority
    (Minute TAM(89)186(b) refers)_______________________________

   The Authority was informed that the Regional General Manager had met
   with Mr Duncan Nichol, Chief Executive of the NHS Management Board to
   discuss the Review.   Preliminary agreement had been reached in
   respect of the Regional submission, and the main principles of the
   Review, ie to promote maximum delegation of responsibility downwards
   to District and Unit level, had been accepted.

   The Regional submission had contained proposals in respect of:-

   (a)    The South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

   (b)    The Blood Transfusion Service.
         It was anticipated that in the short term no firm decisions would
         be taken on the future of the BTS, pending agreements on
         management to be taken at national level.

   (c)    The Regional Supplies Organisation.

   (d)    The Regional Computer Division.

   (e)    The Regional Training Function
         Members were informed that for the future, the role of Regional
         Training would be confined to Management Training only and a
         "slimming down" of the RHA's Training Section had already been
         carried out.

   (f) The Regional Capital Department
       Further consideration would be given to the role of the
       Department in the long term.

   (g) The Regional Design Group
       Some rationalisation had already been carried out, and it h'ad
       been anticipated that a small group would continue to function
       "in house".   However, it now appeared that this arrangement
       would not be acceptable and firms were now being approached to
       negotiate the assimilation of the Group on a commercial basis.

   Members were informed that detailed proposals on the review of the
   organisation of the RHA would be submitted to the Authority in the
   near future.              .

   Particular concern was expressed on two aspects of the Review
   proposals,

   (1)   Training

         It was noted that Management Training would be continued, but it
         was also felt that adequate transition arrangements should be
         made to cover other forms of training, at least in the short
         term.    '                                       -■
            (2) Computing

               Following the proposals on the future of the RHA's Computer
               Division, Members questioned the advisability of retaining a
               small group of staff at Regional level with NHS expertise,   It
               was felt that because of the likely increase of Information
               Systems coming into use at hospitals in the future, the retention
               of such a group "in-house" would safeguard the interests of the
               NHS.

      (c)   Disciplinary Procedures:   Hospital Medical and Dental Staff:




158   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY

      The Secretary to the Authority reported briefly on the current situation
      relating to the Inquiry.

      (1) The brief factual reports (TA(89)98) considered by Members at the
           last meeting of the Authority had now been submitted to Lord Justice
           Taylor, who was heading the official Inquiry into the disaster.
      (2)   After rejection of an initial application, the Authority had now
            been given leave*to be legally represented throughout the official
            Inquiry.

      (3)   It was expected that representatives of SYNAS would appear before
            the Inquiry shortly, to give evidence.

      (4)   A Paper would be brought to a future meeting of the Authority on the
            Joint Conference "To consider current knowledge on the management of
            psychological stress after major disasters".   (Members were
            reminded that following the disaster the Joint Conference had been
            proposed by the Chairman of the Trent RHA and the Chairman of the
            Mersey RHA.)

159   APPOINTMENT OF HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF

      There were no matters concerning the appointment of Hospital Medical and
      Dental Staff requiring discussion in private.

160   DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES:   HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF:
      DR F E ETENG                             ____________________

      The Authority received a Report of the Regional General Manager
      concerning Dr F E Eteng, Consultant Psychiatrist, North Derbyshire Health
      Authority (TA(89)110), which embodied the decisions of a Committee of the
      Authority.

      As the decision to dismiss Dr Eteng was already the subject of an Appeal,
      it was

            RESOLVED THAT the following Members would form an Appeal Committee
            in accordance with Section 40, paragraph 4 of the General Whitley
            Council Agreement:

                 Mrs P B Wildgoose (Chairman)
                 Mrs N M Collett
                 Professor P H Fentem

      Accordingly, Mrs Wildgoose and Mrs Collett left the room prior to
      consideration of the remainder of this item.   (Professor Fentem was not
      present for this Authority meeting.)

      Dr Sewell, who had chaired the.Committee, reminded Members of details of
      the case.   The report outlined the decisions of the Committee concerning
      alleged professional misconduct/incompetence and alleged personal
      misconduct.

      So far as the latter was concerned, the Authority noted that, having
      carefully considered all the facts and having taken account of the
      representations made on behalf of Dr Eteng, the Committee had determined
      as follows

      In the case concerning a former patient, Mrs H H, the representations
      made on Dr Eteng's behalf were accepted and this case was disregarded in
      the Committee's subsequent decisions.
