                                                       TA(89)179
Trent Regional Health Authority


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - INTERIM REPORT
OF THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


Report of the Regional General Manager


1.   As Members will be aware, the Interim Report of the Inquiry
      set up by the Home Secretary into the disaster at the
      Hillsborough Football Stadium on 15th April 1989 was published
      on Friday, 4th August 1989.


2.   Attached for the information of' Members are relevant extracts
      from the Report relating to the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
      Ambulance Service.   Also enclosed is a copy of a short
      press statement issued after publication.


3.   Mr A Page, Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer, will be in
      attendance at the meeting to answer any queries and to report
      on the up-to-date situation.
    EXTRACTS FROM THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE INQUIRY BY THE RT HON LORD
    JUSTICE TAYLOR INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER ON 15TH APRIL 1989


    Part I - What Happened at Hillsborough?


    Chapter 5 - THE AFTERMATH




South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS)
   105. Before 1986 there had been no SYMAS representative routinely present at Hillsborough matches. The
Club was content, as indeed are many other clubs, to rely upon the St John's Ambulance Brigade and a 999 call
if necessary. From 1986 onwards, after representations, the Club provided two seats in the south stand for
SYMAS staff at League matches. At one stage it was suggested they would be best placed in the north stand
close to the gymnasium which had been designated as the casualty centre in the event o f a major incident. The
south stand seats were allotted as they placed the SYMAS staff closer to the players’ tunnel should a player be
injured. These seats were, however, not available at Cup semi-finals. SYMAS representatives nevertheless
attended at the semi-finals by arrangement with the police in 1988 and again in 1989. The SYMAS officers
stood on the ramp leading to the pitch at the north-east comer. They had one ambulance outside the ground
and one on standby.

   106. On 15 April 1989. Officers Higgins and Eason were at the ground with an ambulance and crew. They
noticed fans on the track and went to the Leppings Lane end whilst the game was still in progress. They began
to attend to casualties. Meanwhile, at 2.59 pm, there had been a call from Police Constable Waugh at police

Headquarters to the Hillsborough police control asking if ambulances were required. This was on the
instruction o f Chief Inspector Edmundson who had heard over the radio, as had Police Constable Waugh
himself, crowd noise and snatches of speech from Hillsborough suggesting distress and possible injuries. The
reply from the control box was: no reports o f injuries but keep standing by. At 3.07 pm after hearing from the
ground that there might be inj uries. police Headquarters notified SYMAS that ambulances might be required.
Then, seconds later, Mr Murray’s request for a fleet o f ambulances was relayed to SYMAS. They reacted at
once. Ambulances began to arrive at the Leppings Lane entrance at 3.13 pm and at the Penistone Road
entrance at 3.17 pm. In all, some 42 ambulances attended, 31 o f them from SYMAS and 11 from
neighbouring authorities. By 4.30 pm, they had conveyed some 172 casualties to the Northern General
Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.
  Part III - Conclusions



                                                CHAPTER 21

                                FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY SERVICES

No Fault by the Emergency Services
   296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the response by the St John
Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any
criticism of them. The only attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was proved to be
wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April when he said more
lives could have been saved if staff and equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact
as to the times of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say whether lives
could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor complained o f the
absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the
pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the electric
charge.

  297. I find that all three of the emergency services named above responded promptly when alerted, that
they brought appropriate equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently.

  298. It would be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium, medical facilities capable of dealing with a
major disaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, other
equipment and medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100 casualties is not practicable.

  299. What is required is a basic level of provision for first aid. for professional medical attention and for
ambulance attendance, together with a system of co-ordination with the emergency services which will bring
them to the scene swiftly in whatever numbers are required. What will amount to an appropriate basic
provision for the future eg the equipment in a first aid room, requires expert evaluation and advice.

   300. On the day, there was no clear understanding between the Club and Dr Purcell as to his role. He
believed he was primarily there to attend to the players. The Club regarded him also as the “physician available
to attend at the first aid room if required”, as laid down in the Safety Certificate.

  301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the emergency services. It is clear
that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature
and extent of the crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for which those
unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to the emergency services would have
saved more lives.

  302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at the north-east corner
of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that at the top of the ramp leading to the pitch the
access for ambulances was inadequate. There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for
ambulances to use the two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out routes
was frustrated by the^presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event, none of these matters affected
operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down. The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and
ambulances used one entrance satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.
Part IV - Interim Recommendations

Safety Certificates
           13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
        which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
        ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
        object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
        recommendations in this report.

          14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
        which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

          15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
        Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


           16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
        amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
        accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
        effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
        with the locsfTauthority’s rules.

           17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
        of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
        the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group's terms of
        reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
        ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
        and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
        written reports for consideration by the local authority.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★          35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
        liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

★         36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
        ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
        spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
        concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
        rooms of each of the emergency services.

★         37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
        services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
        within the ground itself.

★         38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
        the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
        they are required.


First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
★         39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators. The
        club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

           40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
         equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
         medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

★          41. The club should eta^iuv ■* »ieuical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
         any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
         present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
         match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
         contactable.
                      w
    ★      42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
         attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

           43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
         be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
         requirement of the Safety Certificate.
                                                                           tre n t
                                                                           tssm&mmgfis&tus
F ulw ood H ouse, Old Fulw ood Road, Sh effield SIO 3TH                    REGIONAL
Public R elations Office: Sh effield ( 0 7 4 2 ) 6 3 0 3 0 0               HEALTH
Fax: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 3 0 6 9 5 6                                               AUTHORITY




For immediate use                                          4 August 1989
                                                          No. 38/89




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY REACTION
SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


   Mr. Brian Edwards, General Manager of Trent Regional Health
Authority, commented today (Friday, August 4) on the interim
report of the Hillsborough Inquiry.
    "We have always had every confidence in the professionalism
and dedication of the personnel of the South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service, which is one of the finest in
the country.
    "It is very nice to know that Lord Justice Tayler has reached
the same conclusion".


ENDS




Note to News Editors
    South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service is directly
responsible to the Trent Regional Health Authority.
