                                                                 TAM (89) 233-260

TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Meeting held on 11 September 1989 at the Regional Health Authority
Headquarters_______________

PRESENT              Sir Michael Carlisle (Chairman)

                Mr D Brown                         Professor D S Munro
                Mrs R E Carmichael                 Mr A O'Brien
                Mrs N M Collett                    Dr A Z Paterson
                Professor P H Fentem               Dr P F 3 Sewell
                Mrs B 3 Keene                      Councillor 3 Thierry
                Professor Sir Robert Kilpatrick    Mr N F Townsend
                Mrs P E Latham                     Mrs P B Wildgoose
                Mrs A Lathwood

APOLOGIES:      Mr M Foy
                Councillor P Gaul
                Mrs 3 Radford
                Mr M Varcoe


233   INTRODUCTION

      The Chairman informed members that Professor Sir Robert Kilpatrick was
      attending his last meeting of the Authority, due to retirement.

      Since joining the RHA in August 1973, Sir Robert had made a great
      contribution to the work of the Authority, both as a Clinician and a
      Scientist. Members recorded their very sincere thanks to Sir Robert and
      extended their good wishes for   the future.

234   MINUTES

      The minutes of the meeting held on 10 July 1989 were approved as a
      correct record, subject to the inclusion of Councillor 3 Thierry's name
      on the list of those members attending the meeting. The minutes were
      signed by the Chairman.

235   MATTERS ARISING

      (a)   Guidelines for the Chairmen of Medical Advisory Appointments
            Committees (Minute 205 refers)

            The Regional Medical Officer reported a delay in completion of the
            Guidelines, and stated that these would be circulated to Members
            before the next meeting.    Any comments  would be    considered and a
            further report brought to   the earliest  possible    meeting of the
            Authority.

      (b)   Proposals for the Interim Rationalisation of Obstetrics and
            Gynaecology Services in Sheffield (Minute 214 refers)

            The Authority noted that any further developments in respect of
            discussions with the Community Health Cduncil would be reported to
            members.
                                           -   2   -
236   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CIRCULARS

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional General
      Manager, summarising Department of Health Circulars (TA(89)160).

237   APPOINTMENT OF MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF

      The Authority received a Report notifying the unanimous recommendations
      of Advisory Appointments Committees held on 7, 14, 19, 26 July 1989, 2,
      10, 16 August, 1989 and 7 September 1989 (TA(89)16l).

      (a)    It was

                  RESOLVED THAT the following appointments be approved in
                  accordance with the terms and conditions of service approved
                  for Consultants by the Department of Health.

      NAME                   GRADE/ POST                       HOSPITAL/DISTRICT

      DR D CHEW              Consultant Physician with         North Derbyshire HA
                             responsibility for the
                             Elderly

      DR S M LITTLEW00D      Consultant Dermatologist          Central Nottinghamshire
                                                               HA

      MR 3 G PILLAY         Consultant in Accident             North Lincolnshire HA
                            and Emergency

      DR C I ROTHWELL        Consultant Radiologist            North Lincolnhsire HA

      DR F E WINTON         Consultant in Acute                North Lincolnshire HA
                            Psychiatry with special
                            responsibility for
                            Rehabilitation

      D R C K G TYLER       Consultant Anaesthetist            North Lincolnshire HA
                            with responsibility for
                            Intensive Care

      MR C A GIE             Two Consultants in                Central Nottinghamshire
      MR C 3 PICKLES         Obstetrics and Gynaecology                  HA

      (It was noted that the above appointments had already been approved by
      the Chairman under delegated authority).

      MISS A FOWLIE          Consultant in Obstetrics          Southern Derbyshire HA
                             and Gynaecology

      (b)    The following Consultant retirements were noted:-

      NAME                SPECIALTY            BASE HOSPITAL        LAST DAY OF SERVICE

      DR P G HURST        Anaesthetics         Pilgrim Hospital     17.10.1989
                                               Boston

      DR H L MATTHEWS     General              Derbyshire RI        23.11.1989
                          Medicine             Derby
                                       -   3   -
238   FINAL SPENDING POSITION OF HEALTH AUTHORITIES WITHIN THE REGION FOR THE
      YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 1989______________________________________________

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional Treasurer
      (TA(89)162).

      The Principal Assistant Regional Treasurer (Revenue) reported a very
      satisfactory year end result at 31 March 1989. He drew the attention of
      members to details contained in the Report of under and over spendings
      against cash limits, and the under and over spendings on an income and
      expenditure basis for both Revenue and Capital for each District in the
      Region during 1988/89.

      It was

            RESOLVED THAT the Authority should note the satisfactory year end
            position on both revenue and capital account and that the
            appropriate adjustments to the 1989/90 cash limits for the Regional
            Health Authority (for Regionally Managed Services) the District
            Health Authorities and the Community Health Councils to reflect the
            under and overspendings set out in Report TA(89)162, be approved.

239   REPORT ON CASH LIMIT ALLOCATIONS 1989/90

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional Treasurer
      setting out proposed revenue allocations to District Health Authorities
      and Regionally Managed Services (TA(89)163).

      The Principal Assistant Regional Treasurer (Revenue) drew a number of
      items to the attention of members.

      (a)   Review Implementation Costs - Distribution of the additional sum
            received from the Department of Health to meet the costs associated
            with the implementation of the NHS Review.

      (b)   Flexible Pay Supplements - Non recurrent addition to theRegion's
            cash limit, notified by the Department of Health, to meet the
            flexible pay supplements awarded to nurses andmidwivesunder    the
            pilot scheme introduced from 1 July 1989.

      (c)   Project 2000: Sheffield - Non recurrent allocation to the Region's
            Cash Limit notified by the Department of Health as a result of the
            acceptance of Sheffield Health Authority as a demonstration district
            for the implementation of Project 2000.

      (d)   Patients' Travel Expenses: Members were informed that the
            allocations shown were based on the expenditure recorded in the
            Annual Accounts for 1988/89. During discussion one member
            questioned the wide variation in expenditure between districts and
            it was suggested that Districts be asked to ensure that Patients
            were aware that funds for the payment of travel expenses were
            available.

            It was

                 RESOLVED THAT the recurrent allocations shown in the statement
                 attached to Report TA(89)163, to Bistrict Health Authorities
                 and Regionally Managed Services totalling £2,237,800, the non­
                 recurrent allocations of £2,740,700 and the transfer to capital
                 of £400,000 be approved.
240   SPENDING POSITION OF DISTRICT HEALTH AUTHORITIES AS AT 31 JULY 1989

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional Treasurer
      (TA(89)164).

      Members were informed that over the Region as a whole the Revenue
      spending position at 31.7.1989 was satisfactory. Two Districts were
      showing a relatively high level of overspending, and although there was
      no reason to suppose that a satisfactory year end result could not be
      achieved, the situation would be closely monitored.

      With regard to capital spending, it was expected that a satisfactory year
      end result would be achieved and that spending would be contained within
      the available cash limit. It was

           RESOLVED THAT the current position be noted.

242   REVENUE PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS 1990/91

      The Authority received the Report of the Regional Treasurer on Revenue
      Planning Assumptions 1990/91 (TA(89)166).

      The Principal Assistant Regional Treasurer (Revenue) briefly explained to
      members the main issues of the Report. They were informed that Health
      Circular HC(89)24 issued in August 1989 set out Revenue and Capital
      Planning Assumptions for 1990/91, and Report TA(89)166, now presented,
      made recommendations regarding Revenue Planning Assumptions for Districts
      in the Trent Region for that year. It was stressed that these
      recommendations were in respect of revenue only and a separate report
      would be issued for Capital Resource Assumptions 1990/91. Further
      guidance on Joint Finnace would be issued at a later date.

      Members were reminded that as a result of the NHS Review a new method of
      funding would be introduced from the year 1990/91 onwards. Under the new
      arrangements the present system of allocation under the RAWP formula
      would be discontinued. The most important effect of this change would be
      that District allocations would be calculated on the basis of their
      weighted resident, rather than their weighted served, populations.

      The Authority was informed that for the year 1990/91 the Trent Region had
      been advised by the Department of Health to plan on the assumption that
      Revenue growth would be within the range of 1.958 to 2.4%. All Regions
      had been asked to plan on the- lower end of the range, and following this
      advice, the Regional Health Authority proposed that Planning Assumptions
      for 1990/91 based on the lower growth rate of 1.958 should be issued to
      Districts. However, with the exception of Sheffield, Districts should be
      asked, when submitting their plans, to give details of the projects they
      would wish to bring forward, if their Planning Assumptions were to be
      increased by 25%.

      The Principal Assistant Regional Treasurer (Revenue) also informed the
      Authority that before considering the District Allocations the RHA should
      decide on the amounts which should be set aside for special developments.
      In Report TA(89)166 it was recommended that a total of £7.5 million
      should be reserved for this purpose and details of the estimated amounts
      which it was proposed to set aside for particular purposes was shown in
      Appendix 2 of the Report. The Principal Assistant Regional Treasurer
                                 -   5   -
(Revenue) drew the attention of members to the sums allocated for
Regional Specialties, particularly CABGs and for continuation of the
Regional Strategy for the transfer of the mentally ill and mentally
handicapped patients to the community.

Mention was also made of the fact that in determining the Revenue
Planning Assumptions for 1990/91 it had been necessary to compare the
estimated spending of Districts on their own residents at the present
time with the projected position in 1994/95 based on the new resident
population formula. This factor gave rise to considerable discussion
among members, it being noted that 1985 based projections, prepared by
the Office of Population, Censuses and Surveys (OPCS), of the 1994
resident populations of Districts had been used in calculating the 1994/5
estimated allocations. Members were informed that although the 1987 OPCS
based projections for 1989 differed significantly in some cases from the
1985 based projections there were no figures available for 1994 based on
the 1987 projections, so it was suggested that the 1985 based figures
should continue to be used, pending further detailed consideration of the
new figures over the next few months.

During discussion members also considered two further aspects of the
Resource Assumptions Report.

(a)   The Service Increment for Teaching (SIFT) included for each District
      had been uplifted to the level now agreed under the new formula and
      had been deducted from the figures shown. During discussion it was
      suggested that there was a need to compare the cost of similar
      Teaching Districts in other Regions, i.e. provincial teaching
      hospitals.

(b)   It was noted that in recent years health service inflation had
      exceeded general inflation by about 1% per annum on average, and it
      was suggested that Districts should be asked to set aside 1% of
      their cash limits for this purpose in 1990/91. Districts would be
      asked to decide whether this sum should be met from cost
      improvement/income generation programmes, growth money or a
      combination of both.

      After discussion, it was

         RESOLVED THAT the Authority should

         (1) Agree to set aside £7.5 million as a Provision for Special
              Developments for the purposes shown in Appendix 2 to Report
              TA(89)166.

         (2) Approve the Revenue Planning Assumptions   for Districts set
              out in Appendix 4 to Report TA(89)166.

         (3) Require Districts in preparing plans for 1990/91, to set
              aside 15o of their cash limits as a reserve against possible
              additional pay and price increases. The funding for this
              purpose to be found from cost improvement/income generation
              programmes, growth funding or a combination of both.
CAPITAL RESOURCE ASSUMPTIONS 1990/91
                        7-----------

The Authority received the Report of the Assistant Regional General
Manager (Capital Developments), which presented Capital Resource
Assumptions for the financial year 1990/91 and proposed assumptions of
block capital allocations for issue to District Health Authorities
(TA(89)167).

Members noted that the current estimate of capital resources for the
Regional Capital Programme for 1990/91 totalled £96.12 million with
commitments currently estimated at £101.02 million. This allowed for a
planned level of overcommitment of £4.90 million.

It was proposed that DHAs and RMS should assume receipt of basic block
capital cash allocations in 1990/91 as set out in the Report, totalling
£22.83 million.

During discussion, the question of the apportionment of funds from land
sales was raised. The Authority was informed that as a general rule,
when a sale was initiated by a District the proceeds would be retained by
the District concerned. If, however, the RHA had made a substantial
investment in the District to review or relocate services and a closure
resulted, the proceeds of the sale of surplus land would not revert
entirely to the District.

After consideration, it was

     RESOLVED THAT the Authority should note the capital resource
     assumptions and approve the issue to DHAs of firm block capital
     resource assumptions for 1990/91.

DERBY CITY HOSPITAL: ACUTE MENTAL ILLNESS FACILITIES AND DAY UNIT FOR THE
ELDERLY WITH PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS______________________________________

The Authority received the submission for Approval in Principle for Acute
Mental Illness Facilities and Day Unit for the Elderly with Psychiatric
Disorders (TA(89)168).

Members were informed that in accordance with the procedure for the
examination of proposals to come before the Authority for approval in
principle, Mrs N M Collett, Mrs B 3 Keene and Mrs 3 Radford had met with
Regional Officers on 13 June 1989 at Derby City Hospital to consider in
detail this submission, and had agreed that it be presented to the
Authority.

It was noted that the mental illness scheme would provide facilities for
acute patients requiring short intensive hospital treatment in a unit to
be built on a vacant site at Derby City Hospital; and that the design and
content was intended to be a repeat of the Unit built at Lincoln County
Hospital, with certain modifications. When the new unit was brought into
use, acute beds for the mentally ill at Pastures Hospital would be
closed.

It was also noted that the Day Unit for the Elderly with Psychiatric
Disorders would be purpose designed with a physical link to the
associated in-patient accommodation currently being planned as part of
the Phase II development of Derby City Hospital. Consequently a large
degree of interdependence between the separate inpatient and day patient
schemes would be achieved.
                                      -   7   -
      During discussion of the submission a question was raised on the
      applications of standard planning and design solutions. The background
      to this approach was explained and it was emphasised that the external
      appearance of the unit would be designed to be environmentally suitable
      for the surrounding locality.

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT to enable the continuation of detailed planning, the
           Authority should approve in principle the proposals for the
           provision of:-

           (a)   Acute Mental Illness facilities at Derby City Hospital at an
                 estimated capital cost of £5,384,011 and,

           (b)   A 25 place Day Unit for the Elderly with Psychiatric Disorders
                 at Derby City Hospital at an estimated capital cost of
                 £1,023,629.

245   NHS MANAGEMENT BOARD REVIEW: ACTION PLAN - UPDATE

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional Corporate
      Planning Manager setting out progress towards implementation of the 1988
      Action Plan (TA(89)169). Members were informed that the 1989 National
      Review meeting with the NHS Management Executive would take place on 20
      October 1989.

      The Regional Corporate Planning Manager briefly highlighted aspects of
      current activity in respect of the Action Plan.

      Members discussed the matter of Waiting Lists and it was noted that in
      the Region as a whole the number of patients waiting over one year for
      treatment had been reduced. The Regional Corporate Planning Manager
      informed members that the need for a patient to remain on a consultant's
      waiting list continued to be validated on a regularbasis.   Patients were
      removed from a list only if they had already received treatment or did
      not want to have treatment, or because they had moved from the area.
      Patients were not usually taken off a Waiting List for other reasons, the
      only exception being those patients requiring the removal of tattoos.

      During discussion a point was raised concerning the amount of time a
      patient had to wait between consultation with his/her GP and an initial
      out-patient appointment to see a Consultant. One member from Nottingham
      stated that it was his experience that a patient could wait up to one
      year for an initial appointment to see a Consultant, who would then
      decide whether the patient should be placed on the Waiting List. These
      difficulties arose predominantly in respect of the Orthopaedic,
      Ophthalmic and ENT specialties. It was agreed that the member concerned
      should provide additional information and the matter would be followed up
      by the Regional Corporate Planning Manager.

246   HEALTH PROMOTION IN TRENT - SUMMARY FOR ACTION

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional Health
      Authority Member Sub-Committee on Health Promotion (TA(89)170).
                                      -   8   -
      Members were reminded that at its meeting in February 1988 the Authority
      had agreed that each District Health Authority should produce a statement
      relating to their health promotion services. The summary report "Health
      Promotion in Trent - A Summary for Action" which provided recommendations
      for each DHA had now been produced. Copies had been circulated
      separately to RHA Members and Members of the Regional Executive Team.
      The full Report was available on request.

      Dr Paterson briefly highlighted aspects of the Report to Members and
      after discussion it was

           RESOLVED THAT the Authority should

           1) Receive the Report "Health Promotion in Trent - A Summary for
              Action".

           2) Pass each summary to the respective DHA for consideration in its
              Authority meeting and subsequent action.

           3) Maintain the RHA Members Sub-Committee on Health Promotion in
              order to:-

               a)   Monitor progress in respect of recommendations within this
                    Report.

               b)   Support the Regional Health Promotion Team in its work of
                    developing a strategic framework for health promotion in
                    Trent.

247   HEART TRANSPLANT CENTRE FOR SHEFFIELD

      The Regional General Manager reported to Members that a major expansion
      in Britain's heart transplant programme had been announced by the
      Minister of State at the Department of Health. It was with great
      pleasure that the Regional General Manager confirmed that the Northern
      General Hospital, Sheffield had been designated as one of the two new
      supra regional Heart Transplant Centres in England. The other centre
      would be at St. George's Hospital in Tooting, London. Government funding
      would be available for the new centres from April 1990.

248   INTEGRATED PLANNING STATEMENT 1989

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT the Integrated Planning Statement 1989 (TA(89)171) be
           received. This document would be considered in more detail at the
           October 1989 meeting as part of a presentation on the Annual Report
           1988/89.

249   INTEGRATED PLANNING STATEMENT: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

      It was

           RESOLVED that the Integrated Planning Statement: Executive Summary
           (TA(89)172) be received. This document would be considered in more
           detail at the October 1989 meeting as part of a presentation on the
           Annual Report 1988/89.
                                      -   9   -
250   INTEGRATED PLANNING STATEMENT FOR REGIONALLY MANAGED SERVICES: EXECUTIVE
      SUMMARY________________________________________________________________

      It was

           RESOLVED that the Integrated Planning Statement: Executive Summary
           (TA(89)173) be received. This document would be considered in more
           detail at the October 1989 meeting as part of a presentation on the
           Annual Report 1988/89.

231   NHS REVIEW - 100 CONSULTANT POSTS

      The Authority received the Report of the Regional Corporate Planning
      Manager (TA(89)174).

      The Regional Corporate Planning Manager reminded Members that in April
      1989 the Department of Health had invited RHAs to bid for the new
      consultant posts announced in the White Paper "Working for Patients".
      The RHA had, in turn, requested each District in the Region to submit
      bids by the end of June in order to make a Regional proposal by 31 July.
      These posts would be additional to the planned consultant expansion
      programme.

      The Department's letter of 13 April had stated that the scheme should be
      targetted on those specialties and districts with long waiting times and
      hence successful bids would not be spread evenly throughout the country
      and the inference had been that Trent would receive only two new
      consultants. Trent had made strong representations that this approach
      would discriminate against efficient RHAs and had been assured that Trent
      would not be disadvantaged in this way.

      The RHA had received and passed to the Department of Health 16 bids and
      the results were expected in early October.

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT the Authority should

           (1)   note the bids made and the methodology used

           (2)   await a further Report after the results of the bids were known
                 in October 1989.

252   FULLERTON HOSPITAL, DONCASTER

      The Authority received the Report of the Regional Corporate Planning
      Manager (TA(89)175), confirming that on 31 July 1989 Mr Roger Freeman,
      Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Health had informed the RHA of
      his decision that Fullerton Hospital could be closed permanently and the
      service transferred to Montagu Hospital at Mexborough. The closure had
      been agreed subject to conditions laid down by the RHA, and these
      conditions were set out in detail in Report TA(89)175.

      It was

           RESOLVED THAT the decision of the Parliamentary Under Secretary of
           State for Health to close Fullerton Hospital and transfer services
           to Montagu Hospital, Mexborough, subject t© the conditions set out
           in Report TA(89)175, be noted.
r
                                          -   10   -




     253   QUALITY IN HEALTH CARE IN TRENT: EXHIBITION AND CONFERENCE
           27-29 SEPTEMBER 1989 ____________________________________ .

           The Authority received the Report of the Regional Nursing Officer giving
           details of the Exhibition and Conference to be held in Derby (TA(89)176).
           The attention of members was particularly drawn to the "Caring for
           Carers" aspect of the Conference and members were given a brief update on
           the Caring for the Carers Pilot Project.

           During discussion, the RHA was asked to nominate two members to judge the
           display stands at the Exhibition, and after consideration it was

                RESOLVED THAT Mrs Carmichael and Mr Townsend should judge the
                Display Stands at the Exhibition.

     254   FLEXIBLE PAY SUPPLEMENTS FOR NURSES AND MIDWIVES: PILOT SCHEME

           The Authority received the Report of the Regional Nursing Officer
           (TA(89)177).

           Members were informed that in March 1989 the Government had announced
           that an extra £5 million was to be made available to fund a pilot scheme
           for 1989/90. Health Authorities were asked to submit bids for inclusion
           in the scheme, via Regions, to the Secretary of State and the NHS
           Management Executive. Notification of successful bids was received from
           the Department in mid-July 1989, and members were informed that some bids
           had been accepted in full and others had been accepted but extended in
           coverage. It was

                RESOLVED THAT the successful bids from Trent for inclusion in the
                Pilot Scheme, details of which were set out in Report TA(89)177,
                should be noted.

     255   WHITE PAPER IMPLEMENTATION: REGIONAL GENERAL MANAGER'S PROGRESS REPORT

           The Regional General Manager reported briefly to members on current
           aspects of White Paper implementation.

           1)   FPC General Manager Appointments

                The appointment of FPC General Managers had now been completed in
                the Trent Region. A full list of appointments made would be
                received by Members later in the meeting.

           2)   GP Budgets

                A prospectus would be produced for issue to GPs setting out which
                activities would form part of the budget and giving details in
                respect of fees etc. GPs would then be given an opportunity to
                signify an interest in managing their own budget.

           3)   Self Governing Trusts

                The Secretary of State had recently indicated that, following
                expressions of interest in self governing trusts from nine units in
                Trent, he would like to see all proposals from this Region move
                towards the next stage. As a consequence, business plans for these
                units were now being prepared.




4,
T
                                          -   11   -
          4)    Resource Management Initiative

                An allocation of £1.7 million had been received from the Department
                for work to be carried out in the pilot sites in this Region.

          5)    Contracting Framework

                Work was continuing on contracts and it was reported that Peat,
                Marwick McLintock had been commissioned to produce a preliminary
                contracting framework and North Derbyshire Health Authority had been
                chosen to take part in a pilot scheme. It was expected that work
                would be completed by December 1989. A similar scheme was also
                being carried out in the South East Thames RHA, with Maidstone as
                the pilot district.

    256   EVALUATION OF THE TRENT REGION PALLIATIVE AND CONTINUING CARE CENTRE

          The Authority received a Report on the evaluation of the Trent Region
          Palliative and Continuing Care Centre (TA(89)178).

          The Report set out suggested criteria against which the Centre would be
          reviewed in March 1992, as part of the annual review process. During
          consideration of the criteria the following points emerged:-

          (1)   Members suggested that additional information should be provided
                concerning responsibility for assessment of local community
                initiatives.

          (2)   The question of private funding was discussed.

                Members acknowledged the very real difficulties of obtaining private
                funds in the present financial climate and it was felt that
                discretion should be used in assessing this aspect of the Centre's
                activities.

          (3)   Members suggested that copies of the criteria against which the
                Centre would be assessed should be made available to staff at the
                Centre.

                It was

                     RESOLVED THAT Report TA(89)178 be accepted.

    257   HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

          The Authority received the Report of the Regional General Manager,
          setting out relevant extracts from the Interim Report of the Rt. Hon.
          Lord Justice Taylor on the Inquiry following the Hillsborough Football
          Stadium Disaster (TA(89)179).

          The Authority was advised that Lord Justice Taylor had reached the
          conclusion in his Interim Report that no criticism could be made of the
          First Aid and Emergency Services, including the South Yorkshire
          Metropolitan Ambulance Service, during the tragic incident at
          Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. Members were particularly pleased to note
          this aspect of the outcome of the Inquiry.

          Members were informed that the recommendations* in the Interim Report were
          now being implemented, including the review of Safety Certificates.
                                            -   12   -
          The Chief Ambulance Officer of SYMAS informed the Authority that
          following the Interim Report, officers of the South Yorkshire
          Metropolitan Ambulanfce Service had been invited to give information and
          advice to a number of public bodies including the Canadian Ambulance
          Service.

    258   CHANGES IN SENIOR RHA PERSONNEL

          The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional General
          Manager giving details of recent changes in Senior RHA Personnel
          (TA(89)180).

    259   FAMILY PRACTITIONER COMMITTEES: GENERAL MANAGER APPOINTMENTS

          The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional General
          Manager giving details of appointments to FPC General Manager posts in
          the Trent Region (TA(80)181).

    260   SPINAL INJURIES UNIT: LODGE MOOR HOSPITAL. SHEFFIELD

          The Chairman reported that immediately prior to the Public Meeting of the
          Authority he had received a Petition containing 16,500 signatures in
          respect of the Spinal Injuries Unit at Lodge Moor Hospital.

          The Chairman informed members that the Sheffield Health Authority was
          presently conducting a major review of services, and as yet no decision
          had been reached.




                                                Sigrti

                                                               CHAIRMAN

r
                                                Dated . .
                                                        <T?\




    7JK1/15
