                                                                    TAM(90)32-46

TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Business considered in Private on 12 February 1990 at the Regional Health
Authority Headquarters__________________________________________________

PRESENT:        Sir Michael Carlisle (Chairman)
                Mr D Brown                    Mrs J Radford
                Mrs N M Collett               Dr P F J Sewell
                Professor P H Fentem          Mr N F Townsend
                Professor F Harris            Mr M Varcoe
                Mrs B J Keene                 Mrs P B Wildgoose
                Mrs A Lathwood
                Professor D S Munro
                Mr A O'Brien

APOLOGIES:      Mrs R E Carmichael
                Mr M Foy
                Councillor P Gaul
                Mrs P E Latham
                Dr A Z Paterson


32    BUSINESS CONSIDERED IN PRIVATE

      It was

             RESOLVED THAT to enable the Authority to consider business of a
             confidential nature, the public be excluded from the meeting.

33   MINUTES OF THAT      PART OF THE MEETING HELD IN PRIVATE ON 8 JANUARY 1990

     The minutes of that part of the meeting held in private on 8 January
     1990 were approved as a correct record.

34   MATTERS ARTSTNG

      (a)    GP Budgets   (Minute TAM(90)7(i) refers)

             Following the Regional- General Manager's Report at the last
             meeting, Members were informed that the number of GP Practices in
             Trent expressing a formal interest in the management of their own
             Budgets had now risen to over 50.

35   APPOINTMENT OF HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF

     (a)     Appointment of 3 Consultant Psychiatrists for Doncaster Health
             Authority

             The Authority received the report of the Regional Medical Officer
             concerning the appointment of three Consultant Psychiatrists for
             Doncaster Health Authority (TA(90)20).

             It was noted that in the case of two candidates the decision of the
             Appointments Committee to recommend appointment had been unanimous.

                                        1
         In the case of the third candidate, Dr K Wildgoose, the Advisory
         Appointments Committee had only been able to recommend appointment
         by a majority of four to two with one member abstaining.       The
         Regional Medical Officer brought to the attention of the Authority
         the circumstances surrounding this recommendation, in particular
         the views of those Members of the Advisory Appointments Committee
         who had not been able to support the recommendation to appoint.
         After discussion it was

                RESOLVED THAT

                (a) The    unanimous decision reached by the Advisory
                    Appointments Committee, to recommend the appointment of
                    two of the candidates for the posts of Consultant
                    Psychiatrist to the Doncaster Health Authority be
                    approved, in accordance with the terms and conditions
                    of service for Consultants laid down by the Department
                    of Health.

                (b) In   the case where the decision of the Advisory
                    Appointments Committee to recommend the appointment of
                    a third candidate had not been unanimous, no appointment
                    should be made.

          (b)   Appointment of a Consultant Psychiatrist with a special
                interest in Alcohol and Substance misuse for North
                Lincolnshire Health Authority___________________________

                This appointment had been withdrawn from the Public Agenda
                of the RHA for consideration in private.

                The Chairman of the Advisory Appointments Committee reported
                on the difficulties experienced by the Committee during
                consideration of candidates for this post. Members of the
                AAC had held opposing views, and the Chairman reported that
                the decision of the Advisory Appointments Committee to
                recommend that no appointment be made could not be considered
                unanimous. After further discussion by the Authority, it was

                     RESOLVED THAT no appointment be made to the post of
                     Consultant psychiatrist with a special interest in
                     Alcohol and Substance misuse - North Lincolnshire Health
                     Authority.

36   DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES: HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF




                                     2
37   CLAIMS OF MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE AGAINST NHS HOSPITAL AND
     COMMUNITY DOCTORS AND DENTISTS_____________________

     The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional General
     Manager proposing new arrangements from 1 January 1990 on the handling
     and financing of claims of negligence against medical and dental staff
     employed in the hospital and community health services (TA(90)22).

     The Report was discussed in detail by Members, and a number of issues
     were raised:-

     (a)   Members asked what steps had been taken to inform Junior Medical
           Staff that they should continue to maintain basic cover with a
           Medical Defence Organisation. It was noted that a booklet had been
           issued by the Department of Health setting out the new arrangements
           and had been sent to each Regionally employed practitioner. One
           Member was of the opinion that the necessity for Junior Staff to
           maintain cover with an MDO should be emphasised and sought
           assurance that this had been done. Officers agreed to consider
           this aspect outside the meeting.

                                      3
     (b)   A question was *also raised whether Regions would continue to use
           the expertise of the Defence Societies, and it was confirmed that
           this would be so although not in the same way as before.

     (c)   Some Members felt that in the new arrangements some mechanism
           should exist for mutual discussion between Doctors as to whether
           a case might be settled out of Court. During discussion it was
           also pointed out that District Health Authorities had been advised
           that some mechanism for negotiation should be in place, at District
           level, to include medical input, if a claimant was not satisfied
           about the way in which his/her case would be handled.

     Following discussion, it was

           RESOLVED THAT

           (1)   The proposed financial arrangements described in Paragraphs
                 7 and 8 of Report TA(90)22 for implementing the changes in
                 the handling and funding of claims of medical negligence
                 against NHS hospital and community doctors and dentists, be
                 approved.

           (2)   Approval be given for a named officer to act on the
                 Authority's behalf, as outlined in Paragraph 9 of Report
                 TA(90)22; the Regional Legal Adviser would act in this
                 capacity.

38         REGRADING APPEAL: REPORT OF APPEAL HEARING




39   APPF.AL AGATNST DISMISSAL: REPORT OF LOCAL APPEAL HEARING

     The Authority received and noted the Report of the Local Appeal Hearing
     against dismissal, held on 16 January 1990 (TA(90)24).

     Members noted that the Appeal Panel had made the decision not to proceed
     due to the Union Side's objection to Mr Brown, as a member of the
     Authority's sub-committee on SYMAS, being on the Appeal Panel. It was
     also noted that the Appeal Panel had considered it appropriate that this
     matter and the circumstances surrounding the Panel's decision be brought
     to the Authority's attention.



                                      4
      The Chairman of the Appeal Panel reported on issues related to the
      outcome of the Appeal Hearing and a number of points were considered

      1)   It was requested that the designation of a Chairman of an Appeal
           Panel be made in advance of future Hearings.

      2)   The suggestion that one member of the SYMAS Sub-Committee should
           be included on all appeals against dismissal for SYMAS Ambulance
           Staff was also considered. The Authority felt that provided the
           Member selected had not been involved in the decision to initiate
           disciplinary action, this would be acceptable, but was of the
           opinion that the conduct of future Appeal Hearings would be simpler
           and more straightforward if Members of the SYMAS Sub-Committee were
           not included.

           This matter was discussed in detail by the Authority and it was

                 RESOLVED THAT Officers of the Authority should consider this
                 matter outside this meeting and decide whether to:-

                 (a)   Convene another Hearing of the Panel with the same
                       Membership, with a substitute for Mr Brown' or

                 (b)   Convene an Appeal Panel with new Members to consider
                       this case.

40   HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER: PROPOSED JOINT CONFERENCE -
     TRENT/MERSEY RHAs "TO CONSIDER CURRENT KNOWLEDGE OF THE MANAGEMENT OF
     PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS AFTER MAJOR DISASTERS"______________________ __

     At a meeting of the Authority on 8 May 1989 (Minute TAM(89) 140(3)
     refers) it had been reported that the Chairman of the Trent RHA and the
     Chairman of the Mersey RHA had agreed that a joint conference should be
     held to consider current knowledge on the management of psychological
     stress after major disasters.

     The Authority was now informed that a number of important issues had
     been raised following publication of the Taylor Report on the
     Hillsborough Disaster, and whilst it was acknowledged that the
     opportunity to consider the NHS aspect of this incident in the medium
     to long term should not be- lost, the proposed Conference did not
     represent the most appropriate forum for consideration of these issues.
     The take the matter forward, a small private meeting of invited experts
     would be held in the Summer to consider material available and extract
     aspects of lessons learned which were relevant to the National Health
     Service. Arrangements for the meeting would be co-ordinated by the
     Regional Nursing Officer.

41   INDUSTRIAL ACTION IN THE AMBULANCE SERVICE

     A brief report on the current situation in the five Ambulance Services
     in the Region was made to Members.

     In South Yorkshire, Emergency Services were still being provided by the
     Police and the Military.     In Derbyshire, Leicestershire and North
     Lincolnshire action was varied but Emergency Services were still
                                                          t
                                     5
relatively intact. This situation had also applied in Nottinghamshire
until recently,, but it was now reported that action had escalated and
the effect on services now varied from day to day.

Other aspects of the dispute were also related to Members

(a)   Hospital Services

      At the last meeting the Authority had been informed that reports
      on the situation across the Region had been requested from
      Districts, and Members were now informed that In-Patient Services
      had been largely unaffected. Where some difficulties with inter­
      hospital transfers had existed these had been mainly solved by
      other means, eg hospital car service, taxi and private ambulance
      service. Central Nottinghamshire had been particularly affected
      because of split site working.

      Some falls in planned admissions had clearly been due to the 'flu
      epidemic rather than to the dispute. Discharges had not been
      significantly affected as hospital car services and taxis had been
      used.   It was also noted that Waiting Lists had been largely
      unaffected by the dispute.

      Out-Patients had also been to a large extent unaffected with
      reductions of between 2% and 5% in some Units.        As was to be
      expected, the reduction in attendances for medical out-patients for
      the elderly was the most marked. The Northern General Hospital,
      Sheffield reported that medical out-patients for the elderly
      attendances had fallen to 20% on occasions.

      Day-Patient Services had been the worst hit by the dispute, in
      particular day hospitals for the elderly. In some instances there
      had only been a 20% attendance. However, where possible taxis and
      patients' own transport had been used.

      There had been little effect on the Accident and Emergency
      Services. A few problems had been quoted in obtaining patient
      transport home, but again this had been solved by the use of taxis,
      in the main.

(b)   Costs

      The Regional General Manager stated that there was still no
      indication of the cost of services provided by the Military during
      the industrial action and it was not yet known whether national
      funding assistance would be available to cover these costs.

      However, from figures available at the end of January, and
      discounting the Military costs, costs of £250,000 had been incurred
      across the Region as a whole. It was also confirmed that until
      progress was made towards resolving the linkage aspect of the
      dispute there seemed little hope of an end to the Industrial
      Action.

      Two further items relating to the Dispute were also raised.


                                 6
      (i)    Training

             One member asked whether re-training would be necessary as a result
             of the current action and whether Training Courses were still
             continuing. It was confirmed that the Cadet Training Scheme was
             still ongoing.

             It was also pointed out that there was a move to extend further the
             training of paramedics so that any Ambulance which formed part of
             an Emergency Service would have one paramedic on board. At the
             present time this ratio of paramedics was not available in Trent
             and to achieve this would necessitate an accelerated Training
             Programme for paramedics.

      (ii)   Resolution of Trent RHA Branch of NALGO

             The Chairman formally reported to the Authority that at its Annual
             General Meeting in December 1989, a Motion had been passed by the
             Trent RHA Branch of NALGO and details of the Motion were now
             reported to the Authority. Members noted the resolution of the
             Trent RHA branch.

             Finally^ the Authority was reminded that following a Resolution at
             the December Public Meeting enquiries had been made of the
             Secretary of State as to whether any facilities existed for the
             referral of such Disputes to arbitration.      A response to this
             enquiry had been circulated to Members at the January 1990 meeting.

42.    WHITE PAPER IMPLEMENTATION: REGIONAL GENERAL MANAGER’S PROGRESS REPORT

       The Regional General Manager indicated that he would be making a brief
       Report in the Public Meeting, but there were no White Paper Issues
       requiring consideration in Private.

43.    MEMBERSHIP OF DISTRICT HEALTH AUTHORITIES IN THE TRENT REGION

       The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional General
       Manager (TA(90)25) on Membership of District Health Authorities in the
       Trent Region.

       It was

             RESOLVED THAT the following be appointed to the Leicestershire
             Health Authority

             Mr P Cusack
             31 Lime Grove
             Kirby Muxloe
             Leicestershire
             LE9 9DF

44.    MEMBERSHIP OF COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCILS IN THE TRENT REGION

       The Authority received and noted the Minutes of the Sub-Committee on CHC
       Membership held on 12 February 1990 (TA(90)26).


                                         7
