                                               T A M (90)141-152
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Meeting held on 14 MAY 1990 at the Regional Health Authority
Headquarters__________________________________________________

PRESENT:     Sir Michael Carlisle (Chairman)

      Mr D Brown                    Professor D S Munro
      Mrs R E Carmichael            Mrs J Radford
      Mrs N M Collett               Dr P F J Sewell
      Professor P H Fentem          Councillor J Thierry
      Professor F Harris            Mr M Varcoe
      Mrs A Lathwood                Mrs P B Wildgoose

APOLOGIES;

      Mr M Foy
      Councillor P Gaul
      Mrs B J Keene
      Mrs P A Latham
      Mr A O'Brien
      Dr A Z Paterson


BREAST SCREENING IN TRENT

The Chairman welcomed Professor Scott, Regional Medical
Officer Emeritus, who was attending this meeting to report on
Breast Screening in the Trent Region.

Professor Scott reminded Members that he had taken on
responsibility for the introduction of the Breast Screening
Programme in the Trent Region whilst he was Regional Medical
Officer, and following his retirement he had continued to work
on the Programme to introduce a Breast Screening Service for
Women in Trent between the ages of 50-64.

Professor Scott informed Members that the Presentation to the
Authority would comprise three separate sections:-

(1)   A Photographic Display for Members showing current
      progress towards the introduction of the service in
      Districts within this Region.

(2)   A Statistical Report to be given by the Regional Medical
      Officer Emeritus.

(3)   A short Report highlighting practical problems
      encountered in setting up the Service, to be given by the
      Regional Breast Screening Co-ordinator.




                             1
Statistical Report

Members received and noted Report TA(90)95, and
Professor Scott informed the Authority that in March
1987 the introduction of a National Breast Screening
Service for women over 50 had been announced.   Each
Region had been set the target of introducing a
service to cover all its Districts by 31 March 1990.
All women aged 50-64 were to be invited to attend
for screening at least once by 31 March 1993.

It was reported that screening had now commenced in
all Districts of the Trent Region. Up to the
beginning of March 1990 nearly 35,000 women had been
screened, and this response represented a rate in
excess of the 70% national target.   It was noted
that in total, about 3 50,000 women across the Region
were eligible for the service. Women found to have
an abnormal mammogram were recalled for assessment
by a Consultant team including a surgeon,
radiologist and pathologist and so far 150 non-
symptomatic cancers had been diagnosed. About 500
cancers per year were expected in the first round of
screenings, but after the initial "pick up" it was
expected that there would be a drop in the number
detected. The process of "mammograms in two
planes", an innovative part of the programme in
Trent, was explained to Members.   It was emphasised
that although, over the past three years this Region
had received approximately £1.4 million from thei
Department of Health to fund the establishment of
the service, and a further £2.25 million would be
received annually to run the service, the "mammograms
in two planes" aspect was an "extra" funded by the
Trent Region, for the initial screen only.

Professor Scott concluded his report by informing
Members that at the outset of the implementation
phase, a Regional Breast Screening Steering Group
had been established under his Chairmanship.  This
Group was made up of representatives of all
interested parties and representatives of the
Programmes in this Region.  It continued to meet
about three times each year to address policy and
implementation issues, and at the present time, the
development of a comprehensive Quality Assurance
Programme formed the major task of the Group.

Members thanked Professor Scott for his report and
during discussion one Member asked what arrangements
were in place to review the Programme, particularly
over the next five years.  It was stated that a
National Committee had been set up to determine the
ultimate degree of success of the Scheme.
It was also noted that the Video produced in Trent
to publicise the Breast Screening Programme had been
successful in two ways - in terms of finance because
it had been sold throughout the UK and in terms of
bringing the service to the attention of eligible
women and encouraging them to participate in the
Programme.

Report of the Regional Breast Screening
Co-ordinator

The Authority was informed that currently the
response rate to the Programme in Trent was in
excess of the national target of 70%. The response
rate in this Region was between 70%-80% and in some
areas there was a 90% response. The Region was
presently funded for a 70% target rate, but it was
pointed out that as this rate increased there would
be an inbuilt tendency to overspend.

Tribute was paid to Health Promotion Units,
Voluntary Groups and local press and radio for
education within the community leading to the high
initial response rate in the Trent Region. A number
of Districts had produced Information Packs and
these had also proved a valuable aid in publicising
Breast Screening.

Two aspects of the service were currently being
addressed:-

(1)   Efforts were being made to improve
      communication with Ethnic Minority Groups, and

(2)   As part of the Quality Assurance Programme,
      local research was being carried out into
      techniques employed during the screening
      process, which were known to cause patient
      discomfort.

It was reported that from 1 April 1990 the Trent
Region had become responsible for National Co­
ordination of the NHS Breast Screening Programme
development initiatives throughout the 14 English
Regions, and a budget of about £1 million had been
provided for a variety of tasks including ongoing
education, information technology, quality
assurance, equipment assessment and publishing.

During discussion with the Regional Breast Screening
Co-ordinator, Members raised the issue of the
provision of the Breast Screening Service from 1
April 1991. It was reported that a specimen
contract for Breast Screening had raised a number of
issues, but it was generally felt that Regions
should continue to undertake responsibility for the
                 Breast Screening Service following the introduction
                 of the contracting system in the NHS on 1 April 1991
                 and that Contracts should be held at Regional rather
                 than District level.

                 The Chairman thanked the Regional Medical Officer
                 Emeritus and the Regional Breast Screening Co­
                 ordinator for an interesting and informative
                 Presentation.

142   MINUTES

      The minutes of the meeting held on 9 April 1990 were approved
      as a correct record and signed by the Chairman.

143   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CIRCULARS

      The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional
      General Manager, summarising Department of Health Circulars
      (TA (90)96) .

144   APPOINTMENT OF MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF

      The Authority received and noted a Report notifying the
      unanimous recommendations of Advisory Appointments Committees
      held on 26 April and 1 and 2 May 1990 (TA(90)97 -Revised).

      (a)    It was

                  RESOLVED THAT the following appointments be approved
                  in accordance with the terms and conditions of
                  service approved for Consultants by the Department
                  of Health.

      NAME                  GRADE/POST            HOSPITAL/DISTRICT

      Dr M A Mohanna        Consultant in Adult   North Lincolnshire
                            Mental Illness with   HA (based at
                            a special interest    Lincoln County
                            in Alcohol and        Hospital)
                            Substance Misuse

      Dr D Nag              Consultant            Barnsley HA
                            Radiologist

      Dr A C Briggs         Consultant            South
                            Psychiatrist          Lincolnshire HA
                                                  (based at Rauceby
                                                  Hospital)

      (b)    The following Consultant retirements were noted




                                    4
NAME          SPECIALTY    BASE HOSPITAL       LAST DAY OF
                                               SERVICE

Mr W A        General      Derbyshire RI       4.11.1990
Anderson      Surgery

Dr B A       SHMO in       Lincoln County      1.10.
                                               1.10.1990
Chaudhary    Ophthal-      Hospital
             mology

(c)    The following Consultant resignation was noted

NAME          SPECIALTY    BASE HOSPITAL       LAST DAY OF
                                               SERVICE

Dr A          General      Grantham and        18.7.1990
Henderson     Medicine     Kesteven General

(d)    The Authority noted, with regret, the sudden death on 13
       April 1990 of Dr J G Tetley, Consultant in Haematology
       for Central Nottinghamshire Health Authority.

REPORT ON CASH LIMIT ALLOCATIONS 1990/91

The Authority received and noted the Report of the Regional
Treasurer (TA(90)98).

The Regional Treasurer drew a number of allocations to the
attention of Members, including the agreed transfer of funds
from Regionally Managed Services, totalling £658,500. This
transfer had been agreed as a result of the RHA no longer
making a contribution towards the medical defence union fees
of medical staff and the funds would be available to help
Districts meet future claims in respect of medical negligence,
for which they now had additional responsibility.

It was

       RESOLVED THAT the recurrent allocations shown in the
       statement attached to Report TA(90)98, to District Health
       Authorities and Regionally Managed Services totalling
       £490,400, the non-recurrent allocations of £6,363,900 and
       the transfer from capital of £3,619,900, be approved.

MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES - CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

The Authority received and noted the document "Major Accident
Procedures - Code of Good Practice" (TA(90)99).

Members were informed by the Regional Health Emergency
Planning Officer that following an assessment of the large
number of major accidents which had affected the UK in recent
years, the objective had been to produce a Code of Good
Practice which would encourage the implementation of certain
aims.
      The "Major Accident Procedures - Code of Good Practice" was
      the first document of its kind to be produced b y .a .Regional
      Health Authority, and had three main aims:-

      (1)    To identify the more important lessons learned from
             recent major disasters which had a bearing on NHS
             response procedures and health care.

      (2)    To provide basic contingency planning guidance to NHS
             staff and to eliminate different perceptions in
             expectations and capabilities.

      (3)    To introduce a measure of uniformity in NHS Major
             Accident plans and to communicate the requirements in a
             comprehensive manner.

      The document had also been produced to highlight the need for
      flexible planning for major disasters. Over.the past few
      years the major incidents which had occurred both nationally
      and in Trent had been different types of disasters and it was
      therefore of importance to ensure that the MajorAccident
      Procedures were flexible enough to allow an individual
      approach to a particular disaster.

      Members commended the Regional Health Emergency Planning
      Officer on the production of an excellent document, it being
      noted that copies of the Code of Good Practice would be
      distributed widely within the Trent Region, and copies would
      be available at a cost of £5 each to dnterestecUparties
      outside the Region.

      The document was considered by Members and it was suggested
      that a copy of the Code might be distributed to the
      switchboard of each hospital in the Region responsible for the
      provision of a full Accident and Emergency Service, but it was
      pointed out that such switchboards would beprovided with
      action cards detailing full instruction on their role in a
      major incident without the necessity to refer to the full Code
      of Practice Document.

      Following discussion it was

              RESOLVED THAT the document "Major Accident Procedures -
              Code of Good Practice" (TA(90)99) be formally adopted by
            ^ the Authority for use as regional guidelines on Major
              Accident planning, and to serve as a.universal reference
              within the Trent Regional Health Authority.

147   SHORT TERM PROGRAMMES 1990/91

      (a)    Reports on individual District Short Term
             Programmes 1990/91___________________________

             The Authority received and noted the report of the
             Regional Corporate Planning Manager on the assessment of

                                     6
