                             1   * /- :« , ,
                 REGIONml
         tre n t health^^^




MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES
  C O D E OF G O O D P R A C T I C E
      TR EN T REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
                        EM ERGENCY PLANNING




              MAJOR
       ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

               CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE




                          REF EMERGENCY PLANNING
                                 JAC/C17/24

 This Report is offered for sale at a cost o f £ 5.00 including postage and packing. Please send cheques with
your order. Please make cheques payable to “Trent R H A ” and send to P R Section, Trent R H A , Fulwood
I louse, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3 T H .
PREFACE

1.   THIS HANDBOOK IS A SUMMARY OF THE PROCEDURAL
     ARRANGEMENTS FOR DEALING W ITH MAJOR ACCIDENTS. IT IS
     INTENDED TO PROVIDE BASIC GUIDANCE AND TO SERVE AS A
     UNIVERSAL REFERENCE W ITHIN THE TREN T REGIONAL HEALTH
     AUTHORITY (TRHA).


2.   THE GENERIC TERM ’MAJOR ACCIDENT’ IS TAKEN TO EMBRACE ANY
     ACCIDENT, INCIDENT OR DISASTER RESULTING IN A LARGE NUMBER
     OF CASUALTIES AND INVOLVING TH E AMBULANCE, POLICE, FIRE AND
     EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.


3.   CLEARLY THERE IS A NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN NHS EMERGENCY
     PLANNING IN TERMS OF:

     CLARIFICATION OF RESPONSE REQUIREMENTS

     THE ELIMINATION OF DIFFERENT PERCEPTIONS IN EXPECTATIONS
     AND CAPABILITIES

     THE CLARITY OF THOUGHT CREATED BY COM MITTING MATTERS TO
     WRITING

     A MEANS TO COMMUNICATE REQUIREMENTS IN A COMPREHENSIVE
     MANNER


4.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. THE FOLLOWING HAVE BEEN CONSULTED
     AND HAVE MADE VARIOUS CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE CONTENT OF
     THIS DOCUMENT, WHICH IS GRATEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGED.

     Trent Advisory Sub-Committee in Accident and Emergency Medicine
     Trent Chief Ambulance Officers Group
     Dr Russell Gorton, CPDM, South West Durham Health Authority
     Dr D P Mackie, FRCS, Amsterdam General Hospital
     Trent Regional Psychology Advisory Committee
     Trent Regional Advisory Specialty Committee in Mental Health
     Trent Radiation Protection Advisors Group
     Trent Regional Advisory Committee in Nursing and Midwifery
     Trent Regional Working Party on Hospital Treatment of Acute Poisoning
     Trent Regional Public Relations Officer
     Trent Regional Chaplaincy Committee


JACOSTLEY
Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
RefC17/24
DISTRIBUTION LIST

DoH (MED MPO AND HS5)
Regional General Manager
Regional Director of Public Health/Regional Medical Officer
Assistant Regional General Manager (Admin)
Corporate Planning Manager TRHA
Regional Public Relations Officer TRHA HQ
Consultants in Public Health Medicine TRHA HQ
District General Managers in Trent Region
District Directors of Public Health in Trent Region
Unit General Managers in Trent Region
Chief Ambulance Officers in Trent Region
All A & E Consultants in Trent Region
Regional Chaplaincy Committee Members
Standards Group TRHA HQ
Regional General Manager Yorkshire RHA
Regional General Manager Oxford RHA
Regional General Manager East Anglia RHA
Regional General Manager North Western RHA
Regional General Manager West Midlands RHA
Chief Constable      South Yorkshire
                      Derbyshire
                      Nottinghamshire
                      Leicestershire
                      Lincolnshire
Chief Fire Officer South Yorkshire
                      Derbyshire
                      Nottinghamshire
                      Leicestershire
                      Lincolnshire
British Red Cross and St John Ambulance Brigade in:
                      South Yorkshire
                      Derbyshire
                      Nottinghamshire
                      Leicestershire
                      Lincolnshire
County Emergency Planning Officers of Local Authorities in:
                      South Yorkshire
                      Derbyshire
                      Nottinghamshire
                      Leicestershire
                      Lincolnshire


Health and Safety Executive (as appropriate)
Others as appropriate
         TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
           MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES
              CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

LIST OF CONTENTS                                  SECTION                   PAGE
Policy                                            1                             5-7

Code of Good Practice Major Accident Procedure 2                                8-33
Control of Industrial Major Accident              3                         34-36
Hazards (CIMAH) Regulations 1984
Incidents Involving Dangerous Chemicals           4                         37 - 39'
Incidents Involving Radioactivity                 5                         40-56
Hospital T reatment of Acute Poisoning            6                         57-61
Psychological Problems After Disaster             7                         62-70
Arrangements for liaison with the media           8                         71-79

Annex A - Listed Hospitals - Major Accident and                             80 - 83
          Emergency Departments Providing
          24 hour cover

Annex B - Definitions and Terminology for Major                             84 - 85
          Accident Procedures

Appendices
1 to Section 2 - NHS Response to East Midlands Airport                     22 - 24
2 to Section 2- Management ofMass Burns Casualties                         25 - 29
3 to Section 2 - Relatives Information Service                             30
4 to Section 2 - Paramedic - First Aid Mass Burns Casualties               31
5 to Section 2 - British Telecom Emergency Provision of Service            32
6 to Section 2 - Notes for Hospital Chaplaincy Tearn Leaders               33
1 to Section 5 - Health Service Arrangements for Dealing with              45-46
                 Accidents Involving Radioactivity
2 to Section 5 - General Advice for Health Professionals                   47 - 49
                 Dealing with the Public
3 to Section 5 - Technical background notes                                50-51
4 to Section 5 - Guidance for Hospital Staff and Ambulance                 52 - 54
                 Crews Who May Need to Deal with Casualties
                 Contaminated by Low Level Radioactive Substances
5 to Section 5 - National Arrangements for Incidents Involving             55-56
                 Radioactivity (NAIR)
1 to Section 6 - National Poisons Information Service -                    61
                 Guy’s Hospital Guidelines for Users
1 to Section 7 - Issues to be dealt with in Contingency Planning to deal
                 with the Psychological Aftermath of Disasters             68 - 69
2 to Section 7 - Illustration of Response                                  70
1 to Section 8 - Media Checklist to a Hospital Major Accident Procedures   77 - 79
                                                                                    SECTION 1

       TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
      POLICY - MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

INTRODUCTION
1.1   Subject to the enactment of the National Health service and Community Care Bill all
      major accident plans are to be secured by contractual arrangements which will include
      appropriate NHS Trusts, if they become established.

1.2   There is no standard definition of a “Major Accident” which would satisfy the Health
      Authorities, the Emergency Services and the Local Authorities; each tends to look at such
      incidents from the point of view of its own responsibilities and involvement.

1.3   Where the nature of the occurrence is such that it has widespread effects on the
      community, eg a number of people requiring evacuation or rendered homeless, it will be
      necessary for local authorities to implement their emergency plans in accordance with
      current Home Office guidance. In these circumstances co-ordination of arrangements will
      be the responsibility of the appropriate Local Authority.

1.4   It is the responsibility of Health Authorities to ensure that the Major Accident Plans in
      their respective Districts are kept up-to-date; this includes the emergency plans of the
      Ambulance Service for which they may have responsibility. Each hospital with an Accident
      and Emergency Department is required to produce and regularly review its own internal
      plan, in consultation with the appropriate hospital committee.

1.5   This handbook represents a code of good practice to assist in the production of plans to deal
      with Major Accidents, it is a summary of the procedural arrangements. It is intended to
      provide basic major accident planning guidance and to serve as a universal reference within
      the Trent Regional Health Authority (TRHA).



ROLE OF THE REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY (RHA)

1.6   The role of the RHA is to:-

      1.6.1   Ensure that comprehensive plans are prepared by Health Authorities, Ambulance
              Services and ultimately NHS Trusts throughout the Region to deal with “Major
              Accidents*' and which take account of Department of Health and Regional
              guidance.

      1.6.2   Co-ordinate and advise on, and generally monitor plans and to provide reports to
              the DoH as required.

      1.6.3   Consult with appropriate bodies to prepare and keep up to date Annex A a list of
              hospitals with accident and emergency departments which are suitable for
              designation to receive casualties on a 24 hour basis; detailing the broad
              geographical area they are intended to cover and their capacity to deal with
              casualties in relation to the nature of predominant injury sustained. Copies of this
              list will be provided to District Health Authorities, Ambulance Controls,
              Hospitals, Police and Fire Services and others as necessary.

      1.6.4   After a major accident, immediately provide a brief report to the DoH (Regional
              Liaison Division) followed in due course by a debriefing of all concerned and a
              more detailed account.
NOTIFICATION OF RHA AND DHA OFFICERS
1.7    Notification o f DHA Officers. In the event of a major accident, the Ambulance Service
       will notify the appropriate District Officer(s) in accordance with local instructions.

1.8    Notification of RHA Officers. The appropriate District Officer will be responsible for
       informing Regional Officers, during and after normal office hours, when any hospital in
       their District has been alerted to receive casualties from a Major Accident. They will also
       notify these Officers when hospitals are released from the alert, at the same time famishing
       details of the number of casualties admitted and the number treated and discharged.


RESPONSIBILITIES OF DISTRICT HEALTH AUTHORITIES
1.9    District Health Authorities are to ensure that:

        1.9.1   They have coherent and comprehensive plans for dealing with major incidents
                which will need to be flexible to facilitate drawing on specialist services as necessary
                and take account of cross boundary incidents and resourcing. Appropriate liaison
                arrangements have taken place with other emergency services.

        1.9.2   The Ambulance Service under their control have a plan for mobilizing in the event
                of a Major Accident whilst maintaining an emergency service.

        1.9.3   Each listed hospital (Annex ‘A’) and any supporting hospitals or units have their
                own internal plans.

        1.9.4   Exercises and review of plans take place regularly.

1.10   Familiarisation of Staff with Plans. It is of vital importance that key members of staff
        and their nominated deputies (at all levels) are fully conversant with their individual roles
        for dealing with Major Accidents. In view of the staff changes that can occur, there should
       be a positive means to confirm staff familiarity with plans. Staff should have the
        opportunity to practise procedures and to become familiar with equipment, including
        communications equipment.


HOSPITAL MAJOR ACCIDENT PLAN
1.11   A Major Accident is a complex problem and planning requires:-

        1.11.1 A simple approach (not a solution). Plans should be flexible to be able to respond
               to identifiable and non-specific incidents and draw on any specialist resources
               required.

        1.11.2 Ongoing reviews, particularly after an incident to assess the lessons learned and to
               ensure that they are applied to future planning.

        1.11.3 Co-operation between the emergency services (Police, Fire and Ambulance) and
               hospitals.

1.12   It is recommended that preparation of the hospital Major Accident plan should be
       accomplished by a small emergency planning team with a core membership of the
       Consultant in Charge of the Accident and Emergency Department, Chief Ambulance
       Officer, Senior Nursing Officer, Unit General Manager and others as appropriate which
       should include the Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer.

       When in “Draft” the plan should be presented to the appropriate District/Unit committees
       for comment etc.
AIM
1.13   The aim should be to produce a brief but comprehensive document which all relevant staff
       must read on appointment and periodically and sign as having read. It should include a
       personal “ACTION LIST” for each senior member of staff and department, and where
       appropriate, a list of key telephone numbers.


OBJECTIVES
1.14 In a Major Accident the objectives are to:

        1.14.1 Mobilise hospital staff including Site Medical Officer and mobile medical teams.

        1.14.2 Prepare wards and departments at the hospital to receive and treat casualties.

        1.14.3 Ensure effective arrangements for co-ordination and control of services, both in the
               hospital and at the site of the accident.

        1.14.4 Maintain essential communications between the various departments of the
               Health Service and other public services.

        1.14.5 Provide facilities and assistance to the Police Casualty Bureau.

        1.14.6 Cope with the public response, such as enquiries from relatives, the news media,
               and offers of help from volunteers.


EXERCISES
1.15   To ensure that plans will work as efficiently and smoothly as possible, practise of the
       important elements of the local Major Accident plan is necessary and new staff should
       receive instruction on it as soon as practicable. Joint exercises should be agreed and held
       with the other emergency services. It may be appropriate that the Ambulance Service
       should take the initiative in suggesting and arranging exercises. Full scale exercises
       involving in patients are not essential, nor practicable but key elements of the plan,
       particularly the alerting procedures, communications, site co-ordination and hospital
       control, should be tested at, say, six monthly intervals and where practicable key personnel
       should have the opportunity to participate.

1.16    Plans must be reviewed annually and as a follow up to exercises, staff must be informed of
        any agreed changes to the procedures.

1.17    Two copies of each plan should be supplied to the RHA for the Regional General Manager
        and the Regional Director of Public Health.
                                                                                    SECTION 2

                  CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE
               - MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES


INTRODUCTION
2.1   The following guidance is based on the perceived wisdom and experience gained as a result
      of recent major disasters. This points strongly to the need for all Hospital and Ambulance
      Service Major Incident Response (MIR) procedures to be reviewed and updated at least
      annually to take account of lessons learnt in actual incidents, exercises, advances in
      technology, rationalisation of services or other changes which could affect or have a bearing
      upon the procedures.

2.2   The phraseology used to declare a “Major Accident” and activate the NHS response
      should be simple and made clear to everyone concerned (see alerting procedures).

2.3   Each department within the hospital which could become involved in the major accident
      procedures should designate one person to maintain “cascade” call out lists (updated at least
      monthly) and ensure that all key staffhave current copies available, both at home and at
      work. Normally no one should be expected to call more than six others in the “cascade” call
      out.

2.4   Junior doctors must read the hospital major accident plan and be issued with “Major
       Accident Action Cards” as part of their induction, action cards should also be available at
       a specified place in the event of a major accident.

2.5   The action plan agreed between the hospital and the ambulance service will state the
      methods of communication to be used and the information which should be given to the
      hospital - eg type and location of incident, time it occurred, estimated number and type of
      casualties, whether mobile medical team required etc.




HOSPITAL OPERATIONAL CONTROL
2.6   A hospital operational control room should be identified for use in a major accident. It
      should have appropriate internal and external communication facilities, under the direction
      of a senior manager, a senior nurse and a medical controller (as appropriate locally).
      Together they should have the authority to:

      2.6.1    authorise the evacuation of wards
      2.6.2    implement action, both planned and unplanned
      2.6.3    involve other hospitals/agencies as necessary
      2.6.4    take charge of all the beds in the hospital
      2.6.5    direct the cancellation of outpatient appointments
      2.6.6    direct the cancellation/postponement of booked admissions
      2.6.7    request additional assistance from the Police
      2.6.8    liaise regularly with the Senior Ambulance Officer and Ambulance Control
      2.6.9    issue press statements
      2.6.10   permit the progressive stand-down of the plan
2.7    The Medical Controller should establish and maintain contact with:

       2.7.1   The Senior Doctor in charge of A & E
       2.7.2   The Registrars or Senior Registrars for:
               General Medicine
               General Surgery
       2.7.3   Initially, the Anaesthetist on call for ICU
               followed by the Consultant Anaethetist
       2.7.4   Initially the Haematologist on call
               followed by the Consultant Haematologist
       2.7.5   Site Medical Officer

2.8    The Senior Nurse in the Control Room should establish and maintain contact with:

       2.8.1   the senior nurse for A & E and Theatres
       2.8.2   the senior nurse for Surgery
       2.8.3   the senior nurse for Medicine and Outpatients Departments
       2.8.4   the Director ofNursing Services (Acute)
       2.8.5   the Senior Nurse Paediatrics and Obstetrics
       2.8.6    senior nurses for each ward floor as necessary.

2.9    The Senior Manager should initiate the calling in or relocation of additional
       Administration and Clerical staff or the relief of existing Admin and Clerical staff and
       should regulate the response initiated by the staff of non-nursing and non-medical
       departments. He should also (as per local instructions) inform the senior persons listed on
       the Hospital Control Room Contact List and ensure the Senior Nurse and Medical
       Controller have contacted (if necessary) additional nursing and medical staff.

2.10   The Senior Nurse should initiate the calling in or relocation of additional nursing staff or
       the relief of existing nursing staff.

2.11   The Hospital Operational Control may need to be in contact with:

       2.11.1 the Police Documentation Team (up to 4 personnel) representing the Police
              Casualty Bureau at the hospital;
       2.11.2 personnel at the scene of the incident via Ambulance Control or links between
              A & E Department and the scene;
       2.11.3 the media;
       2.11.4 the Ambulance Service via the Ambulance Liaison Officer.
              It may be found beneficial to position this officer in the Hospital control




ALERTING PROCEDURES
2.12   Initial Notification. The initial notification of a Major Accident or Emergency, is likely
       to be an emergency 999 call to the Police. Established control room procedures of the
       Police, Fire Brigade and Ambulance Service ensure that each service is alerted regardless
       of the initial routing of the emergency 999 call. This may take advantage of modern
       technology eg Digital communications, Fax etc.
       NB. It should be noted that normally the Police would assume overall command and co­
       ordination at the scene although in certain circumstances command can be passed to the
       Fire Service in order to deal effectively with a specific incident.

2.13   It must be the responsibility of the Ambulance Service and no other emergency service to
       initiate the NHS Major Accident Procedures. This is particularly important in alerting the
       receiving hospitals. There should be an agreed ALERTING MESSAGE which is used
       consistently by all Ambulance Officers, it must be simple, direct and avoid jargon.
       2.13.1 The following terms are recommended:
               MAJOR ACCIDENT DECLARED :                    FULL response likely to be required
                                                            ofhospital

               MAJOR ACCIDENT WARNING:                     response by hospital may be FULL or
                                                            PRELIMINARY and PARTIAL
                                                            according to local procedure
               MAJOR ACCIDENT WARNING:                     inform all concerned
               CANCELLED
               MAJOR ACCIDENT STAND-DOWN: no further casualties expected
       2.13.2 Other terms - such as red alert, yellow alert, standby etc should be abandoned.

       2.13.3 From the above it follows that the Police and Fire services should normally alert
              the Ambulance Service Control and not the hospitals direct.
2.14   There should be a dedicated TELEPHONE in hospitals through which the Ambulance
       Service notify a Major Accident. In large Accident and Emergency Departments these
       telephones should be sited in the A & E Department where Senior Nursing or Reception
       SfafF are long-serving and experienced in receiving urgent ’blue light’ calls from the
       Ambulance Service and initiating appropriate action, rather than in the main switchboard
       where telephonists are now often inexperienced, under pressure or agency/locum staff.
       However it is accepted that at some hospitals local experience may consider that it is more
       appropriate to site these telephones in the switchboard. In this event local procedures
       should ensure that the A & E department is informed immediately an alert is received to
       provide information on the basis of which the hospital procedures will be activated.


       Hospital Alerting/Selection of Receiving Hospital
2.15   Should a hospital switchboard receive the initial call from a member of the public etc their
       immediate actions must be to verify with Ambulance Control followed by the A & E
       Department. Ambulance Control will normally verify with the police that the call is
       genuine and will confirm this to the hospital (which may not become the designated
       receiving hospital). If the call is received by A & E from Ambulance Control to implement
       the Major Disaster procedure, A & E must inform the switchboard to commence Major
       Disaster Call Out.

       Similarly, if the call is received from Ambulance Control by the hospital switchboard they
       must inform the A & E department immediately.
       2.15.1 Designated Receiving Hospital. It is the responsibility of the Ambulance
              Service to determine the most suitable hospital(s) (See Annex ‘A’) which is to
              become the DESIGNATED RECEIVING HOSPITAL. The Ambulance
              Service is responsible for alerting the hospital and for notifying the Police and Fire
              Brigade of the hospital selected. In line with established procedures and in co­
              operation with adjacent Health Authorities and Ambulance Services this could be
              a hospital in another District or Regional Health Authority.

       2.15.2 Supporting Hospitals. Dependent upon circumstances, at the outset of an
              emergency or subsequently when an appreciation of the situation has been made
              at the major accident site, the Ambulance Service will be responsible for
              nominating and activating one or more hospitals as SUPPORTING
              HOSPITALS to the Designated Receiving Hospital to deal with casualties from
              the Major Accident. This will include close liaison with adjacent Ambulance
              Services to determine the need to use the hospitals in their area of responsibility if
              required.


                                                10
COMMUNICATIONS

2.16   A major concern that has emerged from recent experience of incidents has been the failure
       in systems of communication. Effective communications are essential for the management
       of major incidents. This includes alerting, on site, and hospital communications. There is
       a need to clarify the communiction network required which, when in place, must be
       thoroughly tried and regularly tested.
2.17   The ambulance service have overall responsibility to establish and maintain effective major
       incident communications for all health service activities. There must also be co-ordination
       of communication with other agencies involved. The Unit General Manager will be
       responsible for hospital communications at the receiving hospital.
2.18   Priority Calls. There is at present no means to control dialled telephone calls to achieve
       priority in service. However, by dialing 100 BT Telephone Exchange Operators will accord
       priority to the connection of calls when the prefix “THIS IS A DISTRESS CALL” is
       used. All Hospitals and Ambulance Services are to include this information in local plans.
2.19   Telephone Numbers. A directory of telephone numbers which may be required in an
       emergency is to be maintained at each Ambulance Service Control and at each Hospital
       Control. It should include the ex-directory telephone numbers of the other listed hospitals
       (Annex ‘A’) in the region.

       British Telecom - Emergency Provision of Communications

2.20   There is no national directive to BT on major disaster procedures. Each BT district
       organises its own procedure. The facilities which BT could make available in a major
       disaster include provision of additional telephone lines, cellnet phones, telex, facsimile etc.
       NHS staff at District and Unit should discuss their anticipated requirements with BT staff
       and be familiar with the procedure for activating the arrangements in an emergency.
2.21   The liaison point(s) dealing with BT Civil Emergency Planning within the Region are the
       East Midlands District and Sheffield and Lincoln Districts of British Telecom and are
       identified at Appendix 5 together with the procedure to be invoked.

       Ex-Directory Lines in Accident & Emergency and Hospital Operational Control

2.22   Ex directory telephone lines are available in most A & E Departments and in most Hospital
       Controls for priority and emergency use of staff seeking advice or information during a
       major accident, particularly for communication between key staff where more than one
       hospital is involved. It is strongly recommended that all hospital controls and A & E
       departments should have an appropriate number of ex-directory lines which should be
       made known to other hospital controls, A & E departments and other NHS key staff for use
       in emergency. Appropriate ex-directory telephone numbers are included in Annex ‘A’.

       Hospital Switchboard/Call Out

2.23   Additional hospital switchboard staff may be required during an emergency (especially in
       the so called quiet hours). Instructions may need to be issued not to respond to incoming
       calls during the “call out” sequence. An action card should be provided detailing the
       immediate response required of these staff.
2.24   Where possible long range radio pagers with either “readout” or “major accident” tone
       which do not require staff to contact the hospital before responding should be used. It is
       intended to establish a regional contract which could produce substantial savings for Health
       Authorities renting or leasing this type of equipment. Contact the Assistant District
       Supplies Officer, Doncaster Health Authority for details.
       Staff

2.25   Each member of stafflikely to be involved should have an ‘action card’ or ready access to
       one, which sets out their responsibilities in a major accident and the context in which they
       will work. The action card should identify key contacts and telephone numbers including
       home telephone numbers as necessary. The main information should be a personal ‘action
       list’. The action card should be regularly updated, particularly after exercises where
       improvements are identified.


2.26   Precise instructions for staff reporting for duty or volunteering in response to media
       coverage should be contained in all hospital and Ambulance Service plans. This should
       include the need for key staff, particularly those reporting out of uniform to wear
       identification (arm bands or other means) in view of the larger numbers of staff, media and
       others in the hospital on these occasions. It is also important to retain some staffin reserve
       to cope with activity 12-36 hours following the accident.


2.27   Once the plan has been activated the person responsible in the Ambulance or Hospital
       major accident plan for informing key personnel will contact immediately the designated
       Site Medical Officer who will proceed at once to the scene.


2.28   The ambulance service will alert all receiving hospitals and will also summon the first
       mobile medical and nursing team who should, where possible, come from a hospital other
       than the first receiving hospital. The Site Medical Officer will not form part of a mobile
       team. The Site Medical Officer, mobile teams and the Site Nursing Officer (if one is
       required) should be transported to the site by the ambulance service.



       Ambulance Service

2.29   If appropriate the Ambulance Service will deploy a Mobile Communications Support Unit
       (MCSU) to the scene to provide the necessary communication links for control and
       management. Ideally, the MCSU should contain cellnet batteries and battery charging
       facilities to provide support to the Site Medical Officer and Mobile Medical Teams who
       may need to use portable cellnet/vodaphone facilities to communicate with the A & E
       departments of the receiving hospitals on clinical matters.


2.30   The availability of hand held communication equipment for use of Ambulance Officers
       with key responsibilities is also strongly recommended to cope with the situation where the
       site requires to be reconnoitred or controlled away from the MCSU. Recharging facilities
       for hand held radio equipment should be provided as part of the specification of the



                                                                                                        N
       MCSU.


2.31   The Scottish Ambulance Service has developed a “major incident equipment vehicle”
       designed and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties. It is packed with 50 stretchers,
       blankets and medical supplies and is in effect a travelling storehouse for such equipment.
       A vehicle of that type is deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at football
       matches with crowds over 25,000. This provision goes a long way towards meeting the
       criticism raised after Hillsborough and it is recommended in Lord Justice Taylor’s final
       report on Hillsborough that it be adopted elsewhere.


                                                 12
       Hospital

2.32   During a major disaster there is a heavy and sustained load on internal hospital telephone,
       inter-communication and messenger systems. Essential detail on casualty numbers and
       types of injury is required by many hospital departments to ensure they receive the
       information needed to support ’front line’ activity in A & E. This is particularly evident
       between the following areas which should have the best systems possible to cope with
       demand:

       Hospital Control and A & E department co-ordinator (normally the A & E Consultant in
       charge)
       A & E department and X-ray
       A & E and Theatres
       A & E and designated receiving wards
       Theatre manager and Ward Medical Controller



SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MEDICAL INCIDENT OFFICER
2.33   The Hospital Plan will designate who should act as Site Medical Officer. Senior clinicians
       with appropriate experience and training, if possible A & E consultants should undertake
       this role. The Site Medical Officer will have overall responsibility for deployment of
       medical and nursing personnel at the site. The Site Medical Officer and the Mobile
       Medical and Nursing Team may be provided by a second in line hospital so as not to deplete
       the staff of the receiving hospital.

       NB Special arrangements have been agreed for East Midlands Airport (see Appendix 1).

2.34   Site Contacts and Location. On arrival at the scene the Site Medical Officer must
       contact the Ambulance Incident Officer and will normally locate himselfat the Ambulance
       Mobile Communications Support Unit.

2.35   Responsibilities. In collaboration with the Ambulance Incident Officer the Site Medical
       Officer will be responsible for:

       2.35.1 Triage and formulating a casualty evacuation plan

       2.35.2 Arranging for the attendance of further medical and nursing teams if required eg
              to deal with trapped casualties etc.

       2.35.3 Organising treatment and co-ordinating medical teams

       2.35.4 Ensuring that the receiving hospital(s) is regularly updated on numbers and type
              of casualties they can expect.

       2.35.5 Monitoring the status of the hospitals to continue to receive casualties.

       2.35.6 Initiating ’standdown’ once the functions of mobile medical teams and ambulances
              are no longer required on site.

       2.35.7 Liaison with Police and Fire Services to provide any medical advice required.

2.36   Identifying Accoutrements. An identifying fluorescent jacket or similar must be
       provided for the SITE MEDICAL OFFICER together with an appropriate scale of
       protective clothing (see para 2.40).


                                               13
HOSPITAL FLYING SQUAD/MOBILE MEDICAL AND
NURSING TEAM
2.37   Each hospital at Annex ‘A’ should identify a Mobile Medical and Nursing or Mobile
       Surgical Resuscitation Team to be despatched on request. The team will normally be
       activated by a call from the Ambulance Service or Site Medical Officer via Ambulance
       Control to the Hospital A & E Department. Care must be taken in identifying the mobile
       teams not to deplete the staff of the A & E Department or elsewhere in the hospital who
       could be needed to provide immediate care for gravely injured patients arriving at the
       hospital.

2.38   The Mobile Teams should report to the Site Medical Officer at the Ambulance control
       point to receive instructions and be issued with any further equipment required.
2.39   Transport. Normally the Ambulance Service will send an ambulance to the hospital to
       convey the mobile medical team and their equipment to the site as appropriate to local
       arrangements, however, the teams in Derbyshire and North Lincolnshire have their own
       special transport, communications and equipment. Where transport is to be provided by
       the Ambulance Service the arrangements must be agreed between the hospital A & E
       Departments and the Ambulance Service and clearly identified specifically in both
       Ambulance Service and hospital plans.
2.40   Equipment. It is imperative that the equipment, clothing and footwear set aside for the
       Flying Squad and the Site Medical Officer is checked periodically to confirm serviceability,
       suitability and the maintenance of correct scales of provision. Each hospital should have
       readily available for the use of mobile teams warm protective and waterproof clothing
       (including suitable gloves and goggles) in which they will be easily recognisable. The drugs
       to be taken by the team must be regularly turned-over and readily available for issue as
       should an appropriate amputation pack. Appropriate local arrangements should be agreed
       for the provision and re-supply of IV fluids to the accident site if required. The use of
       miners’ style helmets or headbands with built-in lights is recommended for use in confined
       spaces. Equipment must be compatible eg adaptors and connectors match. Arrangements
       should be made for regular checks of equipment and the replacement of perishable
       supplies.



SITE NURSING OFFICER
2.41   Where more than one mobile team is required at the scene of a major incident, a Site
       Nursing Officer may be needed to co-ordinate the nursing activities. His or her duties
       may also include management/co-ordination of the work of other nurses who arrive
       unsummoned on the site, and detailing nurses to accompany patients to hospitals. He or
       she will be responsible to the Site Medical Officer, will not be a member of any mobile
       nursing team and should come from a hospital other than the first receiving hospital.



TRIAGE AND CASUALTY CLEARING STATION
2.42   Except in the most exceptional circumstances, national and local guidance should be
       adhered to in the setting up of a Triage Point and Casualty Clearing Station under the
       control of a Site Medical Officer and the Ambulance Incident Officer.
2.43   It should be noted that some Ambulance Services and Fire Services now possess inflatable
       tents which could be deployed to the accident site if required. These facilities could be
       made available to other Ambulance Services within the region under mutual aid
       arrangements. Appropriate details should be included in ambulance plans.
2.44   The site Casualty Clearing Station will be established by the Ambulance Incident Officer,
       normally adjacent to the Mobile Communications Support Unit.


                                               14
2.45   All casualties will normally be channelled through the Casualty Clearing Station which
       will act as a filter to ensure ambulance priority is given to the seriously injured, particularly
       those requiring life saving surgery. All casualties handled by the Casualty Clearing Station
       should be triaged and labelled by a trained person before being sent to hospital and details
       of treatment given at the site should be recorded on the label. Particular attention should
       be paid to recording crush injuries diagrammatically on the METTAG label. Where rescue
       has occurred this may require questioning of Police or Fire personnel at the scene. Standard
       METTAG II labels are in, use throughout the Trent Region for this purpose.


TRIAGE AT THE RECEIVING HOSPITAL
2.46   Triage at the receiving hospital is the responsibility of the A & E Consultant, but it is
       recommended that at the request of the A & E consultant, the consultant orthopaedic "
       surgeon “on call” or other Senior Medical Staff could assist with triage in the A & E
       department. This principle would be particularly relevant to burns casualties (see
       Appendix 2 para 10).
2.47   The designation of specific hospitals to receive certain classifications of casualties should
       be a routine part of “triage” eg neuro, spinal, irradiation and burns to regional specialties,
       however it is accepted that these decisions would probably only be taken after careful
       assessment in the receiving hospital and not at the site of the accident.
2.48   It is vital, when managing medical resources during an incident, to concentrate sub­
       regional specialist teams at their base hospitals. Moving patients between hospitals is
       potentially dangerous, but dividing activity between sites may deplete these highly
       specialist resources. Specific procedures have been agreed in regard to the management of
       burns casualties (see APPENDIX 2).
2.49   If circumstances demand it, the presence of a Consultant Radiologist at the A & E
       department X-ray could be beneficial to provide immediate and definitive X-ray reports.
       Much time could be saved by this procedure.
2.50   It could also be found beneficial, in some circumstances, to have a consultant anaesthetist
       with an interest in intensive care assisting with triage in the A & E department.


MANAGEMENT OF BURNS CASUALTIES
2.51   In the case of burns casualties the A & E Department of the receiving hospital should
       contact the local burns unit who would provide a burns specialist to assist in the assessment
       and advise on the management of casualties who may need to be transferred to the specialist
       burns unit (This subject is discussed at Appendix 2). Annex A identifies the regional Burns
       Units.


MANAGEMENT OF IRRADIATED CASUALTIES
2.52   Irradiated casualties would basically required decontamination, blood cell monitoring and
       possibly the facilities of a bone marrow transplant unit. Initially casualties should be treated
       at one of the hospitals listed below, but the receiving hospital should contact (as appropriate)
       the Bone Marrow Transplant Unit of Leicester Royal Infirmary, Nottingham City
       Hospital, Royal Hallamshire Sheffield or the Sheffield Children’s Hospital to request
       specialist assistance in assessing and advising on the management of casualties some of
       whom may subsequently need to be transferred to a Bone Marrow Transplant Unit. The
       hospitals to which casualties who required decontamination and treatment would initially
       be taken are:
       County Hospital, Lincoln
       Derbyshire Royal Infirmary
       Leicester Royal Infirmary
       Royal Hallamshire, Sheffield
       University Hospital, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham


                                                  15
FIRST AID - MASS BURNS
2.53   Paramedic Ambulance personnel should be familiar with the procedure and advice given
       at Appendix 4.



TRAPPED CASUALTIES
2.54   Rescue. The SENIOR FIRE OFFICER present is responsible for initiating the rescue
       plan. The co-ordination of the rescue activities shall be a joint function of the Police, Fire
       and Ambulance Services.

2.55   Where casualties are trapped a medical and nursing team consisting of a minimum of an
       experienced doctor and senior ‘suitably trained’ first level nurse will need to be provided
       to give intravenous fluids, administer entenox, stop bleeding and maintain an airway etc.
       Some of these functions will increasingly be performed by Paramedic ambulance
       personnel. This will be in addition to the site casualty clearing station functions which will
       also require the presence of medical and nursing staff.



EMERGENCY MORTUARY AND DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD
2.56   Responsibility. Emergency mortuary arrangements, including disposal of the dead will
       be the responsibility of the POLICE. However, it is agreed policy in Trent Region that
       ambulances will convey the dead from the accident site to the emergency mortuary on an
       opportunity basis.



ASSISTANCE OFFERED BY VOLUNTARY AGENCIES ON SITE
2.57   Alerting. The procedure for alerting British Red Cross and St John Ambulance should
       be agreed locally and clearly identified in both Hospital and Ambulance Service plans.
       Generally St John Ambulance and the Ambulance element of BRCS will be alerted by
       Ambulance control. The remainder of BRCS would be alerted by Hospital Control.

2.58   Reporting. Members of the St John Ambulance or British Red Cross Society may be
       required to standby at a holding point away from the incident before being mobilised to
       wherever they may be required by the Ambulance Incident Officer. If this includes arriving
       at the scene of a Major Accident they should report to their respective Senior Officer who
       will be positioned in the vicinity of the Ambulance Service Mobile Communications
       Support Unit. Other organisations such as the Military, Women’s Royal Voluntary
       Organisation and Salvation Army etc should report to the Police Incident Officer.

2.59   Duties. The Senior Officers of the Voluntary Aid Societies (BRCS St John Ambulance)
       will assign their members to duties in accordance with the directions issued by the
       Ambulance Incident Officer (ambulance and first aid) or Hospital Control (nursing and
       welfare). Other organisations would be directed by the Senior Police Officer at the scene.

2.60   Liaison. There should be recognition of the importance of consultation with Voluntary
       Aid Societies and the Armed Services in the early stages of contingency planning and
       periodically thereafter when reviewing and revising plans.

2.61   District Officers should ensure that the DHA plans cover arrangements for speedy
       organisation of an adequate number of stretcher bearing parties at the site. All plans should
       include a system whereby volunteers, and where applicable locally available Armed Service
       personnel, can be called upon to provide stretcher bearers and other assistance at the site.


                                                 16
ASSISTANCE OFFERED BY VOLUNTARY BODIES AT RECEIVING
HOSPITALS
2.62   Reporting. A VOLUNTEER RECEPTION room should be established at the receiving
       hospital as a reporting point for members of the Voluntary Aid Societies or individual
       volunteers offering their services and a senior person (reporting to Hospital Control)
       assigned to control all volunteer activity.

2.63   Duties. Volunteers should remain in VOLUNTEER RECEPTION until they are
       assigned to duties by their respective Senior Officers in accordance with directions issued
       by senior members of the Medical, Nursing or Administrative Staff of the hospital or as
       appropriate the Co-ordinator of Voluntary Services.

2.64   Identification. Where possible volunteers should be given an arm band or a lapel
        badge/name card indicating the type of assistance each individual can provide eg ‘Trained
        Nurse’, ‘Trained First Aider’, ‘Welfare’. These would normally be provided by the voluntary
        organisation concerned.


RECEIVING HOSPITAL PROCEDURES
2.65   Redirection of Medical and Surgical Emergencies. If possible, arrangements should
       be identified in the major incident response procedures to re-direct medical and surgical
       emergencies in the community to other medical facilities in order to substantially increase
       the ability of the receiving hospital to absorb casualties from the incident.


       Casualty Management Procedure

2.66   Accommodation. When dealing with a large influx of casualties from a Major Accident
       it is necessary to have a single entrance to the hospital and a unified documentation system
       to ensure that all the injured are examined and triaged. Separate accommodation should be
       allocated where possible for the reception of STRETCHER and WALKING CASES.

2.67   Unloading. An AMBULANCE OFFICER should supervise the unloading of casualties
       and the quick turn round of ambulances and equipment.

2.68   Documentation. On arrival at the receiving hospital(s) pre-printed clinical casualty
       documentation should be used for ALL casualties. The system used should be co­
       ordinated with the local medical records procedure. The aim should be to provide the
       following minimum information:
        2.68.1   Major Incident Casualty Number
        2.68.2   Time of Incident
        2.68.3   Date and time of admission
        2.68.4   Travelling time
        2.68.5   Identification (include name, age and sex, if known, address and nationality). If
                 unidentified distinguishing marks or tattoos.
        2.68.6   Next of kin
        2.68.7   Clinical priority status (immediate, urgent, minor and dead)
        2.68.8   Location in A & E Department (eg Resuscitation Room)
        2.68.9   Manikin charts to mark the anatomical site and type of injuries
        2.68.10 Investigations


                                                17
       2.68.11 Treatment
       2.68.12 Disposal and disposal time
       2.68.13 Doctors names

2.69   It is strongly recommended that, if possible, a nurse or clerk is attached to each patient and
        remains with them to act as recorder/continuity until the patient can be formally handed
        over to ward staff.

2.70   The Medical Controller should assign a suitable doctor to the receiving ward(s) to co­
       ordinate medical staff, decide priorities for surgery and act as the link with “hospital
       control”.


       Equipment and Consumables

2.71   It is not recommended that ljirge reserves of equipment and consumables are held
       specifically for major incidents. However, based on the types of surgical procedures
       expected to be performed in a major accident, increased working stocks of a limited
       inventory of some items, including external fixation kits, chest drains, plasma expanders,
       theatre instruments and sterile supplies are required.

2.72   Resuscitation equipment could be required within X-ray examination rooms if many of the
       patients in X-ray were critically ill. Instructions to obtain and position this equipment
       should be included in action cards for the porters and Medical Equipment Services Unit
       (MESU).

2.73   The location of spare equipment and the means to obtain it need to be clearly specified in
       hospital plans (people do not act in accordance with their usual procedure in these
       situations!).



AFTERMATH
2.74   Hospital departments should include plans for coping with the aftermath of the accident
       with particular emphasis on:

       2.74.1    Continuing demands on staff with special expertise

       2.74.2    Requirements for specialised equipment and consumables.

       2.74.3    Ability to maintain routine services, eg possible postponement of list surgery and
                 some clinics and other planned activity.

       2.74.4    Debriefing of staff, patients and relatives.



POLICE CASUALTY BUREAU
2.75   A police documentation team will be sent to each receiving hospital to collect and collate
       casualty information which will be passed to the central police casualty bureau at Police
       HQ. The major accident plan should identify an office with up to four telephone lines and
       a facsimile machine for this function. Police casualty bureau telephone numbers will be
       released by the police to the general public, to which all casualty enquiries should be
       directed. The location of the bureau will not be released in order to prevent unnecessary
       personal callers impeding the operational effectiveness of the facility.


                                                 18
2.76   Location. The rooms allocated for the RELATIVES INFORMATION SERVICE and
       POLICE DOCUMENTATION TEAM should, if possible, be located in the vicinity of
       the Accident and Emergency Department. The room used for the police documentation
       team must be equipped with (or have suitable BT sockets for) telephones and facsimile and
       the police notified at the planning stage of the telephone numbers which would be used.

2.77   As far as casualty injuries are concerned, the police casualty bureau will only require to
       know whether a person is:—

       Dead
       Injured and detained (for treatment or observation)
       Injured and not detained
       Uninjured

2.78   These details will be passed from the hospital by the police documentation team using
       facsimile, or telephone to the central casualty bureau at Police HQ.

2.79   Messages regarding the death of a casualty will be delivered personally to relatives by a
       Police Officer and not passed to them by telephone.

2.80   Liaison. District Officers should decide, in consultation with the local Senior Police
       Officer, to whom and where members of the POLICE DOCUMENTATION TEAM
       should report in the event of any hospital in their district being alerted to receive casualties
       from a Major Accident.




HOSPITAL SOCIAL WORKERS
2.81   Relatives Information Service. Recent experience has proved the need to establish a
       room with up to four telephones which could be stalled by hospital social workers or
       volunteers to answer inquiries from relatives and friends. This room should be near to the
       room provided for the Police documentation team since there may be a need to exchange
       information particularly if identification of casualties is a problem. Standard inquiry forms,
       such as that shown at Appendix 3, which closely follow the format of the police casualty
       bureau forms should be used to record details.

2.82   The Social Services staff within the hospital have an important role to play in providing a
       relative’s information service and in liaising with the Police Authorities in terms of
       collection of information from relatives about survivors and possible fatalities in order that
       information may be collated to help with possible identification. This facility should be
       separated from the media arrangements to provide privacy and confidentiality.

2.83   A senior person should be responsible for liaison with relatives and should report to one
       central point (hospital control) within the hospital. It is also particularly important to
       establish a relatives area as soon as possible since many will attend the hospital to await news
       of casualties. This could cause logist ic problems involving the provision of short term
       accommodation etc which may need to be addressed.

2.84   Hospitals should ensure that local plans identify the Principal or Senior Social Workers to
       be contacted in the initial stages of a Major Accident. The decision regarding follow-up
       action would rest with this individual and take account of locally agreed policy and
       planning arrangements.
CHAPLAINCY ARRANGEMENTS IN EMERGENCIES
2.85   In a Major Accident situation involving a large number of casualties, the duty Hospital
       Chaplain will have an important role. Local arrangements should, therefore, ensure that
       the duty Hospital Chaplain(s) is identified and included in the first stage call out of Key
       Officers to be notified. The contact point for the Hospital Chaplain will be Hospital
       Control. Appendix 6 provides Notes for Hospital Chaplaincy Team Leaders Involved in
       Major Incidents.

2.86   The ‘Church’ has a well established ‘social services infrastructure’ which would be of great
       benefit in a Major Accident and in certain circumstances Church Halls are regarded as
       primary sites for accommodating the temporarily homeless.

2.87   The role of the Hospital Chaplain will be to assess the requirements and to co-ordinate
       clergy arrangements for all religions. He will act as the point of contact between the clergy
       of various religions and if required will call out other denominations as necessary. This
       could involve a second tier response from the clergy in the community particularly if the
       local authority county peacetime major disaster plan is implemented to deal with a
       situation affecting the community eg homelessness or evacuation due to toxic or other
       hazard.

2.88   Although chaplains offer a ministry to the sick and dying they also offer an important
       pastoral role to both hospital staff and patients.

2.89   It should be noted that there may initially be a need for clergy at the accident site and in the
       receiving wards at hospitals. Appropriate arrangements should be identified in both
       hospital and Ambulance Service plans which should be co-ordinated with the police.

2.90   Counselling and personal support should be co-ordinated through one person, and made
       available to casualties, their families and staff. It should involve the Social Services
       department within the hospital, psychologists and clergy working together. Account
       should be taken of the need for an independent counselling service to be made available to
       support staff who have been involved professionally in a major disaster. Staff are not
       necessarily .the best judge of their own counselling needs, given the pressures that such
       situations inevitably create. This subject is considered in more detail at Section 7.




AMBULANCE MOBILIZATION
2.91   The Ambulance Service will react to a Major Accident in accordance with their operational
       policies and the locally agreed standard operational procedures.




MEDIA
2.92   It is emphasised that intense and sustained media interest must be anticipated. Senior
       persons must be assigned to control and co-ordinate this function, preferably reporting to
       one central point (Hospital Operational Control) within the hospital. The Press Room
       must be separate from the room/function dealing with relatives enquiries and the Police
       documentation team in order to maintain privacy. This subject is dealt with in some detail
       at Section 8.

2.93   Additional pay phone facilities may need to be provided for the media. It should be noted
       that the media can be used to inform both staff and patients (OPD) of the status of the
       hospital and the impact of the incident on normal routines, standard messages could be
       prepared for broadcast on local radio or TV.


                                                 20
BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE
2.94   There is now a system in operation in England which requires each Regional Blood
       Transfusion Centre to register its stock of blood and blood products with the National
       Blood Transfusion Service Headquarters. This information is updated daily and in a major
       disaster those centres with high volumes of blood or blood products would provide aid to
       the centre under pressure.

2.95   In general volunteer blood donors would not be required immediately during a major
       disaster but would be asked to support their local blood donor sessions during the following
       week to help replenish stocks used.

2.96   The BTS should be asked to consider the preparation of a short statement to the media
       indicating whether blood donors are required, or not - if donors are subsequently required,
       the appeal should be initiated and controlled by the BTS.


DEFINITION OF TERMS
2.97   A list of definitions and terminology is given at Annex ‘B*.




                                                21
                                                             APPENDIX 1 TO SECTION 2
                                                             CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

     NHS RESPONSE EAST MIDLANDS AIRPORT
              - FULL EMERGENCY

CONTROL AND CO-ORDINATION OF NHS RESPONSE
1.   East Midlands Airport (EMA) is situated about two miles West of junction 24 of the M l
     motorway in Leicestershire.

2.   The responsibility for planning the NHS response, therefore, lies with the Leicestershire
     Chief Ambulance Officer and co-ordination of multi-agencies is the remit of the
     Leicestershire Chief Constable.

3.   In the event of an aircraft accident occurring within the perimeter of the airfield or in the
     County of Leicestershire, Leicestershire Ambulance Service would assume the “Master
     Control” and would direct the NHS response, supported by Derbyshire and
     Nottinghamshire Ambulance services.

4.   If in attempting to land at EMA the aircraft accident occurred in Nottinghamshire or
      Derbyshire (or exceptionally Staffordshire) the appropriate County Ambulance Service
     would assume “Master Control” and be supported by the other ambulance services as
     appropriate.

5.   The Derbyshire Royal Infirmary has a specific role in the initial NHS response to an alert
     at East Midlands Airport and will provide the Site Medical Officer (see para 8 below).


ALERTING PROCEDURE FOR NHS
6.   When an aircraft emergency is declared at East Midlands Airport the duty Air Traffic
     Controller will alert the Leicestershire Police Operations Room at Force HQ Narborough.
     Leicestershire Police will alert Leicestershire Ambulance Control who will take the
     following action.

     6.1     Alert Derby Royal Infirmary (DRI) Site Medical Officer on the exclusive Accident
             & Emergency No (0332) 362641.

     6.2     Alert Derbyshire Ambulance Control and Nottinghamshire Ambulance Control.

             NB 1: Derbyshire Ambulance Control will check with the DRI and confirm that
             the DRI Flying Squad has received the ‘ALERT’ message and is responding.

             NB 2: Leicestershire, Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Ambulance Services will
             make an initial response as detailed at para 11.

             NB 3: The above three Ambulance Controls will closely monitor the situation
             and the Master Control will provide an initial warning (for A & E Department
             only) to the DRI, QMC and LRI pending the implementation of the major disaster
             procedures as detailed below.

7.   In the event of an aircraft accident resulting in live casualties one or more of the following
     hospitals will receive casualties, Derbyshire Royal Infirmary (DRI), Queen’s Medical
     Centre (QMC), and Leicester Royal Infirmary (LRI). The order in which they are activated
     will depend upon circumstances and the assessment of the Ambulance Incident Officer
     and the Site Medical Officer. The essential elements in the initial message from the
     scene to Master Ambulance Control must be:


                                              22
      7.1    Major Accident confirmed “Implement Major Accident Procedures”.

      7.2    The Master Ambulance Control will inform (as appropriate) DRI, QMC and LRI
             that they will be receiving casualties.

              NB 1: This procedure has been adopted to prevent the need for the hospitals to
              validate messages regarding the incident.

              NB 2: If the aircraft lands safely, or the incident is resolved, the Master Ambulance
              Control is responsible for advising the hospitals accordingly.




SITE MEDICAL OFFICER - CALLSIGN ZULU ONE OR ZULU TWO
8.    In the event of a FULL EMERGENCY alert at East Midlands Airport, the DRI Flying
       Squad will respond, the senior doctor on the team will become SITE MEDICAL
       OFFICER. The DRI Flying Squad consists of one Doctor team leader, one nurse and a
      driver. The team has its own vehicle equipped with radio communication and special
       equipment. It has an activation time of approximately two minutes from time of reccipt of
       emergency call. The vehicle is equipped to maintain communication with:

      8.1     DRI A & E department

      8.2     Ambulance Controls

      8.3     Additional personal radios for team members.

9.    The communications procedure for the DRI SITE MEDICAL OFFICER responding to
      an EMA alert has been agreed and is as follows:

      9.1     On departure from DRI call Leicestershire Ambulance Control on Emergency
              Reserve Channel (ERC) and give estimated time of arrival (ETA) for EMA.
              Remain on ERC frequency and maintain contact with Leicestershire Ambulance
              Control who will pass updated information regarding the emergency.

      9.2     Confirm to Leicestershire Ambulance Control arrival at EMA rendezvous point
              (near EMA Fire Station) or site of accident.

              NB: Any requirement for the Flying Squad to communicate with the DRI on
              clinical matters will be accomplished using the Flying Squad back up radio
              equipment direct to the DRI A & E department.

10.   The Site Medical Officer together with the Ambulance Incident Officer will:

      10.1    Confirm that the incident is a “MAJOR ACCIDENT” by use of the phrase
              “MAJOR ACCIDENT CONFIRMED”.

      10.2    Initiate the request for mobile medical teams and additional medical equipment eg
              IV fluids. Co-ordinate the activities of Paramedics at the scene.

      10.3    Set up a triage point and Casualty Clearing Centre as appropriate.

      10.4    In co-operation with the Ambulance Incident Officer establish contact between the
              site and the hospital A & E department(s) in order to:

              10.4.1 Regularly update the hospital on numbers and type of casualties they can
                     expect.


                                               23
              10.4.2 Request further staff and equipment to support the scene eg The Flying
                     Squads from QMC Nottingham and Leicester Royal Infirmary.

              10.4.3 Monitor the status of the hospitals to continue to receive casualties.

                     NB: When the DRI Flying Squad is called out it is standard practice for
                     the second DRI Flying Squad vehicle to be prepared, if appropriate a
                     further doctor could be sent to the scene to relieve the SMO or make up a
                     third mobile medical team.


INITIAL RESPONSE BY THE LEICESTERSHIRE, DERBYSHIRE AND
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICES
11.   On receipt of the initial alert from the Leicestershire Police the Ambulance Service
      response will be as follows:-

      11.1    Leicestershire Ambulance Service
              Despatch 4 ambulance vehicles and an Ambulance Incident Officer, plus a Mobile
              Communication Support Unit (MCSU).

      11.2    Derbyshire Ambulance Service
              Despatch 4 ambulance vehicles.
              Alert the Senior Duty Officer.

      11.3    Nottinghamshire Ambulance Service
              Despatch 4 Ambulance vehicles
              Alert the Senior Duty Officer


INFLATABLE MAJOR DISASTER TENT
12.   On confirmation of “Major Accident” the Nottinghamshire Ambulance Service would
      deploy their Inflatable Major Accident Tent to the scene. The other Ambulance Services
      in the Region are considering the purchase of tents, and these could be made available if
      required.

13.   Additionally, the Leicestershire Fire Service would, if requested, deploy their Major
      Accident Tent to the scene.


COMMUNICATIONS - EMERGENCY RESERVE CHANNEL (ERC)
14.   The Ambulance Master Control will operate on Channel 1, the ERC frequency. ALL
      ambulance service vehicles deployed to the scene or involved in the incident will be
      required to operate on this frequency unless authorised/requested by the Master Control
      to do otherwise.

15.   Supporting Ambulance Controls will also be required to monitor ERC in order to assist in
       the operation as required. The monitoring of ERC MUST NOT include the activation of
       any ERC base station unless requested by the Master Ambulance Control.
                                                              APPENDIX 2 TO SECTION 2
                                                              CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

 THE MANAGEMENT OF MASS BURN CASUALTIES

INTRODUCTION
1.   The emergence of specialised centres for the treatment of severe burn injury poses
     problems for the management of mass burn casualties. Whilst the concentration of
     expertise and facilities in burn centres has improved the outlook for individual patients
     with extensive injuries, experience in dealing with these injuries in general hospitals has
     correspondingly declined. In addition, the incidence of severe burn injury is relatively low,
     and burn centres are typically small and sparsely distributed. It is clear, therefore, that in’
     planning for the management of mass burn casualties, special consideration must be given
     to the optimal utilisation of the resources available.

2.   In the Trent Region there are three burn centres with a total capacity of 142 beds for both
      plastic surgery and burns located as follows:

     Sheffield    (Northern General)          43 beds (28 plastic surgery + 15 burn)
                  (Childrens Hospital)        12 beds (12 plastic surgery + 0 burn)

     Nottingham City                          43 beds (24 plastic surgery + 19 burn)

     Leicester Royal Infirmary                44 beds (30 plastic surgery + 14 burn)

                                             142 beds (94 plastic surgery + 48 burn)

     NB: Incidents which result in more than 100 hospital admissions are rare (see tables 1
     and 2).

3.   Typically in recent major disasters the number of casualties who suffer burns of 30 - 70%
     body surface area (BSA) has been small. On average, less that 10% of patients admitted to
     hospital had injuries in this range. This fact has significance for disaster planning since
     patients with this size of burn potentially obtain the greatest benefit from referral to a burn
     centre.

4.   TRIAGE AND FLOW OF CASUALTIES
     Since bed availability in specialised ccntres is limited, it is clear that accurate triage is
     essential for the optimal care of patients following fire disaster. Moreover, proper
     assessment of burn patients can only occur under hospital conditions with adequate
     warmth, lighting and trained personnel. Medical sorting should, ideally, be performed by
     an expert in burns as the actual disposal of patients will be influenced not only by the
     number of casualties and bed availability, but also by such factors as the depth and location
     of the wounds, complications such as inhalation injury and extremes of age.

5.   It is also considered vital, when managing medical resources during an incident, to
      concentrate sub-regional specialist teams at their base hospitals. Moving patients between
      hospitals is potentially dangerous, but dividing activity between sites may deplete these
      highly specialist resources. This presents an obvious dichotomy in the management of
      severe burn patients where there is no local burn centre.

6.   However in contrast to many other types of injury, the early transportation of burn patients
     is feasible although careful preparation is required for injuries of more than 20% (Judkins
     1988).


                                               25
7.    From the above, the following conclusions may be drawn:

      7.1.    Typically only a small percentage of mass burn casualties would need to be
              transferred to Regional Specialty Units.

      7.2.    Ideally they should be triaged in hospitals by an expert in burns.

      7.3.    The emergency medical effort should be concentrated at the primary receiving
              hospital(s) but a well ordered secondary distribution of casualties may be
              undertaken to relieve the burden carried by the receiving hospital.

      7.4.    The deployment of a small team of ‘burns experts’ to the primary receiving
              hospital(s), to advise on treatment and medical sorting, may be feasible but will
              only be effective if staff, transport and communications are assured.

8.    POLICY FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF BURNS IN A MAJOR ACCIDENT

      It is rccommendcd that following a major accident with many burns victims, the site
      mcdical officer (who is most unlikely to be a burns specialist) should assess patients for
      Triage using the Mettag II tag-labels.

      0       Dead (black)
      1       Respiratory burns (red)
      II      Children with burns over 10% (yellow)
              Adults with burns over 15% (yellow)
      III     Other burns victims of lesser severity (green).

9.    At the first opportunity he should ensure that the receiving hospital A & E department is
      informed of the approximate numbers of major or lesser burns that they are likely to receive.

10.   The A & E department of the receiving hospital(s) should contact the staff of the
      appropriate regional Burns Unit (see Annex ‘A’). A burns specialist (preferably a
      Consultant, otherwise a Registrar or Senior Registrar) would go immediately to the
      receiving hospital to assist and advise on further Triage. A primary function would be to
      assess the patients and decide which are probably going to need skin grafting and should
      be transferred within 24 - 48 hours or sooner to a specialist burns unit.

11.   It is considered that any single major burn of over 20% constitutes a very considerable
      workload. Most Burns Units are capable of looking after 2 or 3 such patients at a time
      without undue stress on the system but to take on more than this causes very considerable
      disruption to the normal work pattern. It is, therefore, sensible that if there are more than
       3 burns of over 20%, the total number should be shared between the three Units of
      Sheffield, Nottingham and Leicester, as far as is practicable. Such patients would need to
      be transferred to the Burns Units within hours of arrival at the receiving hospital(s) and as
      soon as IV resuscitation has been instituted.

12.   It would be the responsibility of the Burns Specialist attending the receiving hospital to
      authorise transfer and to liaise with the other Burns Units on the details.

13.   Respiratory burns or patients with other additional major injuries will need intensive care
      and should be treated initially by an Anaesthetist in the nearest ITU, preferably in the
      receiving hospital, but may subsequently require transfer to the burns unit.


                                               26
14.   Where there are large numbers of patients with non-life threatening burns but who need
      hospitalisation, it is considered best that they be treated in a ward in the hospital which
      contains the Burns Unit. However it is recognised that injuries, other than burns, may
      dictate that some patients are treated on general surgical wards initially. In Leicester and
      Sheffield this will probably not involve transfer to another hospital. In Nottingham transfer
      from the Queen’s Medical Centre to the City Hospital would be required. IV resuscitation
      may still be required for many of these patients but is likely to be less critical than for the
      major burns.

15.   It is acknowledged that this policy will be more difficult to apply if the A & E receiving
      hospital is in Lincoln, Boston, Derby, Mansfield, Worksop, Barnsley, Doncaster or
      Rotherham. In this case, the A & E specialist should consult the nearest Regional burns
      specialist, who would advise on the best management policy.

16.   Patients with small burns which can be managed on an out-patient basis should be treated
      in the receiving A & E department, preferably by nurses and doctors with experience in
      burns dressings. They should return within 24 hours for reassessment by a burns specialist
      or senior A & E specialist particularly where depth or severity of injury are a concern.
TABLE 1 Summary description of 11 fire disasters since 1970,
        (including main references)


 NAME                COUNTRY            DESCRIPTION                   MAIN REFERENCE


                                        OUTDOOR DISASTERS

 Nakivubo            Kamapala,          Petrol tanker crash           Carswell et al. (1976)
 13.1.73             Uganda             in market place

 Los Alfraques       Spain              L P G tanker crash            Arturson(1981)
 11.7.78                                at campsite

 Bangalore           India              circus fire                   Das (1983)
 7.2.81

 Bradford            E ngland           fire in football              Sharpe et al. (1985)
 11.5.85                                stadium

 Ramstein            West               plane crash at                various com munications
 28.8.88             G erm any          airshow



                                        INDOOR DISASTERS

 Sum m erland        Isle o f M an      fire in leisure               H art etal. (1975)
 2.8.73              Britain            complex

 D ublin             Ireland            fire in discotheque           D uigan et al. (1984)
 Feb 1981

 Cardowan            Scotland           coal mine explosion           Allister et al. (1983)
 27.1.84

 M anchester         E ngland           fire in aircraft              O ’Hickey et al. (1987)
 22.8.85

 K ing’s Cross       England            fire in underground           Brough M . (personal)
 24.6.88                                station

 Piper Alpha         Scotland           fire on oil platform          Rayner C. (personal)
 6.7.88



Acknowledgement to M r D P M ackie FRCS Amsterdam G eneral Hospital
TABLE II            Fate of burn casualties following fire disasters.
                    (Figures of the disasters marked with an asterix are provisional)


 NAME                    IMMEDIATE       ARRIVAL         NO               LATE          TRANSFER TO
                         DEATHS          IN HOSP         ADMITTED         DEATHS        OTHER HOSPS


                                            OUTDOOR DISASTERS

 N akivubo                11              < 1 hour         71              26           no

 Los Alfraques           102             1-6 hours        140             108           limited

 Bangalore                92              < 1 hour         77              17           no

 Bradford                 53              < 1 hour         83               5           limited

 Ramstein*                34              < 2 hours       344              37           limited



                                               INDOOR DISASTERS

 Sum m erland             48              < 1 hour         24               2           no

 D ublin                  48             ‘rapid’           44               2           no

 Cardowan                  0              < 2 hours        36               0           yes

 M anchester              52              < 1 hour         15               1           no

 K in g ’s Cross*         30              < 1 hour         29               1           }


 Piper Alpha*            167             several hours     11               1           110



Acknowledgement to M r D P M ackie FRCS Amsterdam General Hospital
                                                                        APPENDIX 3 TO SECTION 2
                                                                        CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

                           RELATIVES INFORMATION SERVICE

E N Q U I R E R :...
(Name, Address
 and Tel N o :) ....

 A & E NUM BER                             C O N SU L T A N T


 SURNAM E                                                                          D E S C R IP T IO N
 F O R E N A M E (S)
                                                                H E IG H T
                                                                B U IL D
 ADDRESS
                                                                C O M P L E X IO N
                                                                N O SE
                                                                TEETH
                                                                H A IR
                                                                EYES
                                                                SCARS
 D ATE O F B IR T H                                             TA TTO O S
 AGE                                                            C L O T H IN G
 SEX                                                            JE W E L L E R Y
                                                                RACE
 R E L IG IO N                                                  OTHERS
 O C C U PA T IO N


 A C C O M P A N IE D BY

 N E X T O F K IN N A M E                                  R E L A T IO N S H IP

 ADDRESS

                                                           T E L NO:




 GP NAM E AND
 ADDRESS




 P R E S E N T IN G
 PROBLEM



 SP E C IA L CASES

 A L L E R G IE S

 D ISPO SA L O F P A T IE N T


 PO SIT IV EL Y ID E N T IF IE D :   YES/N O               C O N D IT IO N

 E N Q U IR E R IN F O R M E D :     YES/N O               L O C A T IO N




                                                      30
                                                            APPENDIX 4 TO SECTION 2
                                                            CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

     AMBULANCE SERVICE - PARAMEDIC TRAINED
                  PERSONNEL

FIRST AID - MASS BURNS CASUALTIES
NB:   Adequate lighting is absolutely essential.


AIRWAY
1.    Give 100% oxygen for 5 minutes with a well fitting mask (unconscious patient).

2.    Attempt intubation once if required.


IV LINE
3.    No - If no other injury, transfer to hospital stat.

4.    Yes - If other injuries.

NB1: Fluid - Gelofusin/Crystalloid eg Hartman’s.

NB2: Rate - Keep the vein open (beware overtransfusing children).


ANALGESIA
5.    Entenox.

6.    Avoid IV analgesia which might depress respiration in inhalation burns.


FLYING SQUAD
7.    We would recommend :
       Consultant Anaesthetist/Senior Registrar with Equipment in view of possible inhalation
       burn or injuries requiring intubation.




                                                  31
                                                        APPENDIX 5 TO SECTION 2
                                                        CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

BRITISH TELCOM - EMERGENCY PROVISION
             OF SERVICE

The liaison points and the procedure for this service are given below:

 1.1    BT EAST MIDLANDS DISTRICT - covers Leicestershire,
        Derbyshire Nottingham shire and South Lincolnshire
        Mr P Hibbert        Civil Emergency Liaison Officer (CELO)            0533 534399
        M r D A Jones       Deputy CELO                                       0602 478104
        Emergency contact (24 hour)                                           0533 536111

 12    BT SHEFFIELD AND LINCOLN DISTRICT- covers South
       Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire and Chesterfield/Worksop
        Miss J Burroughs Civil Emergency Liaison Officer (CELO)               0742 708069
        Mrs J Turner     Deputy CELO                                          0742 708169
        Emergency contact (24 hour)                                           0742 768891

The procedure for requesting emergency provision of service is dial ‘999’ or the 24 hour
contact number and state “ MAJOR ACCIDENT . . . HEALTH AUTHORITY -
REQUEST EMERGENCY PROVISION OF SERVICE”. Include information on
what is required, where it is required and, if possible, the equipment it needs to be
compatible with. This call will be connected to the BT Duty Engineer who will respond,
usually within one hour.

The call to BT should contain clear concise details of the assistance requested, the type of
detail required should include as much of the following as possible:

3.1.    Name, designation and telephone number of requesting officer.

3.2    Location where provision is needed. (Exchange area ifknown).

3.3    Type of service (eg speech, cellnet, telex, data and number of lines required).

3.4    Indicate the scale of assistance that BT might be expected to provide and the reason
        for provision.

3.5    Timescale involved.

It should be noted that British Telecom will subsequently present a bill for the services
provided, therefore the use of this procedure should, if possible, be authorised by a senior
NHS officer.

If this procedure is to be used to test emergency plans the appropriate BT Civil Emergency
Liaison Officer should be informed at least three working days prior of the event.
                                  I

These instructions should be incorporated into Hospital and Ambulance Service
emergency plans. Clarification of procedure or points of detail should be sought from the
appropriate British Telecom CELO.
                                                       APPENDIX 6 TO SECTION 2
                                                       CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

NOTES FOR HOSPITAL CHAPLAINCY TEAM
LEADERS INVOLVED IN MAJOR INCIDENTS

Ensure that all members of the chaplaincy team are familiar with Diocesan/ecumenical
major incident policies as well as your own Unit policy.


Adhere determinedly to your Unit’s major incident policy, especially as regards responses
to media enquiries. See Section 8 for arrangements for liaison with the media.


Ensure your chaplaincy team includes both women and men.


Use volunteers who already belong to your team and are familiar with hospital geography,
staff and procedures.


Respect the contribution of other disciplines and endeavour to co-ordinate your work with
theirs.


Communications are vital. If possible obtain a portable phone and ensure that key people,
especially Hospital Control, can contact you.


Denominational labels matter very little, but sensitivity to expressed preferences is vital.


Take care of one another and don’t allow yourself or colleagues to take on more than is good
for them.


Share the trauma freely with others as early as you can and help your colleagues to do the
same.


Build up staff-support systems that can address post-incident situations. Ensure that there
is feedback/affirmation/expressions of gratitude.
                                                                                        SECTION 3

      CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL MAJOR ACCIDENT
        HAZARDS (CIMAH) REGULATIONS 1984


INTRODUCTION
3.1    Governments in the European Economic Community (EEC) have been concerned for
       some years that industrial activities involving certain dangerous substances have the
       potential to give rise to serious injury or damage beyond the immediate vicinity of the
       workplace. The activities have commonly come to be known in this country as ‘major
       hazards’.


3.2    In Great Britain, after the accident at Flixborough in 1974, the Health and Safety
       Commission (HSC) appointed an Advisory Committee on Major Hazards (ACMH) to
       consider the problems and make recommendations. The ACMH published three Reports
       (HMSO 1976, 1979 and 1984) and spearheaded the development of a system of controls
       for major hazards in the United Kingdom.


3.3    An underlying principle of the ACMH thinking has been that, as in the Health and Safety
       at Work Act 1974 (HSW Act), the primary responsibility for controlling and minimising
       the risks should lie with those who create the risks. In areas of high hazard, however, it has
       not been considered sufficient for employers merely to demonstrate to themselves that all
       is well. It is necessary that they should be able to demonstrate to the community’s agents,
       primarily the Health and Safety Executive (HSE), that their plants are properly designed,
       well constructed and safely operated. Further, because the risks extend beyond the
       immediate vicinity of the workplace, it is proper that there should be control on the location
       of major hazards and any developments in their vicinity. Thus three basic elements of a
       control scheme have been put forward as follows:-


       3.3.1   Identification - It has been seen as essential that potentially hazardous activities
               are identified. This is now possible through the Notification of Installations
               Handling Hazardous Substances (NIHHS) Regulations 1982 which came into
               operation on 1 January 1983. The notifications under these Regulations provide
               the HSE with details for installations that assist in defining priorities for inspection
               programmes.


       3.3.2   Location - Once the location of an installation is known, its relationship to its
               surroundings can be examined. The Department of the Environment, the Welsh
               Office and the Scottish Development Department are pursuing proposals to
               strengthen existing planning control for installations notified under the NIHHS
               Regulations.


       3.3.3   Assessment - One of the main recommendations of the ACMH was that
               notification of an installation should be accompanied by a survey of the potential
               hazards. This would mean that anyone in control of a major hazard site would need
               to demonstrate to the HSE that the hazards had been recognised and that measures
               had been taken to minimise accident hazards wherever possible and to control and
               minimise the consequences of any major accidents that did occur.


                                                 34
SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
3.4    The main aims of the Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazard Regulations (CIMAH)
       are the prevention of major accidents arising from industrial activities, the limitation of the
       effects of such accidents both on man and on the environment and the harmonisation of
       control measures to prevent and limit major accidents in the EEC. A major accident is
       broadly defined as a major emission, fire or explosion leading to serious effects on man or
       the environment inside or outside the confines of the workplace.

3.5    The industrial activities to which the CIMAH Regulations apply are defined in two ways
       and involve specified dangerous substances. The first definition is in terms of industrial
       processes (including on-site transport and associated storage), whereas the second definition
       covers other storage termed ‘isolated storage’. In this way, the CIMAH Regulations
       embrace most of the chemical and petro-chemical industries using substances which haye
       dangerous, flammable, explosive or toxic properties.


REQUIREMENTS OF THE CIMAH REGULATIONS
3.6    The requirements of the CIMAH Regulations can be considered as being at two levels.
       There are some general requirements which are of wide application and in addition, there
       are some specific, more stringent requirements which arc applied only to potentially more
       hazardous installations.

3.7    The general requirements place a number of duties on people in control of industrial
       activities (manufacturers). Manufacturers are made responsible for the safety of their
       activities and for taking all reasonable precautions to prevent major accidents and to limit
       their effects on man and the environment. In addition, all major accidents must be reported
       to HSE.

3.8    The specific requirements of the Regulations are much more stringent than the general
       requirements, but they are of more limited application. Essentially these regulations
       require the preparation of a safety profile, the preparation of on-site and ofT-site emergency
       plans and informing members of the public likely to be affected by a major accident. The
       Regulations for which HSE is the enforcing authority, place duties on manufacturers and
       local authorities, and provide for consultation which will involve fire brigades, the police,
       ambulance services, hospitals, water authorities and other appropriate bodies.

3.9    HSE Area Offices will inform local authorities which installations are subject to the
       provisions of the specific regulations. HSE is also prepared to give planning advice to local
       authorities for such installations covered by the requirements of the NIHHS Regulations.


LOCAL AUTHORITY RESPONSIBILITIES
3.10   I>ocal Authorities at county or equivalent level will be involved in the preparation of
        emergency plans for any installation falling within the scope of the CIMAH Regulations.
        Ix)cal authorities at district or equivalent level will be involved in disseminating
        information to members of the public likely to be affected by a major accident.

3.11   The Regulations provide for the off-site plan to be drawn up in consultation with
       manufacturers, HSE, and other bodies such as the Emergency Services, Health Service
       and Water Authorities.

3.12   The HSE will inform local authorities which installations come within the scope of the
       Regulations and will provide guidance on the hazards and risks involved. It should be noted
       that under the regulations, local authorities are empowered (if they wish) to recover from
       manufacturers, reasonable costs for preparing and keeping up-to-date the ofT-site emergency
       plan.



                                                 35
3.13   OfF-site emergency plans, beside being dovetailed with the on-site plans, must be
       maintained in a state of readiness and provision will need to be made for training and
       exercises. In addition to helping manufacturers deal with the immediate effects within the
       boundary fence, the emergency services will need to be prepared to cope with possible
       consequential effects in the surrounding area. These off-site effects usually take longer to
       develop and allow some time to put precautions into operation. However, they may
       continue for a period of several hours, or even days, and require considerable mobilisation
       of resources to cope with possible evacuation, restriction of access, banning of the
       movement offood-stuffs or the use of water supplies and subsequent decontamination.



INFORMING THE PUBLIC
3.14   The Regulations require that persons in the vicinity of an industrial act ivity who may be
       at risk in the event of a major accident should be given specified information about the
       activity and associated hazards.

3.15   Manufacturers will be responsible for providing this information but the primary route for
       disseminating the information to the public will be via the district council (or equivalent).
       This may be achieved by letter to each household located within the area which could be
       affected by an on-site incident, and the opportunity may be given for residents to attend
       briefings, jointly run by the Manufacturer and the District Council.



CONSULTATIONS
3.16   In producing plans Local Authorities normally consult the following:-

       The Manufacturer
       District or Borough Council
       Fire Service
       Police
       Ambulance Service
       Electricity Board
       Water Authority
       Regional and District Health Authority
       Health and Safety Executive
       Ministry of Defence (Air)
       Gas
       Other County Councils (if appropriate)
       Other District Councils (if appropriate)




                                                    36
                                                                                      SECTION 4

INCIDENTS INVOLVING DANGEROUS CHEMICALS


INTRODUCTION
4.1   The information provided here should be regarded as basic guidance only. When dealing
      with any incident involving chemicals it is essential to identify the substance and if possible
      the manufacturer and to seek expert advice. This would be accomplished at an early stage
      by Police/Fire. This information would be available from the sources identified at para 4.4
      below.

4.2   Local policy and plans should take account of the need to involve the Consultant in Public
      Health Medicine, with responsibility for Environmental Health (CPHM EH) and the local
      authority Environmental Health Officers if the situation demands it. In practice co­
      ordination is the responsibility of the Police and would involve the Local Authority,
      County Emergency Planning Officer (CEPO).

4.3   Each Ambulance Service is to maintain a detailed procedure covering actions by
      Ambulance Control and a procedure for staff at the scene.

4.4   Expert advice and assistance can be obtained from a number of sources some of which are
      listed here:-

      4.4.1   Local Fire Service or Police Force                                 (Hazards)

      4.4.2   The Manufacturer of the Chemical                                   (Hazards)
              Tel No given on vehicle notices and package labels)

      4.4.3   The National Chemical Emergency Centre                             (Hazards)
              AIRE HARWELL
              Oxfordshire
              Telephone - Abingdon (0235) 24141 Ext 2121

      4.4.4   Guy’s Hospital Poison Centre
              071 635 9191 (Direct Line for urgent immediate information)
              071 407 7600 (Less Urgent Information)

      4.4.5   Imperial Chemical Industries                       (Hazards)
              (CHEMSAFE G1 CENTRE - Tel No known to Fire/Police)




GUIDANCE TO NHS STAFF
4.5   It is recommended that all hospital 24 hour major Accident and Emergency Departments
      should have de-contamination facilities for dealing with chemically contaminated patients
      and for the protection and decontamination of personnel. A basic specification for an A &
      E de-contamination room is given below. Until such time as proper facilities are available
      throughout the region ad hoc measures will be required in the event of any Major Accident
      involving dangerous chemicals and in this respect the local Fire Brigade will be able to
      provide assistance with their mobile decontamination facility. However, generally this
      facility would not be suitable for all casualty situations.



                                                37
SPECIFICATION OF AN A & E DECONTAMINATION ROOM
4.6   The following has been agreed with the Regional Advisory Sub Committee in Accident
      and Emergency Medicine and is recommended as the basic aim:

      4.6.1    An enclosed room of about 18m2which may be dual purpose to suit local needs eg
               overdosed drug users, certification of the dead etc.

      4.6.2    Ideally there should be additional external access capable of accepting
               ambulance/hospital stretcher trolleys.

      4.6.3    Shower spray and wash hand basin with NO TRAY.

      4.6.4    Air ventilation with separate extract to prevent contamination of hospital system.

      4.6.5   Separate fluid collection system via floor drainage to avoid contaminating hospital
              drains. If possible and acceptable locally this could be a simple system to an
              external portable container.

      4.6.6   Acid proof floor.

      4.6.7   Walls tiled for ease of cleaning.

      4.6.8   Storage for materials where water is contra-indicated eg Fuller’s Earth or other
              absorbent powder.

      4.6.9   Adjacent to designated resuscitation area.

4.7   General Procedures. The NHS procedures for dealing with a Major Accident involving
      hazardous chemicals will follow those invoked for any Major Accident with the exception
      that there must be a ‘demarcation line’ established in the casualty evacuation system to
      define ’clean’ and ‘dirty’ areas in terms of contamination. This also applies to ambulance
      personnel who may accidentally become contaminated. Blankets and stretchers used in the
      ‘dirty’ areas must not cross the demarcation line and there will be a greater requirement for
      reserves of equipment to permit necessary exchanges, including, in the case of blankets, the
      possible taking out of service of contaminated stores after one use only.

4.8   On stand-down from the emergency situation there will be a requirement to provide
      decontamination facilities for all personnel, vehicles and stores used in the handling of
      casualties on the ‘dirty’ side of the demarcation line and once again the Fire Brigade mobile
      decontamination facility should be requested for this purpose.



RESCUE
4.9   Rescue is the responsibility of the Fire Service and it is preferable that ambulance crews
      should not under any circumstances be allowed to enter contaminated areas. However,
      Hospital Flying Squads and Ambulance Paramedics should receive some training in
      precautionary measures since treatment will occasionally be given in situ and staff who
      may become involved could be quite unaware of the hazards.

      Training in the use of breathing apparatus and the provision of protective clothing could
      be required.


                                                  38
SUMMARY
4.10   With the increase in the conveyance of dangerous chemicals by road it is inevitable that
       accidents involving such substances will occur in greater numbers and hospitals may find
       themselves having to deal with a toxic hazard and the de-contamination of casualties.

4.11   Because it is impossible to be familiar with the properties of all chemicals being transported
       or the varying procedures for combatting resultant hazards when accidents occur, expert
       advice must be obtained and followed. Early identification of the substance(s) involved is
       vital to ensure that correct advice is obtained.

4.12   The FIRE SERVICE should be contacted in the first instance and their advice followed.




                                                 39
                                                                                     SECTION 5

       INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

REFERENCES

A HC(89)8                      Guidance on Accidents Involving Radioactivity (NAIR)

B TRHA1988                      Emergency Planning Manual for On Call Officers

C DOE/HM Inspectorate          The National Response Plan and
  ofPollution                  the Radioactive Incident
  Dec 1987                     Monitoring Network (RIMNET)




INTRODUCTION
5.1   HC(89)8: This Circular advises Health Authorities on the arrangements needed for
      dealing with the consequences of accidents involving radioactivity. All advice on this
      subject is now consolidated in this circular and its annex. It should be noted that HC(76)52
      and HC(85)24 are therefore cancelled.




SUMMARY OF ARRANGEMENTS
5.2   Health Authorities are required to draw up plans for:

      5.2.1   monitoring members of the public by designated medical physics departments;

      5.2.2   designating hospitals for decontamination and treatment of contaminated
              casualties and where an RHA contains a nuclear installation, treatment of
              irradiated persons;

      5.2.3   providing advice to the public;

      5.2.4   designating (within their plans) postholders (see appendix 1) to be:

              5.2.4.1   Regional Contact (Nuclear Emergencies)

              5.2.4.2   Regional Co-ordinators (Monitoring, Public Information)

              5.2.4.3   District Contacts (Monitoring, Public Information) (See Appendices 2
                        and 3 General Advice and Technical background for Health
                        Professionals dealing with the public).

              5.2.4.4   NHS Coordinator for an emergency at a named nuclear installation
                        (Authorities with an installation within their boundaries, only).

      5.2.5   provide designated postholders with access to dedicated electronic mail boxes
              and/or facsimile machines for the duration of an emergency or exercise;

      5.2.6   continue to make staff available for the National Arrangements for Incidents
              Involving Radioactivity (NAIR). (See Appendix 5).


                                                40
NUCLEAR ACCIDENTS OCCURRING OVERSEAS
5.3   In the light of the Chernobyl accident the Government has prepared a national plan for
      dealing with the consequences of any similar accident. Health Authorities are asked to
      make specific plans to undertake four main roles, namely:

      5.3.1   provision of monitoring for persons who, on returning from an area adjacent to a
              nuclear accident, believe they may have been exposed to radioactive
              contamination;

      5.3.2 provision of advice and, if appropriate, monitoring for other anxious people;

      5.3.3 monitoring of a sample of UK residents to provide information on doses being
            received by members of the public from any radioactive contamination affecting
            the UK;

      5.3.4 dissemenation of general advice on the health consequences of a nuclear accident
            to members of the public. Details of these roles are set out in Part I of HC(89)8
            which also describes the role of the primary health care services.



ACCIDENT AT A UK NUCLEAR INSTALLATION
5.4   Any accident within the UK resulting in radioactive pollution off-site would generate
      concern on a national level. Health Authorities countrywide would need to be ready to
      perform the roles described above for overseas accidents. Additional roles would be
      required of those Health Authorities who have a nuclear installation within their
      boundaries. Advice is set out in Appendix 1 to Part II of HC(89)8 which also describes the
      role of the primary health care services.



INCIDENTS INVOLVING NUCLEAR POWERED SATELLITES
5.5   Depending on the nature and severity of the impact on the UK, Health Authorities might
      need to carry out elements of the roles envisaged for UK and/or overseas accidents. Advice
      is given in Appendix 2 to Part II of HC(89)8.



ARRANGEMENTS FOR DECONTAMINATION AND TREATMENT OF
CASUALTIES
5.6   Previously HC(76)52 (Appendix 2 and Appendix 3, respectively) listed hospitals able to
      provide decontamination facilities and also hospitals able to treat severely irradiated
      casualties. To replace these lists RHAs have been asked to designate hospitals within their
      Regions which can be equipped and staffed to perform these roles. In the case of hospitals
      able to treat severely irradiated casualties, some RHAs may wish to enter into agreements
      for hospitals outside their Region to provide this facility on their behalf. The hospitals
      which are prepared to accept contaminated casualties and to advise on and assist with
      decontamination of personnel have been designated within the Trent Region and are listed
      at paragraph 5.13.

5.7   Part III of HC(89)8 also contains updated advice on the treatment of contaminated
      casualties. It is essential that the readiness of staff to perform this role is maintained by
      adequate training and exercising. The Radiation Protection Advisers in the Region have
      agreed to provide training to both Ambulance and hospital staff based on a video
      presentation “Pre-hospital and Hospital response to Radiation Accidents”.


                                               41
INFORMATION FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONALS ADVISING
THE PUBLIC
5.8    Any nuclear accident at home or abroad which involves radioactive pollution will generate
       a need for public information on the health effects. Specific briefings will be issued by the
       Government in the event of a major accident. Part IV of HC(89)8 gives some general
       background information for use by the public information teams (see Appendix 2) set up
       by HAs to advise the public. These teams will also brief GPs.

NAIR
5.9    The National Arrangements for Incidents involving Radioactivity (NAIR) are described
       more fully at Appendix 5. Responsibility for the organisation of the scheme lies with the
       National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB). The role of Health Authorities is limited
       to making suitable staff, (usually from Medical Physics departments), available to advise
       the police. NHS staff participating in NAIR should be regarded as working on normal
       NHS duties and subject to the provisions of the NHS Superannuation and Injury Benefit
       schemes and the Industrial injuries Scheme. Further details are contained in the NAIR
       Handbook available from the NRPB which lists hospital medical physics departments
       participating in the scheme.

ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
5.10   In the event of an incident resulting in any of the following; a Nuclear Briefing Room will
       be established within the Department of Health which will, among other things, maintain
       liaison with the lead government department, alert Regional Contacts and provide briefing
       to Regional Co-ordinators and District Contacts for monitoring and public information,
       (appropriate staff are also identified at Appendix 1).

       5.10.1 an overseas nuclear accident with consequences for the UK;

       5.10.2 a UK nuclear installation accident with off-site consequences;

       5.10.3 a threat posed by a nuclear powered satellite;

5.11   After the initial alert of Regional Contacts by telephone, all subsequent communications
       to Regional Co-ordinators and District Contacts will be sent by electronic mail. Experience
       has shown that it is essential that during an emergency all designated postholders should
       have a designated mailbox available to them which they can scan frequently. It may also be
       necessary to use facsimile machines from Health Authority locations to certain key
       points/staff locations.

THE HANDLING OF CASUALTIES CONTAMINATED WITH
RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
5.12   Radioactive substances are in wide use in industry, medicine, research and teaching and
       incidents might occur on premises used for these purposes. Any incident involving
       radioactivity may give rise to casualties who as well as being contaminated will require
       treatment for their injuries. The large establishments such as nuclear power stations and
       similar sites are likely to have their own facilities to deal with such casualties but in other
       cases they may be taken to hospital accident and emergency departments. Where the need
       for life-saving treatment appears to override the need for decontamination, ambulance
       crews (in liaison with their control) must take the casualty to the nearest accident and
       emergency department even though it may be at a hospital not listed in para. 5.13. In that
       event the hospital receiving the casualty can arrange with the nearest hospital listed in Para
       5.13 to obtain advice and assistance in the decontamination of the casualty, the ambulance,
       the ambulance crew, and any other staff. Pending receipt of this assistance, the guidance
       at Appendix 4 of this section should be followed. This information is intended to assist
       those concerned in the period before the arrival of expert assistance and in no way obviates
       the need to obtain such assistance.


                                                42
5.13   Hospitals in England prepared to accept contaminated casualties and to advise on, and
       assist with, decontamination of personnel are listed in the NAIR handbook available from
       NRPB. Within the Trent Region these are the A & E departments of the following
       hospitals:

       (1)    *Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield
       (2)    Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, Derby
       (3)    Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester
       (4)    County Hospital, Lincoln
       (5)    University Hospital, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham

       *NB The Royal Hallamshire operates a night rota with the Northern General Hospital (see
       Annex A) but in an out of hours incident concerning contaminated casualties the RHH
       would be opened and staffed to deal with the incident.



CONTAMINATED CASUALTIES
5.14   Ambulance crews must be instructed to inform the police (via Ambulance Control)
       immediately they become aware that radioactive substances are involved at any incident
       they attend. The police are responsible for arrangements to protect the public and in
       conjunction with the Fire Service will endeavour to contain, if possible, any radioactive
       substances; ambulance crews will be concerned solely in dealing with any casualties. In all
       instances ambulance crews should inform the hospital in advance, via ambulance control,
       that radioactive substances are involved and, where known, the name of the radioisotope.

5.15   When the need for life-saving treatment does not override the need for decontamination,
       casualties will be taken to the nearest hospital listed in Para 5.13 and the ambulance crew
       must confirm this with their control who will alert the hospital concerned.



CASUALTIES EXPOSED TO LARGE DOSES OF RADIATION
5.16   It is not intended that hospitals listed at Para 5.13 should treat casualties affected by a high
       radiation dose such as might occur from an accident at a nuclear power station or Ministry
       of Defence establishment. Facilities for the treatment of persons suffering from severe
       whole body irradiation exist at the following hospitals. Enquiries about treatment or
       admission of casualties should be made to the appropriate officer or department indicated.

       (1)The University College and Middlesex Hospital
              University College Hospital
              Gower Street
              London WC IE 6AU
              Tel No: 071-387 9300
              (Duty Radiation Physicist)

       (2)The Royal Marsden Hospital
              Fulham Road
              London SW3 6JJ
              Tel No: 071-352 8171
              (The Medical Physics Department)

       (3)The Royal Marsden Hospital
              Downs Road
              Sutton
              Surrey
              Tel No: 081-642 6011
              (The Medical Physics Department)
Notwithstanding the above, the local Bone Marrow Transplant and Burn Units should be
consulted since they would be able to provide specialist assistance in assessing and advising
on the management of casualties some of whom may need to be transferred to their
Units for:

5.17.1 Experienced medical and nursing care for patients with severe damage to the
       haemoietic system and with gastro-intestinal and lung function problems.

5.17.2 Blood cell monitoring.

5.17.3 Treatment of severe burns.

5.17.4 Isolation facilities for protection against infection.

Some General Practitioners may be involved in the National Arrangements for Incidents
involving Radioactivity (NAIR). Health Authorities after consultation with their Family
Practitioner Committee and Local Medical Committee should therefore notify general
practitioners of local arrangements.
                                      APPENDIX 1 TO SECTION 5
                                      INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

 HC (89)8 HEALTH SERVICE ARRANGEMENTS FOR
     DEALING WITH ACCIDENTS INVOLVING
                RADIOACTIVITY

1.   REGIONAL CONTACT (NUCLEAR EMERGENCIES)
     Mr J A Costley, Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
     (0742)630300

2.   REGIONAL COORDINATORS, (MONITORING, PUBLIC INFORMATION) s
     Dr P Cooke, Regional Scientific Officer
     Dr K W Allen, Consultant in Public Health Medicine (Communicable Diseases)
     (0742)630300

3.   DISTRICT CONTACTS (MONITORING, PUBLIC INFORMATION)
     Barnsley HA      M r J Unsworth, Principal Physicist
     (0226) 730000    Dr C G Oddy, Consultant in Public Health Medicine (EH)

     Bassetlaw HA            Mr K Bomford, Department of Medical Physics,
     (0909)500990            Sheffield
                             Mr W Downie, Consultant in A & E

     N Derbyshire HA         Mr K Bomford, Department of Medical Physics Sheffield
     (0246)231255            Dr N Salfield, Consultant in Public Health Medicine

     S Derbyshire HA         Dr M W Harper, Medical Physics Department
     (0332)363971            Derbyshire Royal Infirmary
                             Dr S Whitehead, Acting Director of Public Health Medicine

     Doncaster HA            Dr D Ottewell Principal Physicist, Doncaster
     (0302)367051            Dr R Stlaker, Director of Public Health Medicine

     Leicestershire HA       Mr R Aukett, Radiation Protection Adviser
     (0533)559777            Professor Buchan, Director of Public Health Medicine

     N Lincolnshire HA       Mr G P Jones, Medical Physics Department,
     (0522)532321            St Georges Hospital, Lincoln
                             Dr K Jones, Director of Public Health Medicine

     S Lincolnshire HA       Mr G P Jones, Medical Physics Department
     (0529)414166            St Georges Hospital, Lincoln
                             Dr S Mcllroy, Director of Public Health Medicine

     C Nottinghamshire HA Mr K J Plested, Medical Physics Department
     (0623) 22515         Nottingham General Hospital
                          Mr A A Mousley, Director of Public Health Medicine

     Nottingham HA           Mr K J Plested, Medical Physics
     (0602)691691            Department, Nottingham General Hospital
                             Dr L M Davies, Director of Public Health Medicine


                                         45
Rotherham HA            Mr K Bomford, Medical Physics Department
(0709)820000            Weston Park Hospital
                        Dr R Milner, Consultant in Public Health Medicine

Sheffield HA            M r K Bomford, Medical Physics Department,
(0742)670333            Weston Park Hospital
                        Dr D Birks, Consultant in Public Health Medicine.



DESIGNATED HOSPITALS FOR DE-CONTAMINATION AND
TREATMENT OF CONTAMINATED CASUALTIES
4.    The following hospitals in Trent Region meet the basic criteria described at 3.2 of Part III
      ofHC(89)8.

      County Hospital Lincoln (0522) 512512
      Derbyshire Royal Infirmary (0332) 47141
      Leicester Royal Infirmary (0533) 541414
      Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield (0742) 766222
      University Hospital, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham (0602) 421421
                                               APPENDIX 2 TO SECTION 5
                                               INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

 GENERAL ADVICE FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
         DEALING WITH THE PUBLIC

1.     In the event of a nuclear accident (either in the UK or abroad) Health Authority staff(and
        GPs) will be approached by members of the public for advice. The postholders identified
        in Appendix 1 would receive Government-prepared material concerning the effects of
        specific nuclear accidents and would deal with queries from the public. In addition, these
        postholders should brief GPs and those NHS staff most likely to be approached directly by
        the public.

2.     The following notes highlight selected features of the national plans which may be helpful
       to health professionals in dealing with members of the public seeking advice or reassurance.
       They are not intended to be a substitute for the accident-specific briefings which will be
       prepared. Appendix 3 gives technical background information for health professionals
       advising the public.

Sources o f Exposure
3.   Following an accident, radioactivity may be released to the air as gas or radioactive
      particles. The radioactive particles may subsequently be deposited on the ground and find
      their way into food. Exposures to members of the public may occur by:

        3.1     inhalation of the radioactivity as it travels through the air;

        3.2     external irradiation from the radioactivity on the ground or from airborne material;

        3.3     ingestion of food or water which contains radioactivity.

Food and Water
4.    The Government has plans for the monitoring of food and drink following a nuclear
      accident (whether within or outside the UK) so as to ensure that any controls necessary are
      in place before affected food and drink reach the public. Controls on imported food would
      be exercised at the ports of entry.

5.     The criteria used to determine the need for controls take full account of potentially sensitive
       groups such as pregnant women and the newborn. Members of the public can generally be
       assured that they need have no concern about the safety of food or drink on sale in the
       shops, or about the water supply.

6.     Guidance on use of home-grown produce and use of private facilties (such as wells for
       drinking water) will also be given if necessary, and such information would be passed on
       to health authorities and local authorities by central government. Members of the public
       in affected areas would be informed by the police and over local radio, but might also
       consult health professionals for advice.

Radioactive Iodine
7.   The majority of any release of radioactive iodine is likely to be in the form of isotopes with
      a physical half-life of several days. It gives most of its dose to the thyroid gland as it is this
      organ which concentrates most of the iodine absorbed into the body. Exposure to iodine
      may occur early because it can be inhaled from the air and later because, following
      ingestion by cows, it is secreted into milk. Control of exposures to radioactive iodine in milk
      and other foods is best effected by controlling the supply of contaminated food.
8.      In the event of the release of radioactive iodine, thyroid-blocking by stable iodine provides
        protection against inhaled or ingested radioactive iodine. However, stable iodine is
        ineffective against external irradiation of the gland. UK nuclear sites hold supplies of stable
        iodine tablets which would be issued to members of the public for this purpose if it is
        necessary. However it should be noted that these tablets should be taken as soon as possible
        after the event to provide maximum protection and if possible they should be taken before
        fallout arrives.



9.      Iodine supplements can themselves have adverse health effects. The general public should
        not therefore take stable iodine unless they are in a location where this has been specifically
        advised by the emergency controller.

        NB: The World Health Organisation is currently formulating guidelines on the use of
        stable iodine prophylaxis, and it is envisaged that an amendment will in due course be
        issued to HC(89)8 containing further, more specific, advice).




GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR THOSE TRAVELLING ABROAD
10.     Specific advice relating to countries which may have been affected by a nuclear accident
        will be issued by the government. In general, travellers abroad should follow advice given
        to the public by the government of the country they are visiting. However, health
        professionals may be approached with specific queries and in a situation where there is
        doubt about the adequacy of controls in an area, the following notes on common causes for
        concern may be useful. It should be noted that this advice could apply equally to the UK
        if it was affected.



Radioiodine
11.   Where environmental contamination by radioiodine may have occurred, milk should be
      purchased from retail outlets rather than direct from farms, as any individual source may
      not be so rigorously monitored as bulked supplies. In isolated areas where this is not
      possible, levels of radioiodine are likely to be lower in cow milk than in sheep or goat milk.
      If in doubt, additional safeguards for two groups may be called for. Pregnant and
      breastfeeding women should reduce their intake of fresh milk, where possible, and dried
      milk or long-life milk produced prior to contamination could be used as milk substitutes.
      Infants should, ideally, be breastfed. Infant formula or, if preferred, follow-up milk should
      continue to be given until the local supplies of fresh cow milk are confirmed to be
      satisfactory for giving to infants as part of normal weaning.



Radiostrontium
12.   The advice given about radioiodine in milk is also relevant for radiostrontium.



Radio caesium
13.    In the short term the guidelines given for radioiodine should be used. However, the long
       physical half-life of some radiocaesium (approx 30 years for caesium13') means it can build
       up in foodstuffs and give rise to more persistent problems. Since this build-up develops
       gradually it is likely that there will be ample time for the control of contaminated food at
       source, or for detailed information to be obtained and it is unlikely that there will be a need
       for individual action to avoid exposure from this source.


                                                  48
Water Supplies
14.   It is unlikely that there would be any problem with mains water supplies from ground water
      sources except very close to an accident. Well water is also likely to remain uncontaminated
      provided the well is covered and thus protected from deposition from the air and from
      rainwater. Water butts should also be covered and disconnected from their collecting pipes
      to prevent contamination by deposition from the air and by rainwater. Water supplies from
      small rivers could in time become contaminated by run off from land. Advice on the safety
      of rainwater for drinking purposes will no doubt be given by the appropriate national
      authorities. However, if in doubt, rainwater collected during the passage of airborne
      radioactive contamination should not be used for drinking; bottled water, where available,
      can be used instead of tap water: However, where bottled water is used to make up infant
      feeds or given on its own to infants, those with high mineral content should be avoided to
      prevent the danger of solute overload.


Vegetables and Fruit
15.   These may be contaminated on their surface by deposition from the air or by rainwater.
      Thorough washing and/or peeling will help reduce contamination.




                                                                                                     [




                                                49
                                           APPENDIX 3 TO SECTION 5
                                           INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

            TECHNICAL BACKGROUND NOTES

1.   The activity of a radionuclide is measured in becquerels (Bq) and is a measure of the
     number of radioactive disintegrations that occur in a given period of time (one becquerel
     equals one disintegration per second). When a nuclear disintegration occurs, energy is
     released and is carried by nuclear particles (usually alpha or beta particles) and gamma rays.
     These particles and rays can interact with biological material giving up the energy they
     carry. This may result in damage to individual cells within the tissue; thus, in terms of
     health effects, what matters is the amount of energy released in the tissue of an exposed
     person. The amount of energy deposited is therefore the dose received and is measured in
     sieverts (more usually milliseiverts - mSv); the becquerel being a very small unit and the
     sievert a large unit.

2.   Converting the radioactivity in a material (in Bq) to the dose likely to be received (in mSv)
     by members of the public depends on a variety of physical, chemical and biological factors
     including:

     2.1     the type of radiation emitted by a particular radionuclide, and the amount of
             energy deposited in tissue;

     2.2      the amount of material absorbed into the body and the length of time it is retained
              within the body (ie the biological half-life of the radionuclide);

     2.3      the rate of decay of the radioactivity (ie the physical half-life of the radionuclides
              concerned).

3.   The conversion of radioactivity levels in food to the effective dose to the body is, therefore,
     a complex matter and will depend on many factors including the level of radioactivity in the
     food and the quantity of that food which is consumed. However, when all relevant factors
     are taken into account, a value for the effective dose from any particular radionuclide can
     be calculated. Thus, for example, the effective dose for an intake of one becquerel of
     iodine131is 1.3 x 10”8sieverts. To put it another way it requires an intake of 77 million (ie
     the reciprocal of 1.3 x 10 ”8becquerels of iodine131to give a person an effective dose of one
     sievert.

4.   Following release of radioactivity to the environment the time over which it is available for
     absorption in food depends on a variety of factors including:

     4.1     how the food is contaminated; (radioactive particles will be speedily deposited on
             the leaves of vegetables, such as cabbages growing in an area, but will take longer
             to enter the muscle of animals grazing on contaminated grass);

      4.2    the ‘half-life’ (ie time for the radioactivity to decay by one half) of the radioactive
              isotope; many radioactive isotopes such as iodine131have a half-life of a few days
              and therefore contamination with radioactive iodine is not likely to be a problem
              over more than a month or so, while caesium137has a longer half-life of about 30
              years and therefore can pose longer-term problems;

      4.3    how long the radioactive material is likely to remain available for incorporation into
              food; with time the particles of radioactive material will be washed further into the
              soil and may therefore no longer be so readily available for incorporation into
              growing plants.


                                                50
5.     To determine the level of a radioactive material permitted in a food it is necessary to
       consider how much of that food is going to be consumed and what other foods or sources
       of radioactive exposure are likely to occur, so that the total dose from all sources related to
       the accident can be estimated. Therefore, for example, levels of radioactivity in common
       foods (such as milk or meat) will generally need to be kept fairly low compared with levels
       of radioactivity in a less common food (such as smoked salmon), and one country may
       tolerate higher levels in a food than another if the dietary habits with respect to that food are
       markedly different.

Comparison with other dose levels
6.  We receive on average an effective dose of 2mSv each year from ‘background radiation’.
    (lOOOmSv equals one sievert). A chest X-ray results in a skin dose of about 0.6mSv.
                                            APPENDIX 4 TO SECTION 5
                                            INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

        GUIDANCE FOR HOSPITAL STAFF AND
     AMBULANCE CREWS WHO MAY NEED TO DEAL
       WITH CASUALTIES CONTAMINATED BY
       LOW-LEVEL RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

1.     As a result of an incident involving radiactivity, hospital staff and ambulance crews may be
       called upon to deal with a casualty who may be contaminated. This appendix provides
       guidance on the handling of such cases.

2.     It should be noted that an irradiated casualty is not a hazard to personal with whom they
        come into contact. Attention to the following guidance will ensure that any small risk from
        contaminated clothing etc is minimised.

Basic Principles
3.    The basic principles which should be observed when dealing with casualties who might
       be contaminated are:

       3.1     Life-saving treatment will override other action;

       3.2     Expert advice from a radiation physicist or other similarly experienced person
               should be sought from the nearest hospital designated to handle contaminated
               casualties as soon as possible. Until such advice is obtained, it must be assumed
               that the casualty is contaminated with radioactive substances;

       3.3     Care is needed to avoid the spread of contamination.

       3.4     Staff should shower thoroughly after handling contaminated patients.

Action at the scene of the incident
4.    If it is decided that the casualty requires urgent hospital treatment for any injuries, he
       should be taken to the nearest accident and emergency department and the hospital should
       be informed in advance of arrival that the casualty may be contaminated with radioactive
       substances. Any other contaminated casualty should be taken to the nearest designated
       hospital (see para 5.13 of Section 5).

5.     The following procedures will minimise the spread of possible contamination:

       5.1     Wear disposable gloves;

       5.2     Do not eat, drink or smoke in a contaminated area and afterwards not until
               monitored and declared clear;

       5.3     Removal of the patients outer clothing is all the de-contamination that is
               recommended on site;

       5.4     Prophylactic IVs are not recommended;

       5.5     Radiation itself does not cause unconsciousness, if casualty unconscious, look for
               other reasons;

       5.6     Do not delay treatment and de-contamination to measure accurate levels of
               contamination. Detection of radioactivity is all that is required initially;


                                                52
       5.7     If available, a large plastic sheet should be spread underneath the patient in the
               ambulance and the patient should be kept on it when moved by stretcher to the
               hospital;

       5.8     After the patient has been delivered to the hospital (via a side door if possible) and
               contamination is confirmed, the ambulance crew and the ambulance should also
               be monitored for possible contamination;

       5.9     Until it has been shown to be free from contamination, the ambulance should not
               be used for other calls except in life-threatening emergency.

Guidance of doctors, nurses and other staff in the Accident and Emergency
Department of the hospital
6.   A casualty suspected of being contaminated with radioactivity will have been brought to
     a non-designated hospital only when the injuries have been judged so severe as to need
     urgent medical attention. This attention must obviously take precedence, but a few simple
     preparations and observance of the basic principles outlined above can help to minimise
     any possible spread of radioactive contamination whilst the advice of a radiation expert is
     awaited.

7.     If time is available, the following preparations should be made before the patient arrives at
       the hospital:

       7.1     An area, not necessarily within the accident and emergency department, should be
               set aside for the reception of casualties, (the ‘dirty area’), and it should be covered
               in plastic sheeting or heavy-duty paper which should be secured with tape,
               (newspaper can be used if nothing else is available);

       7.2     Protective clothing (including theatre masks, caps and theatre boots or shoe covers)
               should be issued to all staff who will handle the patient. Waterproof aprons should
               be worn by medical staff who are expected to wash skin or wash out wounds etc;

       7.3     A plentiful supply of paper towels and tissue should be available;

       7.4     Large polythene or paper bags will be needed for the collection of patient’s
               clothing and contaminated equipment etc. These should be clearly labelled and
               saved for monitoring later;

       7.5     An area should be cleared where the ambulance can wait for monitoring and
               possible decontamination;

       7.6     A limited number of staff should be appointed to handle the patient, and a person
               should be designated to log the movements of any of those staff who must leave the
               ‘dirty area’ after the casualties have arrived, in order to minimise the difficulty of
               tracing contamination. There, should be facilities to allow such staff to change their
               footwear on leaving the ‘dirty area’;

       7.7     If other areas of the hospital become involved in handling the patient, eg a theatre
                or intensive care unit, similar arrangements should be made for these areas as
                appropriate;

        7.8    A person should be designated to deal with enquiries, public relations etc.


                                                 53
8.     The following initial decontamination procedures should be followed:

       8.1    Experience has shown that washing with water will effectively remove
              contaminated material from the skin in most cases. Initial treatment and any
              necessary washing to remove as much of the suspected contamination as
              practicable should be done in the ‘dirty area’. Where possible, such washings
              should be saved and labelled;

       8.2    Open wounds should be irrigated and the irrigate saved and labelled. Special care
              needs to be taken to prevent the spread of possible contamination to other parts of
              the body, and in the cleaning of areas near the eyes and mouth;

       8.3    It will usually be possible to seek further expert advice from a designated hospital
               before proceeding beyond the initial treatment stage, and it is inadvisable to excise
               wounds unless contamination is obvious, or unless surgically indicated before
               monitoring assistance is available;

       8.4    Washings and irrigate should be disposed of safely.

NB: All staff who have been in contact with the casualty should, oncompletion of the procedures
shower thoroughly and be monitored.




                                                54
                                              APPENDIX 5 TO SECTION 5
                                              INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

      NATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR INCIDENTS
          INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY (NAIR)

GENERAL
1.     For some years radiation staff at certain hospitals have, at the request of the police, provided
       advice on the safety measures to be taken at incidents involving radioactive substances. The
       National Arrangements for Incidents involving Radioactivity (NAIR) scheme is to
       continue. Participating hospitals are listed in the NAIR handbook which is issued and
       updated by the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) who co-ordinate NAIR.


2.     The arrangements are intended to cover incidents in public places such as damage to
       containers in transit, accidents to vehicles conveying radioactive substances; and incidents
       involving the public on premises where radioactive substances are not normally handled.
       They are not intended to cover incidents of any kind at places where radioactive substances
       are normally handled as staff should be available there who are competent to cope; nor do
       they cover incidents whether on or off the site involving nuclear installations or associated
       transport accidents. However, if the public are thought to be at risk and other expert
       assistance is not available, then the police might seek help from a NAIR first stage centre
       (usually Hospital Medical Physics Department).


3.     The police will normally be the first authority to be informed of a transport accident or
       other incident in a public place. Consquently, the basis of NAIR is that the arrangements
       will be invoked by the police and for this purpose the United Kingdom is divided into areas
       of assistance based upon Police Forces. These are set out in the NAIR handbook, (copy
       held by Medical Physics Departments).


4.     Assistance is provided in two stages; the first enables the police to call upon an experienced
       person who can advise them on action and the second provides more sophisticated
       resources should these be necessary. Each Police Force area has been allotted first and
       second-stage assistance centres. First-stage assistance is provided in most, but not all, police
       areas by hospital radiation staff. Second-stage assistance is not provided by hospital staff but
       by radiation staff from nuclear power stations and other similar establishments. In case of
       difficulty in alerting their allotted first-stage participant the police will contact the first-
       stage participant from a neighbouring area before getting in touch with their allotted
       second-stage source of assistance.


S.     Hospitals approached by the police should make every effort to contact their radiation staff
       quickly. When this is not possible, or the radiation staff are unable to assist, the police
       should be notified promptly so that they can contact another source of assistance.


ft.    Should the police inadvertently contact a hospital not in the scheme, they should be
       referred to Home Office Circular ES3/87 or advised to contact the NRPB.


/      NHS Radiation staff participating in NAIR should be regarded as working on normal
       NHS duties and they will be subject to the provisions of the NHS Superannuation and
       Injury Benefits Schemes as well as the Industrial Injuries Scheme.
First-stage assistance
8.     Hospitals whose radiation staff have agreed to provide first-stage assistance are listed in the
       NAIR Handbook. This assistance consists of advising the police whether there is a
       potential hazard from radioactivity, and where there is, giving advice on the action
       necessary to minimise and contain the danger. It is accepted that hospital radiation staff
       have relatively limited resources and will normally be able to carry out only small recovery
       operations. They will not be expected to cope with incidents involving the spread of
       contamination unless very minor. Where the incident is beyond their capability to deal
       with unaided, they should advise the police to obtain second-stage assistance. At the same
       time they should also advise the police on the steps they should take to prevent the exposure
       of the public, for example, by the erection of barriers or by covering and containing
        contaminated material to prevent its spread.

9.     The hospital radiation staff may be asked by the police to comment on the seriousness of
        an incident but should limit their remarks to an assessment of the potential radiation
        hazard. They should avoid any direct contact with the Press, Radio and Television, and
        should refer any queries from them to the Police Force in charge of the situation.


Second-stage assistance
10.  Some incidents may prove impossible for hospital radiation staff to deal with alone, either
      because of the scale or because the equipment available to them is not suitable. In such
      cases second-stage assistance is to be obtained from establishments such as the United
      Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, the Central Electricity Generating Board, British
      Nuclear Fuels Ltd or the Ministry of Defence. It is for the hospital radiation staff either at
      the time when they receive the call from the police or on attending at the incident to advise
      the police whether second-stage assistance is required.


Further advice
11.   Further advice on NAIR is set out in the NAIR handbook and all staff participating in
      NAIR should be familiar with its contents.
                                                                                      SECTION 6

      HOSPITAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE POISONING

REFERENCE A TREN T RHA Hospital Treatment of Acute Poisoning - Report of the
            Working Party of the Trent RHA, May 1983.

                  B HN(84)25. The Management of Deliberate Self Harm.

                  C ABC OF POISONING. Tim Meredith, Jane Caisley, Glyn Volans BMJ
                    22.9.84.



INTRODUCTION
6.1    The following is basically a summary of the report by the Trent Regional Health Authority
       Working Party on Hospital Treatment of Acute Poisoning (May 1983) and is intended,
       supplemented by more recent relevant developments, only to highlight the main working
       party recommendations.



POLICY IN TRENT REGION
6.2     Consultants in Accident and Emergency medicine have been appointed to maj or Accident
        and Emergency Departments in the Region and within their remit is the responsibility for
        the treatment of poisoning cases arriving in their departments. This may include the
        management of some in-patients as well as acting as a source of advice to colleagues.


6.3     Designated Poisoning Treatment Centres. All hospitals with a major Accident and
        Emergency Department are designated poisoning treatment centres and this is the pattern
        followed generally throughout the country. If a patient requires admission it is usually
        under the care of the consultant physician or paediatrician on emergency take. In certain
        Health Districts some of the acute medical beds, and some or all of the paediatric beds,
        may be in hospitals other than the one containing the Accident and Emergency
        Department. Under these conditions it follows that all hospitals with acute medical or
        paediatric beds are effectively part of the Health District poisoning treatment centre. It is
        essential that all treatment centres should have facilities for intensive care.


6.4     Since all major Accident and Emergency Departments receive cases of acute poisoning,
        essential equipment must include up-to-date works of reference and names and telephone
        numbers of sources of information. Local information sources should be considered before
        referring to the national information centres described here at para 6.12.


6.5    The ambulance services are already aware of the concept of designated hospitals and
       designated Poisoning Treatment Centres and that only in exceptional and critical situations
       are patients to be taken elsewhere.


6.6    Admission of Children. In general, like adults, children should be taken to the nearest
       major Accident and Emergency Department. Accident and Emergency Departments
       should, where possible, have staff who are used to dealing with children and the facilities
       and equipment appropriate to their special needs. Close co-operation with the local
       paediatric unit is essential so that expert advice can always be obtained.


                                                 57
6.7    It is considered that the treatment of cases of acute poisoning requires a ‘team’ involving;
       the staff of the accident and emergency department, medical and psychiatric departments
       and also laboratory staff and social workers. After discharge the general medical
       practitioner may also need to play an important part in follow up and continuing care.


6.8    Laboratory Support. There are many drugs and poisons for which assays may be
       required but relatively few where the results have an immediate effect on clinical
       management. For those which do have a direct bearing on clinical management, facilities
       must be available at all times and the working party recommended the following (assay
       capability) list:-

             Salicylate
             Paracetamol
             Barbiturates
             Iron
             Ethanol (and if possible, Methanol)
             Lithium
             Carboyhaemoglobin
             Paraquat (screening test only)


ADULTS
6.9    Psychiatric Services. A psychological and social evaluation of every case of self­
       poisoning before discharge from hospital should be carried out. The working party was of
       the view that the medical team should decide for each individual case whether there was
       a need for specialist psychiatric opinion and this view has since been supported by new
       draft guidelines (Reference B) issued by the DoH.


6.10   Each District Health Authority should have a clear policy on this issue and a consultant
       psychiatrist should be designated to co-ordinate the policy. The availability of a liaison
       psychiatrist who could attend the Accident and Emergency Department 24 hours a day to
       advise on mental illness problems would be of considerable benefit. This should be a junior
       of at least “middle-grade” experience who would report to his consultant. Policly issues
       arising should be referred back to the consultant responsible.


CHILDREN
6.11   The situation is different as far as children with acute poisoning are concerned. Non­
       accidental injury can sometimes present itself as poisoning in young children, older
       children almost invariably have complex family problems and need specialist help. “Glue
       sniffers” are included in this category. The Working Party is strongly of the opinion that
       all older children with self-administered poisoning should be seen by a child psychiatrist
       in consultation with the paediatrician.


POISONS INFORMATION AND ADVISORY SERVICES
6.12   The following is a brief summary of sources of information and advice:-


       6.12.1 Identification of Medicinal Products. Identification of medicinal products
              (tablets and capsules) can be achieved at each Listed Hospital (Annex ‘A’) by use of
              the ‘TABLIDENT’ system, complementary services also exist for other medicinal
              products.


                                                58
6.12.2 The National Poisons Information Service provides information on the
       symptoms, toxicity, and management of poisoning with all drugs. It monitors cases
       of unusual drug overdose to maintain the database needed to answer inquiries, and
       welcomes reports of such cases, especially for those agents where the Committee
       on Safety of Medicines invites special care in the reporting of adverse reactions.
       Recently, with the collaboration of the drug manufacturers, efforts have been made
       to include in the database not only earmarked drugs but also products undergoing
       large-scale clinical trials, since overdose cases have been reported at this stage. The
       large and ever increasing number of potential poisons make it impractical for every
       hospital to keep a comprehensive and up-to-date information system.. Five main
       national centres have, therefore, been established to provide a 24 hour service,
       including clinical advice. Guidelines for Users is given at Appendix 1. The Centres
       are located in:-

        (a) London          071-635 9191 (direct line for urgent immediate information)

                            071-955 5095 (less urgent information and laboratory requests)
                            (ask for New Cross extension)

        (b) Edinburgh       031 229 2477
                            031 228 2411 (Viewdata see sub-para 6.12.4 below)

        (c) Cardiff         0222 709901

        (d) Belfast         0232 240503

        (e) Dublin          0001745588




6.12.3 Plants. Identification of plants and berries ingested by children can often be
       difficult and help can sometimes be obtained from local authority Parks
       Departments or University Departments of Botany




6.12.4 Edinburgh Viewdata System. The Scottish Poisons Information service in
       Edinburgh has developed a computerised information file whereby their poisons
       information database has been put on to a private viewdata system. Users are
       approved by, and registered with, the Poisons Information Service and include
       Accident and Emergency units, drug information centres and general
       practitioners. Apart from an initial small outlay on the VDU, the only cost to the
       user is the telephone call to Edinburgh when information is required. The
       availability of the viewdata system does not replace the need to contact the national
       poisons information services directly on occasions for clinical advice about
       particular patients.




6.12.5 Advice can also be obtained from local industries concerning poisonous substances
       used by them, however the importance of liaison with a named member of the
       laboratory staff concerned with investigation and diagnosis is stressed. Many
       enquiries are also made to and dealt with by hospital pharmacy departments
       though they are not formally constituted to provide such information.


                                         59
OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION
6.13 Some poisons information is available through the Regional Drug Information Centre
      based at Leicester Royal Infirmary Tel: (0533) 551234 ext 418, but it is not equipped and
      staffed to provide a 24 hour service. It has access to various computerised data-bases (eg
      Toxline, Toxback and Rtecs) which are available via Blaise-link, (British Library viewdata
      service) and contacts with product manufacturers and other bodies such as the Ministry
      of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Royal Society of Chemistry.


6.14   Reference C - ABC of Poisoning is an interesting and comprehensive article on
        “Emergency Drugs: Agents Used in the Treatment of Poisoning” which was published in
        the British Medical Journal (Volume 289) on 22 September 1984 and is recommended
        reading.




                                                                                                   |yj
                                                         APPENDIX 1 TO SECTION 6

NATIONAL POISONS INFORMATION SERVICE
 - GUY’S HOSPITALGUIDELINES FOR USERS
          Tel 071-635 9191 IF URGENT

 The caller should be ready to give the name of the suspected agent(s) involved as accurately
 as possible. Since the manufacturer’s name or other details may also be needed, container(s)
 should, if possible, be at hand. In addition the following information is usually required.

 (1)    the patient’s name and age

 (2)    time of exposure

 (3)    any apparent signs or symptoms

 (4)    treatment already given


 Patients or relatives should not be asked to telephone the information service since
 inquiries from the general public cannot be answered. The emergency information service
 answers inquiries only from hospitals, general practitioners, and other emergency services.


 The caller may subsequently receive a follow up questionnaire requesting information
 regarding the outcome of the poisoning. These should be filled in and returned to the
 information service as they are essential to permit the compilation of “acute poisoning in
 man” especially where new or uncommon compounds are involved.


 Direct telephone lines are available to the poisons information service (071-635 9191). Only
 callers requiring information on the emergency treatment of poisoning should use this
 number. All other inquiries, including requests for less urgent information and laboratory
 requests, should be made through the Guy’s Hospital switchboard (071-955 5095).
                                                                                     SECTION 7

 PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AFTER DISASTERS

Preface
7.1   This paper is based on a talk given by Dr Russell Gorton, CPHM, South West Durham
      HA to the Health Service Emergency Planning Conference on 16 March 1989. It also
      includes advice from the Trent Regional Psychology Advisory Committee and the Trent
      Regional Advisory Specialty Committee in Mental Health.

Introduction
7.2   The occurrence of psychological problems in people involved in a disaster or in dealing
      with its aftermath have been described with increasing frequency in recent years. The
      extent of the morbidity described suggests the need for a response. This paper indicates the
      types of psychological problem which may follow a disaster and briefly reviews the
      epidemiological literature. The need for plans, their possible content and their
      development are discussed.

Nature of Psychological Morbidity after a Disaster
7.3  Thiscanbe summarised as:

        ★      Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
        ★      Survivor Syndromes
        ★      Bereavement Syndromes
        ★      Other Disorders

7.4    Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a term given to a range of problems following
       exposure to a traumatic event. There are two groups of symptoms: ‘denial/numbing’ with
       withdrawal, repression of memory and depression, and ‘intrusive/repetitive’ with
       flashbacks and nightmares. Concomitant symptoms include anxiety, anger, aggression and
       psychosomatic symptoms.

7.5    Survivor syndromes are psychological problems relating to the individual’s survival in the
       face of death and destruction. The perceived loss of control is an important determinant.
       Feelings of alienation and guilt, withdrawal and damage to interpersonal relationships are
       prominent features.

7.6    Normal bereavement reactions include initial shock, denial, anger and depression. In
       particular reactions the individual does not progress on to a new psychological adjustment.
       Several features of disasters make pathological reaction more likely.

7.7.   ‘Other disorders’ includes much of psychology and psychiatry. Vulnerable individuals may
        be precipitated into anxiety or depression.

7.8    The degree and type of morbidity experienced can be related to the nature of the disaster
       and the individual’s personal experience of it. Each of these types of morbidity may
       severely disrupt a person’s life and have sequelae such as family breakdown, career failure,
       frank psychiatric disease and suicide.

7.9    Reactions to a disaster are best understood in terms of successive phases over time.
       Immediately, effects are widespread and intense amongst those involved; as time goes on,
       most people recover but a minority continue to experience marked difficulties.


                                                62
        7.9.1 Immediate post-impact phase (5 - 7 days). Although the degree of distress
               experienced will vary, most survivors and helpers go through similar patterns of
               acute response. Intense feelings such as shock, fear, grief, anger, guilt, helplessness,
               sadness are to be expected in almost everyone, together with bad dreams, tiredness,
               sleeplessness, headaches and anxiety reactions. These reactions are entirely normal
               and do not constitute PTSD.



        7.9.2 Intermediate phase (6 - 9 weeks). For the majority, psychological reactions will have
               begun to settle by 4 - 8 weeks following. An estimated 5% (varying with nature of
               disaster and exposure) will show evidence of more entrenched reactions. In
               addition, others will develop phobias, panic disorders, depression, psychosomatic
               disorders and PTSD, or combinations of these.



        7.9.3 Long term reactions. Some individuals who show distress in the intermediate
              phase will require long term care and support. Others will only begin to show signs
              of disturbance several months after the event, or on the anniversary of the event.
              There is some evidence that the most severe reactions may be those that first
              become manifest 6 months or more after the event. Long term reactions may be
              prolonged (up to 3 years after the event). They may be intensified by legal battles
              for compensation and the desire to apportion blame and seek revenge. Some people
              are more vulnerable than others to these reactions; eg parents who have lost
              children or young adult offspring.



Types o f Disaster
7.10 Disasters vary widely in the experiences to which they subject individuals and in the
proportions of dead and injured. A broad distinction can be drawn between ‘man-made’ and
‘natural’ disasters although these factors may combine. Features of disasters associated with greater
psychological problems include:

        ★      the intensity of the event
        ★      absence of warnings
        ★      ignored warnings
        ★      having preventable features
        ★      being unfamiliar types of risk
        ★      publicity attached to the event




7.11   Individuals are more likely to suffer psychological problems if they experience:

        ★      shock
        ★      periods of uncertainty about their own survival or the survival of significant others
        ★      concurrent injury
        ★      multiple bereavement




7.12   Self perception of behaviour during the event, legal issues which may follow, and the
       behaviour of others towards them, including that of members of the emergency and other
       services are also determining factors.


                                                 63
Types of Victim
7.13 The range of individuals at risk can be categorised as follows. Individuals may be in more
      than one category.

       Primary victims           Survivors, exposed to the event

       Second level victims      Bereaved relatives, friends, workmates etc

       Third level victims       People involved in rescue, recovery and caring for primary
                                 victims. Also known as ‘helpers’ and, when affected, ‘hidden
                                 victims’.

       Fourth level victims      People in the community involved in the disaster - includes those
                                 affected by the breakdown of normal services.

       Fifth level victims       People in whom emotional problems are precipitated by
                                 knowledge of the disaster even though not otherwise affected.
                                 Also known as ‘media victims’.

       Sixth level victims       Those who but for chance would have been primary victims
                                 themselves.

                                  Those who persuaded others to the course that made them
                                  victims.

                                  Those in some way responsible.


7.14   A ‘ripple effect’ has also been described. This is the spread of psychological problems
       through the community by the effects of altered behaviour of individuals. The size of this
       effect is difficult to measure. As an indication, 10,000 people (from all categories) contacted
       the Herald Assistance Unit after that ferry disaster.


Levels o f Morbidity
7.15 Recent studies have used a standardised approach which has allowed levels of morbidity
       between disaster to be compared, Measures used include psychological and mental health
       scales, mortality, drug use, physical symptoms and health care utilisation.


7.16   Reported levels of psychological morbidity vary according to the nature of disasters; in a
       review of the world literature Raphael concludes that about 40% of primary victims
       experience serious psychological morbidity, with a range of 20% to 80% for the research
       reviewed.


7.17   Many studies have reported falls in morbidity after the first year, However some recent
       research has suggested that though some individuals recover by two years, others suffer a
       delayed onset of problems, The duration of illness caused remains uncertain, but there will
       be some individuals for whom it is lifelong.


Children
7.18 Particular problems have been recognised with children, some relating to the response of
      others, There may be lack of recognition or denial of the trauma experienced, and
      inappropriate responses to altered behaviour. Treatment is more difficult and recovery rates
      appear to be lower.
Reduction of Morbidity
7.19 Different interventions are appropriate at different phases after the disaster. Some are
     primarily preventive, others aim to ameliorate sustained reactions revealed over time.

       7.19.1 In the immediate post-impact phase, three levels of preventive work can be
              distinguished:

               7.19.1.1   Psychological first aid, involving informal support offered by all helpers
                          in contact with victims. This includes supportive listening, the
                          immediate opportunity to talk over what has happened, the recognition
                          of suffering, minimising the feeling of loss of control, providing useful
                          activity, and the sensitive handling of the bereaved. Expressing feelings
                          and experiences at this stage can prevent more severe reactions
                          developing later.

               7.19.1.2 Providing information. This reduces feelings of loss of control and
                        reduces the amount of uncertainty, and is of benefit both during the
                        event/rescue and in the aftermath. A leaflet describing the range of
                        disaster reactions commonly experienced should be made available
                        within a day or so to those directly and indirectly affected by the disaster.

               7.19.1.3 Psychological debriefing, deliberately bringing together groups of
                        victims with a skilled facilitator to review their experiences. This is most
                        useful within the first week after the event, but failing that may be
                        implemented up to 6 weeks afterwards. Debriefing emphasises the
                        normality of people’s emotional reactions through sharing and
                        structuring feelings and mobilising resources and social supports,
                        Instead of opening up areas of personal sensitivity, as in counselling, it
                        encourages simple acknowledgement of the existence of personal issues
                        and helps people use existing coping resources to move on, For workers
                        and helpers, this also promoted a necessary disengagement from the
                        disaster role.

       7.19.2 In the intermediate phase, individuals who have not recovered within a few weeks
              require a skilled professional assessment to determine the most appropriate type of
              intervention:

               7.19.2.1 A small proportion of those involved (approximately 5%) will show
                          evidence at this stage of entrenched psychological reactions, while
                          others will develop (either now or in the long term) specific disorders
                          including PTSD, phobia, panic disorder, depression, or psychosomatic
                          disorders. These require specialised psychological treatment carried out
                          by clinical psychologists with appropriate post- graduate -training.
                        . These include (a) behavioural treatments such as de-sensitization or
                          anxiety management; (b) cognitive approaches to dealing with excessive
                          irritability, inappropriate attributions (eg self-blame) and inability to
                          accept that the past cannot be changed; and (c) dynamic psychotherapy
                          where the disaster has brought out unresolved conflicts and issues that
                          may have little surface connection with the disaster events.

               7.19.2.2 In addition, others will require follow-up debriefing group sessions to
                        help review progress and air ongoing difficulties; or counselling for
                        bereavement or other grief reactions, which are often related to
                        unfinished mourning for an earlier loss which have been reactivated by
                        experience of the disaster.
        7.19.3 Long-term care includes continuing work with those identified during the
               intermediate phase as suffering specific psychological disorders, together with
               assessment and treatment of those presenting with such disorders several months
               or more after the disaster. Intense reactions, including the emergence of such
               disorders, are particularly likely at the anniversary of the disaster. Psychiatric
               Treatment may also be appropriate.

Planning to Deal with Psychological Problems After a Disaster
7.20 Recent UK disasters have highlighted difficulties in providing a response. In some cases
      no response has occurred, or responses have been delayed, of inadequate duration,
      insufficiently resourced and unco-ordinated, while failing to make use of all available
      resources. Routine services are not appropriate for many affected victims, nor available on
      sufficient scale. These problems together with the numbers affected, suggest the need for
      contingency plans. Planning must take account of the time course of psychological
      reactions and of the required responses to these at each stage.

7.21   Plans to respond efficiently and effectively to the different phases of psychological reactions
       must include the following objectives:

        7.21.1 Developing awareness and educating rescue and relief workers in psychological
               first aid in order that these functions are not carried out in ways which add to
               distress and inhibit psychological responses.

        7.21.2 Educating workers about their own possible psychological reactions to their
               experiences and the process of psychological debriefing.

        7.21.3 Securing the availability of resources, including professionals from appropriate
               disciplines and relevant voluntary agencies, and providing them with specific
               training in disaster work.

        7.21.4 Setting up a specific organisational structure to co-ordinate involved organisations
               from the health and social services and from the voluntary sector, to enable the
               necessary communication and co-operation,

        7.21.5 Divising multi-agency arrangements and methods of operation, appropriate to the
               individual features of the disaster, enabling identification, assessment, monitoring
               and treatment of those individuals in need of psychological therapy.

7.22   A checklist of the issues for plans is included in Appendix 1, and in Appendix 2 a list of
       activities is given as an aid to visualising a possible response.

Development of Plans
7.23 The required skills to plan or mount a response are in short supply, and there is a need to
      co-ordinate several agencies with non-parallel structures. The identification of personnel
      and their further training is therefore paramount. The formation of multi-agency teams
      consisting of professionals, voluntary sector workers, planners and managers is suggested.
      O f Health Service professionals, clinical psychologists are well equipped for a lead role.
      Such teams should receive training in the management of psychological problems and
      providing a response. Their responsibilities would include both leading the response to a
      disaster and developing the type of plans discussed.

7.24   The need to have sufficient skills available suggests that initially such teams might be set
       up at regional level although the advantages of having local responses might later lead to
       planning being based around smaller units possibly with outside support. Social services
       departments will have a major role and local authorities may be an appropriate level. The
       NHS must also consider the needs of its own staff as potential third level victims.

7.25   There is a need for an academic input both for further study of the psychological morbidity
       and its epidemiology, and in the development and evaluation of appropriate'responses.


                                                 66
Conclusion
7.26 Disasters leave a legacy of psychological morbidity. The size and scope of the problem
      cannot be fully defined. The range of potential victims is wide and includes the rescue
      services who respond. Affected individuals may suffer from profoundly disabling social and
      mental health problems. Support and treatment for such people has frequently been
      patchy, ineffectual and offered late and for too short a time. In order to minimise morbidity
      and mortality, services appropriate to the problems need to be available. This task requires
      coordination of the resources of health services, local authorities and voluntary bodies.
      Contingency planning is essential. The fundamental issues are the definition of roles, co­
      ordination and decision-making between agencies, training, and research to evaluate the
      impact and improve the design of services offered.


7.27   The formation of multi-agency teams able to develop expertise and form a basis for the
       provision of a response, and the development of plans, is recommended. Consideration will
       be given to establishing a Regional Team, with the prime functions of training, promoting
       the development of a network of District teams, and monitoring the effects of psychological
       work in the aftermath of disasters. A further function of the Regional team would be to
       establish networks with other Regions for mutual support in the event of disaster. Any
       Regional team should be multi-disciplinary and multi-agency, and should include
       professionals and representatives of voluntary agencies; wherever possible, members should
       have direct experience of disaster work.


7.28    District Steering Committees on Psychological Aspects of Major Disaster could then form
        a network co-ordinated and supported by the Regional team. District committees should
        include a clinical psychologist, a general practitioner, a psychiatrist (preferably a liaison
        psychiatrist), a representative from the voluntary sector, and a social worker. All members
        should have a particular interest in this field.


7.29    Any Regional team should then be convened within 48 hours of any major disaster whether
        it occurred within the Region or elsewhere in Britain, to consider whether it is appropriate
        to mobilize a response from Districts within the Region.




                                                 67
                                                               APPENDIX 1 TO SECTION 7
                                                               PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

  ISSUES TO BE DEALT WITH IN CONTINGENCY
 PLANNING TO DEAL WITH THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
          AFTERMATH OF DISASTERS

1.    Definition of the roles of health services, social services, voluntary bodies and emergency
      services.

2.    Co-ordination, leadership and decision making, individual responsibilities.

3.    Register of resources of trained staff and facilities.

4.    Co-ordination of Phase I and Phase II disaster planning.

5.    Capacity to set up an ‘at risk’ register - technical means, information gathering.

6.    Capacity to communicate with victims, including provision of means for unknown ‘at-risk’
      individuals to make contact with the services (eg ‘helplines’).

7.    Collection of resource material for victims and helpers

      eg Data collection forms
         Educational materials for victims and staff
         Academic literature

8.    Education and training for staff especially ‘leaders’ on:

       ★       psychological needs and problems               .    '
       ★       responsibilities after a disaster
       ★       triage, emotional first aid and preventive approaches
       ★       adaptive and non-adaptive responses to disaster
       ★       special needs of children
       ★       data collection
       ★       response planning after the disaster
       ★       debriefing

9.    Education and training for other emergency workers on:

       ★       emotional first aid and preventive approaches
       ★       psychological needs and problems
       ★       debriefing

10.   Types of intervention which may be appropriate.

11.   Types of approach to victims to be used.

12.   Maintaining the normal workload of involved staff.

13.   Recording of activity and allied research.

14.   Press relations and dissemination of information.

15.   Organisation of debriefing and monitoring of involved staff.


                                                 68
Other feedback of experience to the:

★      Planning process
★      Emergency teams

Need for specific funding.

Updating the plan (especially registers of resources) and maintaining training.
                                                                APPENDIX 2 TO SECTION 7
                                                                PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

                     ILLUSTRATION OF RESPONSE

A list of activities is given as an aid to visualising the action to betaken after a disaster.

1.      Implement plan. Leaders make contact with relevant agencies to gather information and
        offer help with psychological/social problems.

2.      Psychological first aid to primary and second level victims.

3.      Start compiling ‘at risk’ register.

4.      Define initial priorities; re types of victim.

5.      Review available resources.

6.      Decide on types of approach to at risk groups.

7.      Decide on how access will be afforded to unknown at risk individuals and lower priority
        groups.

8.      Finalise types of criteria for interventions.

9.      Disseminate information to public. (An ongoing task.)

10.     Organise briefing and information sessions for involved personnel.

11.     Review progress frequently and modify above as required.

12.     De-briefing for emergency services and own staff.

13.     Review experiences for future.
                                                                                       SECTION 8

ARRANGEMENTS FOR LIAISON WITH THE MEDIA
INTRODUCTION
8.1   A Major Accident will undoubtedly attract considerable interest from the media - ie
      newspapers, radio and television. Representatives will arrive at the receiving hospital in
      large numbers. They will also ask for information over the telephone, especially in the early
      stages of an incident - until their reporters arrive. Liaising with the Press and relatives will
      probably be the biggest single management problem for a hospital during a Major
      Accident. Appropriate staff should therefore receive training and be conversant with media
      methods. A media checklist is provided at Appendix 1.

8.2   Hospital staff who may be required to respond to media inquirers should be wary of the
      media ploy of ringing the hospital and asking a member of staff to confirm that patient X
      is in hospital with problem Y or receiving treatment Z. It is very easy for staff in an
      unguarded moment simply to confirm this, thereby giving the press what they want and
      by-passing medical confidentiality.

8.3   There are likely to be visits by Royalty, the Prime Minister, Government Ministers and
      others and although this will place additional pressure on the hospital the benefits to both
      patients and staff can be considerable in lifting patient morale and the recognition given
      to staff for a job well done.

PREPARATION
8.4   Managers should ensure that arrangements for liaising with the Press are included in their
      hospital’s Major Accident plan and are tested as part and parcel of that plan. The Regional
      Public Relations Officer is available to advise on press arrangements.

8.5   The objective in liaising with the press should be to establish a constructive and positive
      relationship with them, remembering that the careful RELEASE of information can be
      important in easing public alarm.

8.6   The press can also be very helpful to the medical functioning of a hospital, especially
      during a major incident. They can print or broadcast appeals for blood donors, notify the
      cancellation of clinics and/or ambulance journeys and generally inform the public (out­
      patients) of re-arrangements to hospital schedules disrupted by the need to invoke the
      Maj or Accident plan.

8.7   As part of the Major Accident plan, a large room should be identified as a Press Room with
      access to outside telephone lines.

8.8   In the event of a Maj or Accident Unit General Managers will need to designate a member
       of their staff as Press Officer, either for the whole incident or until the Regional PRO can
       arrive. The Press Officer MUST be of sufficient grade and personality to command respect
       and action within the hospital, especially with medical and nursing staffs. There will be a
       need for medical involvement in briefing the media and this should be clarified in hospital
       plans.

8.9   The advantages of designating a Press Officer are two-fold:-

      8.9.1   Journalists/photographers will know who will give them information and keep in
              contact with him/her, leaving other hospital staff free to carry out their work
              without interruption.

      8.9.2    The Press Officer will quickly build up a working relationship with the Press, each
               side recognising the other’s problems and needs. They will begin to work together.


                                                71
8.10   The Press Officer will also need the help of one other member of staff, someone to hold the
       fort on occasions. The Regional PRO will also need help when he/she arrives.

ACTION
8.11   During a Major Accident, handling the press can be divided into three phases. The timings
       given are approximate and will vary according to each situation.

Phase One - The First Two Hours
8.12 When the Major Accident is declared, three steps should be taken by the appropriate
      Manager as soon as possible:-

       8.12.1 Appoint a Press Officer

       8.12.2 Appoint his assistant

       8.12.3 Inform the Regional PRO

8.13   The immediate action of the Press Officer should be to ensure that the Press Room is
       available, that external telephone lines are available, although many now have Cellnet
       telephones, and that the porters know that when the press arrive they are to be TAKEN to
       the Press Room.

8.14   Experience has shown that if a Press Room is not provided problems can arise from
       reporters and/or photographers seeking to talk to anyone and everyone to gather
        information. This can result in wrong and sensitive information being published, upsetting
       relatives and possibly police enquiries. Also staff needed urgently elsewhere may be delayed
       or hindered. By having a Press Room and releasing information in it regularly, reporters are
       encouraged to remain in or close to the Press Room: those tempted to wander may miss the
        release of vital news.

8.15   On arrival at a hospital photographers will be content to take pictures of ambulances
       arriving with the injured. They will also, at this time, happily take pictures of hospital
       spokesmen reading out statements. Following this they will want to take pictures of the
       injured in wards and may start to wander. Staff will need to be briefed to be on the lookout
       for unfamiliar people, with cameras and to ESCORT anyone who has ‘lost his way’ etc,
       back to the Press Room.

8.16   If more than one hospital receives patients then:-

       8.16.1 The same procedure MUST be adopted at ALL receiving hospitals.

       8.16.2 A central co-ordinating Press Office MUST also be set up, probably manned by
              the Regional PRO and his staff. This office will be external to the hospital(s) thus
              relieving the workload of the hospital(s) switchboards, enabling them to function
              more easily. It will also reduce the workload on hospital Press Officers by providing
              national and regional media with basic information from one source. It is therefore,
              essential that the Co-ordinating Press Office is kept fully up-to-date with
              information including any proposed press releases prior to any action being taken.

Security
8.17 If the Major Accident has been, or is suspected of having been, caused by terrorism or
      crime (bombs or firearms), the police will impose a degree of security around the hospital.
      This will increase even more if police officers have been involved. In this event the police
      will probably stop everyone except essential personnel from entering the hospital, and they
      may control the press ‘at the gates’. This will throw a burden on the Press Officer because
      the press will telephone the hospital incessantly for information.
8.18   If terrorism or crime is suspected the police will send a liaison officer to the hospital to co­
        ordinate police activities. This officer may also act as press officer. In these circumstances
       the police will maintain contact with their headquarters, the highest ranking police officer
        in the district and with the central police Casualty Bureau which should be diverting calls
        away from the hospital.
8.19   It is essential for the hospital Press Officer to get to know the police liaison officers as
       quickly as possible including the senior uniformed police officer in charge and the police
       press officer.
8.20   The police should be involved in press releases, with co-operation the press work can be
       handled satisfactorily to suit both the Hospital and the Police requirements. The hospital
       Press Officer has a considerable role to play whatever the circumstances and he/she must
       ensure that it is carried out, taking account of any particular sensitivities or special
       requirements.
Press Briefing
8.21 Whatever the nature of the Major Accident a press briefing should be held as soon as
       possible, even if it has to be held outside the building.
8.22   It is emphasised that MEDICAL CONFIDENTIALITY MUST BE MAINTAINED
       and any decision to release information must have prior medical consent. The Press Officer
       will need to collate the following information:-
       8.22.1 Number of injured received by the hospital
       8.22.2 Type of injuries (even if only in general terms to start with)
       8.22.3 Treatment being given (number being operated on, receiving minor care, etc)
       8.22.4' Time hospital was told to expect casualties
       8.22.5 Time first casualties arrived
       8.22.6 Details of numbers of staff on duty, of medical teams on standby, of routine
              operations cancelled and other background information
       8.22.7 Brief resume of the hospital’s Major Accident plan, what time it was put into action
              and the consequences for other departments and the hospital
       8.22.8 Divide injured between men and women, children under 16 and the nature
              (broadly) of their injuries, whether retained in hospital or discharged
       8.22.9 State if any patients have been transferred elsewhere either for specialist treatment
              (burns, neurosurgery) or because hospital could not cope.
8.23   Prepare a statement (with the aid of the Regional PRO if present) around these facts but
       consult with the police liaison/press officer if one is present, Particularly if the incident
       involves terrorism or crime.
8.24   The Unit General Manager or his Press Officer will be expected to:-
       8.24.1 Read the statement to reporters and photographers
       8.24.2 Repeat the statement first to radio interviewers and then two or three times more
              to television reporters
       8.24.3 Fix a time for a further briefing (this should be fairly soon, if events are developing
              rapidly as they usually do in a major accident)
       8.24.4 Inform the Co-ordinating Press Office, if applicable.


                                                  73
Phase Two - The Next Few Hours
8.25 Answer any telephone calls from the press using the facts and figures already drawn up for
      the first press briefing. These calls will be mainly from local, daily or evening newspapers
      or news agencies asking for additional details about anyone involved in the incident who
      may be resident in their circulation areas. If a Co-ordinating Press Office has been
      established many of the regional and national media can be referred to it.

8.26   If circumstances allow, establish a link with the medical and nursing staff dealing with
        casualties to ensure complete reliability of the information on treatment and injuries.

8.27    Prepare the second press briefing. If the incident has been caused by terrorism or crime the
        Press Officer will need to clear the release of information with the police liaison/press
        officer.

8.28   If possible provide:-

        8.28.1 Details of patients - names, addresses and ages (bearing in mind need for any
               confidentiality)

        8.28.2 Details of extent of injuries and treatment given

        8.28.3 Details of numbers of deaths, emergency operations, intensive care cases and
               patients sent home

        8.28.4 Inform the Co-ordinating Press Office, if applicable.

8.29   If there have been any deaths, the details required by the media will include the time of
        death, how long the dead person survived on the operating table, how many medical and
        nursing staff fought to save the patient etc but see para 8.30 below.

8.30   It is stressed that the police will not confirm names of the dead until positive identification
        has been made and the next of kin informed.

8.31   As victims are brought in and treated, the press will ask to interview them. The press will
       also want to interview the staff treating the injured. Check security with police and obtain
       the agreement of the consultant concerned.

8.32   Some minor casualties may be willing to be interviewed. Some will not. Some, although
       unwilling to be interviewed, may be prepared to give information to pass on to the press
        who will almost certainly use it as quotes from the casualty concerned.

8.33   If possible, ask key staff members to give interviews to the press. First-hand accounts reduce
        the risk of wrong information being given and afford an accurate - and favourable
        impression of the hospital and its staff.

8.34   Finally, arrange more press briefings for later that day. If there is nothing new to be said,
        inform the press but promise an updating briefing as soon as possible. Inform the Co­
        ordinating Press Office, if applicable.

Phase Three - The Next Day Onwards
8.35 Reporters will want to speak to those casualties admitted to hospital. Photographers will
      want to take pictures. Check with the police since either may seriously breach police
      security (such as when a patient might fear for his/her own safety or are witnesses to a
      crime) this should only be arranged, provided the doctor confirms that the patient is
      sufficiently able to do so and the patient agrees.


                                                  74
8.36   To minimise problems for patients and staff, it is advantageous to arrange a “Press Hour”
       when the press will be allowed to come onto the ward and speak to patients and take
       pictures. Some patients might agree to speak but not have pictures taken. Ensure that their
       wishes are observed.

8.37   Consult medical and nursing staff on those patients fit enough to talk and ask staff to talk
       to the press on how they coped with the pressures of the emergency and to give details of
       injuries and how these were treated.

8.38   Speak to the patients personally to establish if they are prepared to talk to the press and have
       their pictures taken. Try to group these in one part of the ward. This will give peace to those
       who are unwilling to take part, and also there is less likelihood of photographers
       ‘accidentally’ taking pictures of people who do not wish to be photographed, If possible
       screen off that part of the ward containing patients who do not wish to speak to the press,

Press Hour
8.39 Reporters will have very good reasons for requesting that they be allowed to do their
       interview first. Everyone, it seems, has a deadline within the next half hour, Whatever
       arrangements you make, control them firmly.

8.40   Allow the photographers to go in first. If there is a large group of photographers, perhaps
       ten or more, split them into two groups, Give each group at least five minutes each to take
       pictures and then escort them away.

8.41   Next, admit newspaper reporters. Give them 10 to 15 minutes.

8.42   Now admit radio reporters. Give them 10 to 15 minutes.

8.43   Lastly, admit TV crews. Admit one crew at a time for 10 minutes each. Deal only with the
       BBC News (national or regional) and ITN (or the local independent company if ITN is
       not present). Other TV interests, Possibly international stations, will be able to gain film
       footage from BBC and ITN.

8.44   By the time the TV crews are due to go in, patients might be getting irritable, tired,
       uncomfortable or distressed. If this happens, admit only one TV crew for a single
       interview. The resulting film should be ‘pooled’ by the TV stations - they don’t like it but
       the alternative is no film at all. A variation is to admit one reporter but two film crews,
       Again, the TV crews will not like it, but again the alternative is no coverage at all.
       Generally, TV crews in these circumstances will co-operate fully, A film crew is usually
       four people - reporter, cameraman, lights man and sound man.

8.45   After the Press, Hour, there should be no need for further press access to the casualties
       except in special circumstances. A relative of a casualty might ask that a local newspaper
       has access to a particular patient, or Royalty or senior Government Ministers may wish to
       visit. The advice at Paragraphs 35 - 38 should be observed as approprite.

8.46   Normally, once full access has been given and the interviews/pictures have been obtained,
       the press interest will flag and another story will take over.

Hospital Needs
8.47 During the course of a Major Accident the hospital may wish to use the media to help the
      casualties or assist in the smooth running of the hospital. Blood donors might be required
      urgently, perhaps with a particularly rare blood group. The media will happily use this
      information and broadcast it, but they will wish to know why the blood is needed and what
      is involved etc. The media can also notify the public (out-patients) of changes to clinics etc
      but they will wish to know why eg are the medical teams so exhausted, busy or whatever to
      carry out their clinics the following day and so on. Inform the Co-ordinating Press Office,
      if one has been activated, such appeals might be issued from it on behalf of all hospitals
      involved.
8.48   Do not hesitate to achieve the hospital’s objectives via the media if it is considered that is the
       right and quickest way of achieving them. The media will willingly co-operate.


8.49   CONTACTS: Regional Public Relations Officer - Derek Hull
                 Business tel: Sheffield (0742) 630300 ext 606
                 Home tel: Chesterfield (0246) 452938


RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
8.50   HM(56)58          Information to the press about the conditions of patients



8.51   A MEDIA CHECK LIST TO HOSPITAL MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES IS
       GIVEN AT APPENDIX 1.




                                                  76
                                                           APPENDIX 1 TO SECTION 8
                                                           MEDIA LIAISON

      MEDIA CHECKLIST TO HOSPITAL MAJOR
            ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

ACTION BY UGM
1.   IMMEDIATELY

     1.1    Appoint a Press Officer

     1.2    Appoint his/her assistant


2.   The Press Officer must:

     2.1    Name and signpost a Press Room;

     2.2    Instruct Switchboard to divert media calls to the Press Officer’s number;

     2.3    Instruct porters to TAKE media on arrival to Press room;

     2.4    Inform Regional PRO of disaster


3.   If the Major Disaster has been, or is suspected of being, caused by terrorism or
      crime:

     3.1    Make contact with the police press liaison officer immediately

     3.2    Involve police in any media comment or information to be released.


4.   IN ONE HOUR:

     4.1    Hold a Press Conference in the Press Room - if terrorism or crime is involved,
            security may dictate that this is at the hospital gates;

     4.2    You will need to provide information on:

            4.2.1   The number of injured and dead received by your hospital;

            4.2.2   Numbers of men and women, children under 16;

            4.2.3   Types of injuries, in general terms - do not say how dead died;

            4.2.4   Treatment being given (number operated on, receiving care, likely to be
                    discharged soon);

            4.2.5   Time hospital was told to expect casualties;

            4.2.6   Time first casualties arrived;

            4.2.7   Time major disaster plan was put into operation;
            4.2.8   Number of staff on duty;

            4.2.9   Number of additional operations being performed;

            4.2.10 Number of medical teams on standby;

            4.2.11 Number of routine operations postponed;

            4.2.12 Number of staff called in and general response by staff;

            4.2.13 If any patients have been transferred to you by another hospital either for
                   special treatment diagnosis (neuro-surgery, scans) or because they could
                   not cope OR the reverse, patients transferred by you etc.

5.   The Unit General Manager or his Press Officer will be expected to:

     5.1   read the statement to reporters and photographers;

     5.2   repeat the statement to radio and television reporters - sometimes three, four or five
            times altogether;

     5.3   fix time for a further briefing - about one hour’s time;

     5.4   post information on board/flip chart in Press Room - date and time it;

     5.5   inform RHA Co-ordinating Press Office, if appropriate;

     5.6   provide tea, coffee, sandwiches, biscuits in Press Room.

6.   AFTER TWO HOURS

     6.1   Answer press telephone calls using first statement.                    =

     6.2   Prepare second press briefing or statement.

     6.3   With medical and nursing staff, identify patients fit enough and willing to talk to
           Press about their experiences.

7.   MEET THE PRESS

     7.1   Use the Press Room

     7.2   Before patients arrive give Press:

            7.2.1   Names, addresses, ages and occupations of patients about to talk to them.
                    Put this information down on paper and distribute to Press before patients
                    arrive.

            7.2.2   Ask Press to be gentle in their questioning - these patients may have had a
                    harrowing experience.

            7.2.3   Tell Press they will have just one chance to talk to these patients. There is
                    no question of newspaper, radio and TV reporters doing separate
                    interviews. This press meeting is in the nature of a press conference.

           7.2.4    Tell Press you are going to allow about 30 minutes for this conference (this
                    is usually adequate for about three patients).


                                             78
                                                                                                     ..'""1




8.    An alternative to patients meeting the Press is to ask doctors and nurses who have treated
      patients to give interviews to the Press in the Press Room. Follow 7.2 above. DO NOT
      COMBINE PATIENTS AND STAFF at Press Conferences.


9.    THE NEXT DAY

      9.1     Update Press statements at 8.00 am, mid-day and 6.00 pm.

      9.2     Press will want to talk to and take photographs of patients in wards.

      9.3     Group consenting patients (and, if appropriate, their relatives) in one ward or part
              of a ward.

      9.4     Inform Press that this access will on a ‘pooled’ (shared) basis only.

      9.5     Allow 45 minutes access for this purpose.

      9.6     Allow individual requests from media to interview patients - IF IT IS
              CONVENIENT TO PATIENTS, STAFF AND YOURSELF - butbe careful,
              the volume of individual requests can get out of hand.


10.   VIP VISITS

       10.1   VIPs descend on hospitals immediately and sometimes without any prior warning
              to see and comfort the patients and their relatives. MOST of these visits will be
              accompanied by the Press, including going on the wards.

       10.2   Use the “pool” principle for each such visit.


11.   ONGOING

       11.1   Keep updating Press information at 8.00 am, mid-day and 6.00 pm.

       11.2   After 2 to 3 days, seriously consider closing the Press Room.

NB
1.    Refreshments: It makes good sense toprovide Press with sandwiches, biscuits, tea and
       coffee, but in the Press Room ONLY

2.    Telephones: If possible provide external pay phones but nowadays thepress will have
       cellnet telephones.




                                               79
TRENT REGIONAL                                                                   ANNEX ‘A’ TO TRHA MAJOR
HEALTH AUTHORITY                                                                 ACCIDENT PROCEDURES -
                                                                                 CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

LISTED HOSPITALS
Major Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover

 HEALTH                      HOSPITAL,                    TYPE OF SERVICE             BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL
 AUTHORITY                   ADDRESS AND                                              AREASERVED
                             TELEPHONE NO.


 DERBYSHIRE
 North Derbyshire HA         Chesterfield & North         24 hour + Flying Squad      North and Central Derbyshire but part of
                             Derbyshire Royal Hosp        Burn Unit:                  High Peak District is by Stockport Royal
                             Calow, Chesterfield          Sheffield—Northern          Infirmary, Wellington Road South
                             (0246)277271                 General Hospital            Tel: 061480 7441
                             Ex Directory                 (0742)434343
                             A&ETBN
                             Hospital Control
                             (0246) 209505/201797


 Southern Derbyshire HA      Derbyshire Royal             24 hour + Flying Squad      South and Central Derbyshire but
                             Infirmary, London Rd         Burn Unit:                  Swadlincote area served by Burton
                             Derby                        Nottingham City Hosp        District Hospital, Belvedere Road,
                             (0332)47141                  (0602)691169                Burton on Trent
                             Ex Directory                                             Tel: (0288) 66333
                             A&E(0332) 362641
                             *Hospital Control
                             (0332) 291506



 LEICESTERSHIRE


 Leicestershire HA           Leicester Royal              24 hour + Flying Squad      All ofLeicestershire. Also provides an
                             Infirmary                    Burn Unit:                  alternative casualty receiving hospital for
                             (0533)541414                 Leicester Royal Infirmary   major accidents occuring in the Oxford
                             Ex Directory                 (0533) 541414               and W Midlands Regions where these
                             A&E(0533) 552127                                         occur close to the Leicestershire boundary.
                                   (0533) 552177
                             Hospital Control
                             (0533) TBN



 LINCOLNSHIRE
 North Lincolnshire HA       Lincoln County Hosp          24 hour + Flying Squad      North Lincolnshire and East of the
                             Sewell Road, Lincoln         Burn Unit:                  Newark/Grantham rail line
                             (0522)512512                 Nottingham City Hosp        except: an area in the north which is
                             Ex Directory                 (0602)691169                        served by Grimsby and
                             A&E(0522) 512835                                                 Scunthorpe
                             Hospital Control
                             (0522) 537397



*Staffed only in office hours and during a Major Accident Alert




                                                                  80
TRENT REGIONAL
HEALTH AUTHORITY

LISTED HOSPITALS
Major Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover

HEALTH                  HOSPITAL,                TYPE OF SERVICE             BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL
AUTHORITY               ADDRESS AND                                          AREASERVED
                        TELEPHONE NO.


South Lincolnshire HA   Pilgrim Hospital         24 hour                     South Lincolnshire
                        Sibsey Road, Boston      Burn Unit:                  except: (a) South of South Witham and
                        (0205) 364801            Leicester Royal Infirmary           Bourne (Peterborough District
                        Ex Directory             (0533)541414                        Hospital)
                        A&E(0205) 364609                                             (b) Grantham, area west of
                        Hospital Control                                             Newark/Grantham rail line, area
                         (0205)361465                                                between Grantham and South
                        Hospital Switch                                              Witham and Bourne (Queens
                         (0205) 354395                                               Medical Centre, Nottingham)
                        * Police Control                                             (c) Area west ofNewark/
                         (0205) 364609                                               Grantham rail line
                                                                                     (Lincoln County Hospital)



NOTTINGHAMSHIRE
Bassetlaw HA            Bassetlaw DGH            24 hour + Flying Squad      North Nottinghamshire
                        Worksop                  Burn Unit
                        (0909)472831             Northern General Hosp
                        Ex Directory             Sheffield
                        A&E(0909) 500990         (0742)434343
                        Hospital Control
                        (0909) TBN


Central Notts HA        Mansfield & District     24 hour + Flying Squad      Central Nottinghamshire
                        General Hospital         Burn Unit
                        West Hill Drive          Nottingham City Hosp
                        Mansfield                (0602)691169
                        (0623)22515
                        Ex Directory
                        A & E (0623) 420218
                        Hospital Control
                        (0623) 24275


Nottingham HA           University Hospital      24 hour + Flying Squad      Nottingham: plus parts ofLincolnshire:
                        Queen’s Medical Centre   Burn Unit                   ie (a) Grantham
                        Nottingham               Nottingham City Hosp           (b) West ofNewark/Grantham rail line
                        (0602)421421             (0602)691169                   (c) Area between Grantham and South
                        Ex Directory                                                Witham and Bourne
                        A & E (0602) 785924
                        Hospital Control
                         (0602)781638
                         (0602)785921
                         (0602)785912
TRENT REGIONAL
HEALTH AUTHORITY

LISTED HOSPITALS
Major Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover

HEALTH             HOSPITAL,              TYPE OF SERVICE          BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL
AUTHORITY          ADDRESS AND                                     AREASERVED
                   TELEPHONE NO.


 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
 Barnsley          Barnsley DGH           24 hour + Flying Squad   Barnsley
                   Gawber Road            Burn Unit:
                   Barnsley               Northern General Hosp
                   (0226)730000           Sheffield
                   Ex Directory           (0742)434343
                   A &E(0226) 730013
                               730020
                   Hospital Control
                   (0226) 730063/730212


 Doncaster         Doncaster Royal        24 hour + Flying Squad   Doncaster (under review)
                   Infirmary              Burn Unit:
                   (0302)366666           Northern General Hosp
                   Ex Directory           Sheffield
                   A&E(0302) 360828       (0742)434343
                   Hospital Control
                   (0302) 360641


 Rotherham         Rotherham DGH          24 hour                  Rotherham
                   Moorgate Road          Burn Unit:
                   Rotherham              Northern General Hosp
                   (0709)820000           Sheffield
                   Ex Directory           (0742)434343
                   A &E(0709) 820958
                   Hospital Control
                   (0709) TBN
TRENT REGIONAL
HEALTH AUTHORITY

LISTED HOSPITALS
Major Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover

 HEALTH            HOSPITAL,             TYPE OF SERVICE         BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL
 AUTHORITY         ADDRESS AND                                   AREASERVED
                   TELEPHONE NO.


 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
 .Sheffield        Royal Hallamshire     DAY                     Sheffield
                   Hospital (RHH)        0900 - 2000 hours
                   Glossop Road          + Flying Squad
                   Sheffield             B um Unit:
                   (0742)766222          Northern General Hosp
                   Ex Directory          Sheffield
                   A & E (0742) 766476   (0742)434343
                   Hospital Control
                   (0742)766301


                   Northern General      DAY                     Sheffield
                   Hospital (NGH)        0900 - 2000 hours
                   Herries Road          + Flying Squad
                   Sheffield             B u m Unit:
                   (0742)434343          Northern General Hosp
                   Ex Directory          Sheffield
                   A&E(0742) 437981      (0742)434343
                   Hospital Control
                   (0742)422020          NIGHT ROTA
                   (0742)431418 ,        Mon - R H H
                                         Tues -N G H
                                         Weds -N G H
                                         Thur - R H H
                                         Fri -R H H
                                         Sat -N G H
                                         Sun - R H H


April 1990
                                                 APPENDIX ‘B’ TO TRHA
                                                 MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES
                                                 CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

   DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY FOR MAJOR
            ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

GENERAL TERMS
Ambulance Control:                The permanent office (manned 24 hours) which receives
                                  all demands for ambulance resources in the county, co­
                                  ordinates and allocates the demand to stations or vehicles.

Central Police Casualty Bureau:   A bureau set up by the police (external to the hospital) to
                                  maintain a list of casualties resulting from a Major
                                  Accident including casualties dealt with at the site without
                                  referral to hospital and to answer all initial enquiries
                                  regarding casualties.
Police Documentation Team:        A small police team (up to 4) sent to the receiving
                                  hospital(s) to collect and collate details of all casualties and
                                  transmit this information to the central Police Casualty
                                  Bureau.
Emergency Services:               The ambulance, fire, police, rescue and coastguard
                                  services.
Major Accident:                   For health service purposes a Major Accident is one which
                                  because of the number and severity of live casualties it
                                  produces requires special arrangements. In this document
                                  the generic term “Major Accident” is taken to embrace any
                                  accident, incident or disaster resulting in a large number of
                                  casualties and involving the Ambulance, Police, Fire and
                                  Emergency Medical Services.


SITE TERMS
Ambulance Incident Officer:       The officer of the ambulance service responsible for the
                                  co-ordination of that service at the scene of a Major
                                  Accident.
Ambulance and Medical             The location of the Ambulance Incident Officer and the
Communications Point:             Site Medical officer and the focal point for all medical,
                                  nursing and ambulance staff at the scene of the Major
                                  Accident.
Paramedic                         A qualified ambulance person who has obtained the
                                  NHSTA certificate in Extended Ambulance Aid Training
                                  or other local qualification allowing the practising of
                                  endotracheal intubation, intravenous infusion and cardiac
                                  care.
Ambulance Loading Point:          The place designated at the scene of a Major Accident
                                  where ambulances are loaded.
Site Medical Officer:             The medical officer with overall medical responsibility at
                                  the scene of a Major Accident. He should not normally be
                                  a member of a mobile medical and nursing team.


                                          84
Ambulance Parking Point:            The place designated at the scene of a Major Accident
                                    where arriving ambulances park so that the attendant can
                                    report arrival, thus avoiding congestion at the entrance to
                                    the site or at the ambulance loading points.
Casualty Clearing Station:          A post set up at the Major Accident by the Ambulance
                                    Incident Officer, in liaison with the Site Medical Officer to
                                    sort casualties and direct their evacuation.
Chief Site Nurse:                   The most senior nurse with overall nursing responsibility
                                    at the scene of a Major Accident where two or more mobile
                                    medical and nursing teams are required or where
                                    circumstances create a need for her presence.
Flying Squad/Mobile Medical         The team sent to the scene of a Major and Accident
Nursing Team                        usually at the request of the ambulance service or Site
                                    Medical Officer.
Stretcher Bearer Assembly Points:   The places designated by the Ambulance Incident Officer
                                    where volunteer stretcher bearers can assemble to be
                                    directed where required.

HOSPITAL TERMS
Ambulance Liaison Officer:          The ambulance officer responsible for providing radio
                                    communications and for the supervision of ambulance
                                    service activity and liaison at a hospital receiving casualties
                                    from a Major Accident.
Casualty Assessment Officer:        A doctor who will receive and assess all casualties as soon
(sometimes termed the Triage        as they enter the hospital and decide the priority of
Officer)                            treatment.
Consultant in charge of Major       The Consultant (usually the Consultant in charge of the
Accident Procedure:                 A& E Department) who is nominated to be responsible for
                                    co-ordinating all hospital medical arrangements relating to
                                    Major Accidents.
Listed Hospitals                    Hospitals listed by the Regional Health Authority as
                                    adequately equipped to receive casualties on a 24 hour
                                    basis; most are also able to provide, when required, a Site
                                    Medical Officer, Chief Site Nurse and a Flying Squad.
Designated Hospitals:               The first listed hospital to be alerted by the ambulance
                                    authority to receive casualties in the event of a Major
                                    Accident.
Supporting Hospitals:               Hospitals nominated to support the designated hospital in
                                    dealing with casualties from a Major Accident.
Relatives Information Service:      A centre at a hospital, set up by the General Manager, to
                                    deal with callers enquiring about casualties and handle
                                    follow-up telephone enquiries from relatives about specific
                                    patients. There would be close liaison with the police
                                    documentation team.
Triage/Sorting:                     Assessment of casualties into priority for treatment/
                                    removal to hospital.
Hospital Control Room:              A room manned by hospital medical, nursing and general
                                    management staff who are jointly responsible for co­
                                    ordinating the hospitals response to the major accident.
                                    The senior manager would normally be in charge of the
                                    hospital control room.


                                            85
NOTES:
NOTES:
NOTES:
MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES
   CODE OF GOOD PRACTICE

Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
        Telephone: Sheffield (0742) 630300
                Fax:(0742)306956
                                REGIONAL
                   tre n t health^




                 Supplied by PR Section, Trent RHA
            Design and A rtw o rk by Pemberton Lee Design
