                                                                TA(89)98




IN CONFIDENCE



Trent Regional Health Authority


Report of the Regional Legal Adviser


HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY



1    At the preliminary hearing of the Enquiry convened by Lord Justice
     Taylor in Sheffield on the 28th April, the Authority's Solicitors
     applied unsuccessfully for leave for the Authority to be represented at
     the Enquiry. Overall the responses throughout the NHS to this disaster
     appear to have been both speedy and efficient but it is considered,
     principally for the following reasons, that the RHA should be'
     represented:
     1.1   The vulnerability of staff who will be called as witnesses;
      1.2    Aspects of the involvement of SYMAS with the football club and
             South Yorkshire Police prior to the match, and operationally at
             the match itself could be subject to critical examination by
             Counsel for the other parties;
      1 .3    SYMAS considers it should make representations to the Enquiry
             that the Ambulance Service should be consulted in relation to
             future licensing of sports grounds by the Licensing Authority in
             order in future to make less likely some of the operational
             difficulties of the sort it actually faced at Hillsborough; and
      1.4    there has already been some public criticism of aspects of the
             "medical services" that were available at the ground. These may
             well be given expression at the Enquiry.
      Extensive debriefing has taken place by the RHA's managers, assisted by
      their solicitors and all the indications are that there are sound
      answers to any criticisms that may be forthcoming.



2      Accordingly instructions were given to the Authority's Solicitors to
      renew privately to Lord Justice Taylor the Authority's request for
      representation at the Enquiry.      However, it seems likely that the
      application will have to be renewed in public when the Enquiry re-opens
      on the 15th Hay 1989.
                                                                   IA(89)98


TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY'


IN CONFIDENCE


NOT FOR PUBLICATION


Report of the Regional General Manager - Hi 1Isborough Disaster


1.   In my letter of 24th April, 1989 I informed Members that an up-to-date
     progress report would be made at the meeting of the Authority on 8th
     May, 1989.

2.   Attached for consideration are copies of irrmediate factual reports
     concerning the involvement of our Services which were submitted to the
     Department of Health and the Home Office on 28th April, 1989.

3.   The Region/District debriefing meeting set up under Circular HC(77)1
     was held on 2nd May, 1989 and a preliminary verbal report on the
     outcome of that meeting will be given to Members.




FJK/JH
   Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3 T H
   "e!: Sheffield (0742) 6 3 0 3 0 0   Telex: 5 4 7 2 4 6 TRHA G   Fax: (0742) 3 0 6 9 5 6
                                                                                             trent
  Your Reference:                                                                            REGIONAL
  Our Reference:     F j K/ j H                                                              HEALTH
  Please ask for:    Mr   Kenny (ext        345)                                             AUTHORITY




•■'r B Slater
Regional Liaison Division
Richmond House
79 Whitehall
LONDON
SW1A 2NS


28 April 1989


Dear Mr Slater

I refer to your letter of 17th April, 1989 requesting irrmediate factual
reports concerning the involvement of our Hospitals, and Ambulance and
Blood Transfusion Services in the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday 15th
Apri1, 1989.

As I have already informed you, extensive debriefing is proceeding in
preparation for our participation in Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry and the
reports prepared (copies attached) are necessarily of a preliminary and
factual nature in order to avoid, as I am sure we must at this stage, wider
issues which are properly in the province of the other Inquiries.

Apart from our involvement in the official Inquiry, arising from the
Region’s responsibilities under Circular HC(77)1, we will shortly be
holding our own Region/District debriefing meeting with a view to
formulating in due course a report for submission to the Regional and
District Health Authorities and the Department and consideration of any
operational matters which need dealing with in advance of the official
Inqui ry.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if there is any further information
you require.

Yours sincerely




Regional General Manager




 T.R.H.A. 28
MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE

                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                 H I L L   S B 0 R 0 U G H    E M E R G E N C Y

        BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE. TO THE
         HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989

 1   Activation of Mai or Disaster Plan

     1.1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
         regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
         Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports.

     1.2 Northern General Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
         Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
         to ‘stand by’ as there was an incident with casualties at
         Hillsborough.   A further message was received at approximately 15.25
         hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the
         Northern General Hospital.   At approximately 15.27 hours the
         paediatric cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty
         from Hillsborough.   The ambulance driver stated that there had been
         a major accident at the Football Ground.

     1.3 Charge Nurse Batty at the Northern General Accident and Emergency
         Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
         prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
         instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
         call—out cascade for a major disaster.

     1.4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
         approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
         to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

     1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs B Williams, Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
         and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
         implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to
         ‘stand by’ by the police.

      1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
          Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
          Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
          casualties.

      1.7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

          At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
          Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
          Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
          from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
          monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the
          receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
          Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
          Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
          anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At


                                          1
       approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room
       and, in response to a hospital staff enquiry, confirmed that a major
       alert was in being and the hospital duty Nursing officer notified
       switchboard which commenced cascade call out for staff in accordance
       with major disaster procedure.

2   Accident and Emergency Department

    2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
        Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
        the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
        by approximately 17.30 hours.

    2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
        and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
        approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
        approximately 18.15 hours.

    Site Medical Teams

    3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
        team to attend the site at approximately 15.45 hours.    The team,
        comprising two doctors, was collected by ambulance from the
        Northern General Hospital at approximately 15.55 hours (earlier
        response was not possible because of the volume of casualties in the
        Accident and Emergency Department).   The team was sent back on
        arrival at the Ground but the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was
        retained for use at the Ground.

    3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
        a request although it had put a team on stand by, ready to respond to
        any request to attend the site of the incident.   No ambulance
        reported to collect the team.

    Patients Statistics

    4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
        Hospitals from the incident are as follows

                                            NGH         RHH             TOTAL

    Casualties brought
    to Accident & Emergency                 88          71                  159

    Dead on arrival or died in
    the Accident & Emergency                11           1

    Treated and discharged                  21          45

    Admitted                                56          25

    Admitted to ITUs (included
    in total admissions above)              19                               26

     Subsequent transfers from ITU
     (for scans and neurological care)       7 to RHH    7 from NGH

     Subsequent deaths                       2




                                        2
4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
    on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the
    Northern General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the
    Royal
    Hallamshire Hospital.

4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
    District General Hospital.

Hospital Responses

5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
    proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
    the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
    District or in the inter-face with the other emergency services can
    be made for future planning.

5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
    HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
   'HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
    QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
    staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
    others involved in the disaster.

5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles were:-

    5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
          orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at
          Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

    5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
          transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
          transfers were made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

    5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
          for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
          hospitals and to release staff for the district general
          hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.

    5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
          receive casualties if required.

    5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
          Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
          two district general hospitals.

    5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
          with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
          practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
          Hospital to take medical emergencies.

    5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
          Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
          Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
          ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
          emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
          hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until


                                 3
              9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
              confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
              Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.
                       *
6   Communications

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agencies

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
        social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.                   >

8   Conclusion

    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        offers of help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the following:-

        Sunday. 16 April :

        Mr D Blunkett MP (to Northern General Hospital)

        Archbishop of Liverpool, the
        Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
        and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

        Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
        (accompanied by Mr I Patnick MP at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

        Chair of Liverpool Council          )
        Lord Mayor of Sheffield accompanied) Sunday RoyalHallamshire Hospital
        by Councillor Clive Betts           )Monday Northern GeneralHospital
        Lord Mayor of Nottingham            )


        MOndav. 17 April;

        Liverpool Football Team

        TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales




                                    4
Tuesday. 18 April:

HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital)

The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party
accompanied by Councillor Clive Betts


Wednesday. 19 April:

The Bishop of Hallam

Nottingham Forrest Football Team


Thursday. 20 April:

Lord Justice Taylor

Chief Constable Dear, West Midlands Police


Tuesday. 25 April

Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN
                               TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989


                      Report From Trent Regional Blood Transfusion Centre


15.30            Call from Glasgow BTS with offer of help - they had seen it on TV.

15.35        Call from Dr M Greaves, Consultant Haematologist,
             Royal Hallamshire Hospital to:

                 1)   notify of disaster

             2)       request blood          20   0   Positive
                                             20   A   Positive
                                              9   O   Negative      sent at 16.00
                                              9   A   Negative
                                             10   O   FFP

15.40        Transport Officer arrives.

15.50        Switchboard Operator, Deputy Donor Organiser, extra driver arrive.

16.00        Medical Officer on-call (Dr Forman), Donor Organiser, backup
              Despatch Orderly arrives.

16.00        Call from the Northern General Hospital requesting 20 units of O
             Negative blood - sent at 16.20.

17.00        Call from Barnsley District General Hospital requesting:

                 20 0 Positive, 10 A Positive - sent at 17.15.

The Director, Chief Administrator, further Consultant Haematologist, relief
Telephonist and Donor Attendant Supervisor also attended.

4 further Donor Panel Department staff were called in to help deal with the
constant stream of ’phone calls from potential donors which continued until
— '2 2 . 0 0 .
Further offers of help from Liverpool BTS, North-East Thames BTS,
Birmingham BTS, Edinburgh BTS, Lancaster BTS and the Army Blood Supply
Depot were received.
