                                                                     TH(91>2

TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


REPORT OF THE REGIONAL GENERAL MANAGER



NEW YEAR HONOURS 1991



The 1991 New Year Honours List includes the following people associated with
the Health Service in the Trent Region.


CBE   :      MR K PUNT
             REGIONAL DIRECTOR OF FINANCE


MBE   :      MISS M COCKBURN
             SERVICES TO ST.LUKE'S HOSPICE
             SHEFFIELD


BEM   :      MR G E MORRIS
             CATERING MANAGER
             RAMPTON HOSPITAL




 JK3/46
Petitions containing 9073 signatures had been received. All
comments received had been individually acknowledged and passed to
the Secretary of State. (A 23,000 signature petition opposing the
Doncaster application had been presented before the meeting by
Martin Redmond, MP).

Comments had fallen into 3 main categories

1    Those opposed to the White Paper and the Act

2    Those on the consultation process - length, timing, lack of
     ballots etc

3    Those on the actual applications

The latter had been fully summarised.

The main comments concerned the lack of full financial
information, on which RME had also commented. Applicants had
carefully followed the Department of Health format. Independent
financial consultants had been specifically employed by DoH to
undertake assessments of the applicants. Each applicant's local
DHA had been supportive. Comments from RME had been included in
the summaries.

Late comments received between the consultation closing date (15
October) and 12 November would be passed to Secretary of State
direct.

Each applicant had been given the opportunity to change its
application in the light of comments received and Northern General
Hospital had chosen to make some amendments.

Matters relating to each of    the three applications were pursued

a)    Northern General Hospital, Sheffield

      In response to questions, the following points were
      emphasised

      i)    that the University supported the application

      ii)   that the hospital was committed to providing a local
            service as well as developing some services on a South
            Yorkshire/north of England basis

      iii) that the Region had confidence in the management
           capability of the Unit

      iv)   that the Mental Health Unit would continue to manage an
            integrated psychiatric service

      v)    that CHCs would continue to have visiting rights

      vi)   that Trust funds would be retained by the Special
            Trustees specifically for Northern General Hospital use

      vii) that the information systems would be in place tosupport
           the Trust
                                     -   3   -




                 Subject to the proviso that they had not seen the full
                 financial plans, the RHA was confident that the Northern
                 General Hospital could manage itself successfully as an NHS
                 Trust, should such status be granted by Secretary of State.

            b)   Doncaster RI/Montaqu Hospital, Mexborough

                 The main development opportunity seen by the applicants was
                 the inclusion of Montagu Hospital. The intention was to
                 improve the level of service to the local community and to
                 reverse some of the current flows to neighbouring districts.
                 The leadership of the hospital had gone to great lengths to
                 make clear their intentions and to counter claims that they
                 were "opting out of the NHS". Once again, it was expected that
                 information systems would be in place to support the Trlist.

                 Subject to the same proviso about of full financial
                 information, the RHA was confident that the units could manage
                 successfully as an NHS Trust, should such status be granted by
                 the Secretary of State.

            c)   Lincolnshire Ambulance Service

                 The applicants1 business was seen as secure in that North and
                 South Lincolnshire intended to purchase the same level of
                 service as currently for the first year. Cross boundary
                 issues within the Region had been resolved and discussions
                 with Yorkshire and East Anglian RHAs were progressing.

                  If the application were successful, the Trust would need to
                  appoint a Director of Human Resources who would need to
                  develop the pay and conditions strategy.

                  The Ambulance Service was a smaller business with less
                  management infrastructure. However, with the recent
                  appointment of a Finance Director and the selection of
                  potential non-executive members with local and expert
                  knowledge, no significant problems were foreseen.

                  Again with the proviso about full financial information, the
                  RHA were confident that the Lincolnshire Ambulance Service
                  could successfully manage as an NHS Trust, should such status
                  be granted by the Secretary of State.

FHM(90)58    THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE REGIONAL DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH 1990

             The Authority noted the Third Annual Report of the Regional
             Director of Public Health (TH(90)35) and a short presentation was
             made to Members by the Regional Director of Public Health. As in
             the two previous Annual Reports, particular aspects of the health
             of the Region's population had been studied in depth. The Annual
             Report for 1990 concentrated on "Cancer: Reasons for Change", and
             "Alcohol Misuse: a Social Problem with Medical Consequences". The
             Regional Director of Public Health also drew attention to a third
             major section "Investing for Health" which reviewed the concept of
             Public Health Management, previously discussed in the Second
             Annual Report. This concept would increase progessively in
             importance after the introduction of the Government's Reforms of
             the NHS in April 1991.
                                       _ 4 _

            Members considered the Report i*n detail and accepted the
            recommendations in principle. It was noted that implementation of
            some of the recommendations would be dependent upon resources
            available. During discussion, the Regional Director of Public
            Health agreed to include an in depth study on Smoking in Trent in
            the next Annual Report. It was also agreed that consideration
            should be given to including schools in the distribution of
            Annual Reports.

            The Authority commended the Rregional Director of Public Health
            on the production of an excellent Report and it was

                  RESOLVED THAT the third Annual Report of the Regional
                  Director of Public Health (TH(90)35) be received.

IHM(90)59   STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK FOR HEALTH PROMOTION

            Copies of the Regional Strategic Framework for Health Promotion in
            Trent (TH(90)36) had been circulated to members of the Authority,
            and this document was now considered in the light of previous
            discussion on the Annual Report of the Regional Director of Public
            Health. It was noted that the Framework had been produced as a
            structured operational document and members endorsed the main aims
            of the Framework which were to:-

            i)       Empower and support Health Authorities to improve and
                     maintain the health of their local populations.

            ii)      Ensure that Health Promotion became an integral part of
                     health services.

            iii)     Encourage co-operation with other agencies committed to
                     Health Promotion,

            iv)      Encourage all health services to adopt the principles of
                     Health for All.

            After consideration it was

                   RESOLVED THAT the Strategic Framework for Health Promotion
                   in Trent (TH(90)36) be adopted for use as an operational
                   document.

fHM(90)60   SPENDING POSITION OF HEALTH AUTHORITIES AS AT 30 SEPTEMBER 1990

            The Regional Director of Finance reported that at the end of
            September 1990 the Region as a whole was overspent by £1.9
            million, which represented 0.3% of the half year Revenue budget.
            It was predicted that all Districts in the Trent Region would be
            in balance by the end of the financial year, but present
            overspending in Units in North Derbyshire, Central
            Nottinghamshire, Nottingham and Sheffield would need to be
            carefully monitored during the remainder of this financial year.

            Spending on Capital was satisfactory at present despite underlying
            pressures and it was expected that a satisfactory year-end result
            would be possible. It was
               RESOLVED THAT the spending position of Health Authorities
               at the 30 September 1990, as set out in Report TH(90)37,
               be noted.

#1(90)61   REGIONALLY MANAGED SERVICES BUDGET REPORT - SIX MONTHS TO
           30 SEPTEMBER 1990_____________________________ ____________

           The Authority received the Regionally Managed Services Budget
           Report for the six months to 30 September 1990 (TH(90)38). The
           Regional Director of Finance drew to the attention of Members, an
           adjustment in the revenue funding for RMS in 1990/91 to take
           account of the transfer of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
           Ambulance Service to Rotherham. It was

               RESOLVED THAT the Budget Report to 30 September 1990, for
               Regionally Managed Services, (TH(90)38) be noted.

#1(90)62   REPORT ON CASH LIMIT ALL0CATGI0NS 1990/91

           The Authority received Report TH(90)39, and the Regional Director
           of Finance drew to the attention of Members the allocations to
           Southern Derbyshire, North Lincolnshire and Nottingham totalling
           £1,000,600. This additional funding had been allocated to the
           Mental Illness/Mental Handicap Services for the transfer of
           patients into more suitable accommodation. It was

               RESOLVED THAT the recurrent allocations, shown in the
               statement attached to Report TH(90)39, to District Health
               Authorities and Regionally Managed Services, totalling
               £1,109,800, the non-recurrent allocation of £1,249,600
               and the transfer from capital totalling £75,500, be approved.

11(90)63   APPOINTMENT OF HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND DENTAL STAFF

           The approval of the Chairman to the Consultant Appointments
           detailed in Report TH(90)40, was noted.

M(90)64    "HILLSBOROUGH" - THE LESSONS FOR HEALTH CARE: RECOMMENDATIONS OF
           A JOINT SYMPOSIUM TRENT/MERSEY REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITIES.

           The Authority received the Report "Hillsborough: the Lessons for
           Health Care" (TH(90)41) which had been produced after the Joint
           Symposium held in June 1990, organised by the Trent and Mersey
           RHAs. Following after the Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster
           the Symposium had included staff from a wide range of Health Care
           Services and who had direct experience and a part to play in the
           provision of Health Care in both the immediate acute phase and the
           psychological aftermath of the disaster. The aims of the
           Symposium had been to:-

           a) Enable NHS experience to be shared

           b) Highlight lessons learnt

           c) Produce a report and recommendations to the two Regional
              Health Authorities
                                        -   6   -




            It was stressed that Report TH(90)41 centred on the aftermath of
            the Disaster, particularly in relation to support and counselling
            for relatives and the bereaved. During discussion, the view was
            expressed that debriefing of staff, patients and relatives, who
            might be suffering from stress and be in need of specific support,
            should be undertaken as a matter of routine following a major
            disaster.

            The General Recommendations set out on Page 28 of the Report were
            specifically noted. It was

                 RESOLVED THAT Report TH(90)41 should be adopted by the
                 Authority, and given wide circulation both within and
                 and outside the Region.

HM(90)65    "BALANCE": FOURTH PROGRESS REPORT

            The Authority received and noted "Balance" the Fourth Progress
            Report noting progress made in Trent in relation to the Achieving
            a Balance: Plan for Action Initiative (TH(90)42)

HM(90)66    COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCIL ANNUAL REPORTS 1989/90

            The Authority received and noted following Community Health
            Council Annual Reports for 1989/90:-

            a) Leicestershire CHC

            b) Central Nottinghamshire CHC

            c) Southern Derbyshire CHC

            d) Sheffield CHC

THM(90)67   NAHAT AGM/CONFERENCE 1991

            Members received details of the NAHAT/AGM Conference to be held in
            Bournemouth on 26-28 June 1991, and noted that during the
            Conference, instead of discussing Motions from Member Authorities,
            NAHAT would be inviting Health Authorities to submit examples of
            new initiatives taken in the implementation of the NHS reforms
            (TH(90)44).

            After discussion it was

                 RESOLVED THAT the following should represent the
                 Authority at the NAHAT AGM/Conference 1991:-

            1)   Mrs P.B.Wildgoose - RHA Member

            2)   Mr.F.J.Kenny - Secretary to the Authority-..




                           ---
                                                                Chairman
JK3/40

                                 Date
