                   CRUSH BARRIER STRENGTHS /..'IP SPASIKG5

1.0    Ilh'RODUCTION

Until recently there was little guidance available on tho strengths and

spacings suitable for crush barriers used on football terraces.       The only-

problem in the design of barriers was often seen as that of ensuring they

did not collapse under crowd pressures.       Uhile it is of paramount importance

that collapso does not occur, it is also                ^

cannot be generated so as to cause injury particularly to those spectators

pressed against the barrier.

1.1    The supporting evidence for the spacing and strength of crush barriers

recommended in the Wieatley Report is given below.       In brief, the

determination of the pressure that can be generated on a terrace is explained,

a distinction being made between the levels of pressure that can be

generated in "peak viewing areas" e.g. behind penalty bores, and in "other

viewing areas"; a figure is obtained for the pressure that can be generated per

man (or alternatively per foot.width of barrier per foot spacing as a

function of slope);       and measurements of the pressures that can be

tolerated by the human body when pressed against a barrier are described.

Other supporting evidence is also mentioned.

1.2.   It is assumed that only on rare pccasions will all the spectators

between 2 consecutive barriers up a slope contribute simultaneously to

crowd pressures.       When this "maximum pressure" does occur it causes grave

discomfort but, owing to its transient nature, is unlikely to cause injury.

It is a&oiiEsd that the pressures which occur frequently wili be generated

by half of these spectators and, for the purpose of this paper, this

frequently generated pressure is called the "tolerable pressure".         The

recommended barrier spacing is based on it, the actual rf-istAnr.g rgpnirmoniiaii

between barriers being the standing room required by twice the number of

spectators who exert the tolerable pressure.       It is also assumed that each

spectator occupies an area of 2 square feet, standing on a step of 14" depth
                    and exerting his pressure over 21" of barrier.           Two series of spacings
                                                    *
                    are given each of which is based on a different level of tolerance to

                    crowd pressure;         one level of tolerance is for safety only and the other   m

                    for safety plus comfort, these being 500 lbf per person (or 170 lbf per

                    foot width) and 200 lbf per^person (or 115 1bf per foot width)

                     respectively.

                     1.5    Since the collapse of-a barrier could lead to an incident escalating'

                     in severity, the barriers should withstand the greatest pressure ever

                     likely to be exerted on them.          Accordingly the recommended barrier

                     strengths are based on the "maximum pressure" i.e. that pressure which
  O n




                     could be generated by all the spectators vho could be involved.          Using
  '




I^O             ua)y "the tolerable pressures quoted in paragraph 1.2, the desired barrier

                     strengths are 340 lbf per foot width and 230 lbf per foot width for the

                     2 levels of tolerance.             Should the barrier spacing be less than the

                    maximum recommended, the barrier strength may be reduced proportionately

                     provided none is less than 206lbf por foot width.           (This is the value

                     quoted in the British Standards Code of Practice for barriers in

                    buildings).


                     2.0    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

                            Research commissioned by Wheatley Inquiry

                             (i)   Measurements of required strength of crush barriers on terraces
                                                           x
                                   Home Office

                           (ii)    Tests to determine the forces tolerated by people when against

                                   crush barriers - Department of Bio mechanics, University of

                                   Surrey

                       (iii)       Measurements of crowd pressures generated at Liverpool Football

                                   Club ground - Bingham Blades, & Partners, Consulting Structural

                                   Engineers 1972

                           (iv)    Literature search for levels of force/pressure at which injury

                                   occurs - Home Office.

                                                “            2



        «
            0
                     Other Research

                      (v)   Measurements of required strength of crowd barriers (horizontal

                            only) - Ministry of Public Buildings and Works 1948
                                                                                                 '- 4


                     (vi)   Measurements of crowd pressures generated at Everton Football

                            Club ground - Bingham Blades & Partners 197'*

                    (rii)   Strength tests on crush barriers at a football club ground

                            Kingston Polytechnic 1971.


              3.0   MEASUREMENTS'- OF CROUD PRESSURES THAT CAN BE GENERATED

              Measurements were made by the Home Office of the pressure that could be

              generated on the terraces during a match,        (reference paragraph 2.0).

              Thirty police cadets were used to simulate spectators. Two levels of
                v
              force were defined - (a) 'lean1, corresponding to spectators bearing on

              one another but exerting no additional force, and (b) 'push1, as 'lean'

              but with the crowd exerting an additional force in order to see, but not

              pushing aggressively.     The cadets in varying numbers of rows were asked to

              'push' or 'lean' against a well padded test barrier attached to an existing

              crush barrier at a football ground.        The forces were measured using

              pressure gauges.     The experiments were carried out on 3 slopes of 0°, 15°»

              and 23r°.     It was considered that condition (b) 'push' corresponded

              to the state of the crowd in the "peak viewing areas" of the terraces

               and that condition (a) 'lean' corresponded to the other areas.        Pressures

              of up to about 300 lbf per person were tolerated with some discomfort

              by the cadets for a few seconds.     Signs of considerable discomfort were

              shown for longer periods of time or for greater praganrpa,

              3.1                           It was assumed that the force propagated do>m a slope

\             2 components:      (i) the force measured with a slope of 0°, and (ii) a

             . component proportional to the weight of the spectator and the size of

              the slope angle.    The following relationship was found to hold for the

              force per spectator.



                                            -JL


    a-
         P
             P slope      =        Po + 84 sin Q
                                   -   f.                                 1                '


       where P slope is force in lbfper             spectator             \
                                                                              '   -   "      ii°
              Q is angle to horizontal of the slope                       r,
                                                                          ^               rI—
                                                                                            lT -^

              Po is the force per spectator when Q              =    0°                   o'
       and    Po (push)       =     40 lbf and   Po (lean)   =      21 lbf.                         \

       However as the police cadets were abore average weight, a normalising
                              «

       factor is needed and the relationship becones:

              P slope     =       Po + 73.5*sin Q

       where Po (push)        =     35.5 lbf and Po (lean)      =    18.5 lbf.

<;•    For exanple, using this relationship it can be calculated that 9 rows

       of spectators all pushing on a 14° terrace will press the foresost

      ^.spectator against the barrier with a force of^'80 lbf>(or 274 lbf per

       foot width of barrier).

       3.2   The values for Q = 0° were in agreement with siailar ceasurekents

       Bade in 1948 by the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works (reference

       paragraph   2.0 (v)).           The force as a function of slepe was not

       measured on that occasion.

       4.0   MEASUREMENTS OF CROWD PRESSURES ACTUALLY GENERATED

       Measurements were nade at 2 football matches of the forces actually

       eierted on a barrier.            The measurements using calibrated strain gauges

       were made at 2 different grounds on barriers situated behind the

       penalty box (reference paragraph 2.0 (iii) and (vi)),

       4.1   Match A.     Barrier spacing behind the test barrier varied froa

      13' to 25' and the terrace slope was 14° (1:4).                 Forces of 100 to

       200 lbf per foot width of barrier were aeasured with occasional

       peaks to 300 lbf per foot width.             The forces did not ezceed 200 lbf per

       foot width for 3 or more seconds.

             Match B    Barrier spacing varied fron 13.5' "to 26' and the terrace

       slope was 14°.         Forces of 100 to over 200 lbf per foot width were

       measured with occasional values of 300 lbf per foot width.
 4.2    Neither match was'crucial nor particularly exciting.                      At the

 second match there were 14 casualties including a man with a

 fractured leg and a boy with concussion.                Two experienced plain­

 clothes men who were stationed in the crowd stated that apprehension                                      1_
                           '~ * _ y .   »   .                       ’__________________________________"


 and fear were generated'ty crowd morements and pressure, and that scne

  spectators stood back and braced thenselres against the crowd pressure

 with one foot on the barrier.


  5.0   MEASUREMENTS ON HUMAN TOLERANCE TO CROWD PRESSURES

 A series of measurements were made cn men and women to determine

  the maximum pressure which could be tolerated by a person when

^--pressed against a crush barrier.              Each person while standing was

  pressed against a steel tube located horizontally against various

  positions in turn on his trunk.               The pressure was applied tc him by

 means of a pack frame on his back with various weights which forced

  him on to the barrier.        Three subjective levels of discomfort were

  defined and each person was asked to say when they were reached.

  In particular the third level of discomfort was defined as that which

  became intolerable after a few seconds.

  For men (42 subjects) the height ef the barrier rail at which maxisun

 ■force could be tolerated was found to be 41 '5JI» which corresponds well

  with the usual barrier height of 42".                The mean value of this force

  for men when passive was found to be 107 lbf and when they were

  allowed to resist by pushing against the barrier was 179 lbf (with

  a range of 98 to 233 lbf).                For the passive tests the force tolerated

  was increased by a third to 140 lbf by substituting a 4" wide plank

  for the steel tube.   The values in respect of women were considerably

  lower.
  5.1   It is felt that although the above results give an order of

  magnitude of the tolerable force, the following comments could be made.
       (i)    The asriaum force tolerate.! was clearly not at the threshold
                          r /
              of injury.

      (ii)    Although the force was defined as being intolerable after a

             I few seconds, periods of surging and pushing in a crovrd on a

              terrace may be’BOge_-transient, and for these very short

              periods greater forces can apparently be tolerated.

  (iii)       Persons with lower leTels of tolerance nay well be protected

              by their stronger •companions.


6.0    MEASUREMENTS OF BARRIER STRENGTH AT A FOOTBALL GROUND

A nunber of measurements were *ade of the strength of existing crush
                      r>
barriers at a London Football Club (reference paragraph 2.0 (vii)).

In particular, tests were made on barriers in the seme area and siailar

t© a barrier which had collapsed during a Batch.        Three similar

barriers failed at pressures of 260, 290 and 300 lbf per foot width.

The distance to the next barrier aboTe the collapsed barrier varied

from 10' to 22'.

6.1     The consulting engineers recommended that crush barriers should

be designed and checked to a significantly higher loading than 200 Ilf

per foot width, and that no spacing between barriers should be greater

than 12' and should be less on steep terraces.        They also recommended

that for design.purposes there was need to determine the lead which
                                     ’X


people can exert on barriers and the naxiicum pressure which the human

body can bear without injury.

7.0     OTHER MEDICAL EVIDENCE FOR TEE LEVEL OF FORCE/PRESSURE AT WHICH

        INJURY OCCURS.

A search in medical papers for evidence ef the level of pressure ct

which injury occurs to the human body was undertaken by a Home

Office doctor (reference paragraph 2.0 (ir)).

7.1     Among the infoicaticn brought to notice by this search were

2 cases of traumatic asphyxia where the pressures (as calculated by the
weight of the objects causing the pressures)differed to a marked

extent.     In the first case the pressure vas 1400 pounds for a period
                                                                              9

of 15 seconds, and in the, second case 300 pounds for scce 4 to 6

minutes.    The reason for the difference in the pressures reported in

these cases nay be due to the 1400 pounds being far in excess of the

riniwun required to cause the fatality.     Certainly the aaount and

duration of the pressure in the second case vere similar to those

reported at the Bolton Ytenderers accident in 1946 where layers of       3 or ■

4 bodies vere sufficient to cause death by traumatic asphyxia.

This evidence does indicate     that if a barrier should collapse and people

are piled on top of each other even for only a short tire, traumatic

asphyxia is a definite hazard.

7.2    The search disclosed no other information about injury to the

body due to static forces, but did reveal that as far as dynamic forces

are concerned the liver can be injured by impacts of 3-5 mph.     There

was also brought to notice that bone finds increased strength when

subjected to a dynamic as opposed to a static loading:     this nay be

the reason why larger forces of a transient nature, can be tolerated.


8.    RECOMMENDED BARRIER STRENGTHS AND SPACINGS

Spectators can be safeguarded.against injury from crowd pressures by

the careful positioning of crush barriers of suitable design.     The

barriers should never collapse under pressure and should be spaced

to limit the number of spectators between 2 barriers so that their

combined pressures can never be sufficient to cause injury.     For

financial reasons there is need to determine the minimum adeauate

strength and the maximum acceptable spacing of barriers for this

purpose.      The following summary of the infomaticn presented earlier

in. this   paper provides the basis for the recoemendaticns which hare

been made in this regard.
8.1   The pressures which can be generated by spectators when they

'lean' or 'push' on a terrace hare been measured (see paragraph 3).

For a 14° slope the 'lean' force per person was calculated to be

36 lbf (or 20 lbf per foot width of barrier) and the 'push' to be

5 3 lbf (or 30 lbf per fo^jt^ridth).

8.2   Pressures measured on 14° slopes during 2 matches (see paragraph 4 )

were of the same order of magnitude, being 200 lbf per foot width cs

a regular occurrence for periods longer than 3 seconds, and with

occasional   peaks of 300 lbf per foot width.   Although it was

unlikely that all spectators were involved in exerting these pressures -

the catches were not considered to be exciting - the pressure that

could have been exerted byeach of the persons in the 12 to 22 rows

behind the barriers ranged from 17 to 9 lbf per fcotwidth (and 27

to 14 lbf during the occasional peaks).     These figures are certainly

of the same order of magnitude as those in paragraph 8.1).

8.3   Further support to these figures is given by the deduced pressure

of 260 to 300 lbf per foot width at which a barrier collapsed (see

paragraph 6).   There were 9 to 19 rows of spectators behind the

barrier and so the 260 represents a pressure per person of 29 to

14 lbf per foot width and the 300 a pressure of 33 to 16 lbf per foot

vidth.

8.4   It is felt that the measurements mentioned in paragraph 8.1 are

reasonable for calculating the maximum pressure that could be generated

between 2 consecutive barriers up a terrace slope.    Furthermore, the

•push' values should be used for 'peak viewing' areas and the 'lean'

values for other areas.

8.5   The measurements by the University of Surrey of pressures

tolerated by the human body are surprisingly low'(see paragraph 5);

the mean figure for men being 107 lbf when passive and 179 lbf when

resisting by pushing against the barrier.    These figures are lower
than the pressures of 200 lbf per foot width, with peaks to 300, which

were recorded at a match (see paragraph 4);   but these pressures say

have been exerted for shorter periods, and they did generate fear (and
                         •~ 3 . —   •   •             .
some injuries were in faci- reported ofi that occasion;.   The Surrey

figures are also lower than the pressures of 300 lbf per person

tolerated by police cadets (see paragraph 3) but in that case the

barrier was well padded and .the cadets may have been prepared to

tolerate more in the company of their colleagues.

8.6.    Given the supporting evidence of paragraph 8.5, it is reasonable

to use a figure of 200 lbf per person (or 115 lbf per foot width) as

the tolerable pressure for comfort and safety, and a figure of 300 lbf

per person (or 170 lbf per foot width) as the tolerable pressure for

safety only.

8.7    As mentioned in paragraphs 1.2 and 1.3 the "tclerable pressure" is

half the "maximum pressure" and so the recommended minimum strengths

for barriers are 230 and 340 lbf per foot width when the barriers are

spaced for "comfort and safety" and for "safety only" respectively.

Should the space between 2 barriers be less than the maximum

recommended, the strength of the front barrier may be reduced in

proportion provided that none is less than 206 lbf per foot width.




Borne Office

March 1973.




                              9
