D.O.B. 14.1.51.

D.Q.S. 15.5.89.

TAKEN BYGT/LJ/

FILE NO 88/16318



I travelled with friends to Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A.Challef

Cup between Liverpool — v — Nottingham Forest.



ffe left Warrington at 10.30a.m. on that morning in a hired car and arrived at

Sheffield at 13.05.



We walked straight up to the ground and arrived at the ground at 13.30hrs.



We stood on a bridge waiting for a crowd to subside for about half an hour until

we were moved by a mounted policeman who approached us and told us to go     the ,

ground.



We walked up to the ground and queried Up outside the B turn -stiles for about

30 minutes until the police opened the gate on the right of the turn stiles;



The crowd poured threw the gates and I was forced through the tunnel, and left onto

the Terraces       just behind the barrior.



The following serges in the crowd forced me to the bottom left of the enclosure

and up against the fence.



I climbed up and over the fence onto the next section and perched on the fence

oulling people out of the crush. My friend also clintoed out and got onto the

pitch.



T "I imbed onto the p itc h and started to help the injured people.   One lad I sat

w ith for 10 minutes or so who was injured and distressed.   Soon afterwards my friei
2 ..............




approached with a hoarding and helped me to carry him to the ambulance.



I then used the same hoarding to ferry a nuiber of injured people to the mpdical

services.   My friend and I want back to the enclosure were my friend was on his back

with his face covered, I approached him but I was told by the policeman to leave him

that he Was dead.



ffe Jaut him on a hoarding and carried him to the Gym under the stands.   I then wondeS$

about in a daze because of the shock that I had seen.



At one point I walked over to a camera man and showed him my ticket to prove that it

hadn't been checked and my family told me that they saw me on the television that

evening.



Once I had found niy friend after about 20 minutes we then made our way outof the grour

towards the car, and on the way a wxnan let us used her telephone to ring home and let

the family no that I was ok.



I got to the car about 17.30hrs and arrived home at about 8.00 O'clock that evening. 3

want into work on the Monday on 17th APril 1989, and tried to return to a normal life.



Hcwaver, on the Wednesday morning after the reports on the radio that there were peopl

looting bodies I broke dcwn and I was sent to the Works Medical Department.



The Works nurse and the Safety Officer then came to calm me down and took me off my

job and put me cm a lighter one.



On returning home that evening after telling my wife what had happened she rang the

help line number and a social worker came out to see me.



He w >; very helpful and understanding and I am still seeing him once or twice a week.
3



The following Friday a forthnight after the natch I went to see my G.P. viio is

                                       , who prescribed tranqulisers to me because

I couldn't sleep and my stanach was bad.



I ^l<=m wish to add that since this incident I have terrible headaches and without

tranqulisers I   find it very difficult to sleep.
STATEMENT 01

HOME ADDRESS

D.O.B.     25.07.65

D.O.S.     02.05.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE:                    /GT/PS




to Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I travelled with some friends to

Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



We arrived at Sheffield a couple of hundred yards from the ground at

about 12.15 pm.       My friends decided that they would like to go and have

a couple of pints but as I do not drink I chose to go up to the ground

and obtain the match programs.



On arrival at the ground I found that I could not purchase any programs

so I walked further around the edge of the ground to see if there were

any sellers there.       Unfortunately I could not find any so I approached

a group of supporter's and asked them if they knew where I could obtain

some of these programs.       One of the lads told me that he had been up

to the football ground and been allowed in through the turn—stiles to

purchase a programm and he had them retunned outy he couldn't believe

how lax the security of the ground was.



I walked around the ground for a while and eventually went into the

ground through the tunnstiles this was about 14.10 hours.



Once inside the ground I made my way throught the tunnel into enclosure

'B* Leppings Lane where I had arranged prior to the match to meet my

friends.    I walked down into the ground up to about 5 foot from the

front fence and stood waiting for my friends to arrive and the match

to start.
At about 14.58 hours there was a teemendous surge forward and I

was pinned against the front by the ensuing crush.   Everybody seemed

to be pleading with the police to help but the police were telling

us to push back.



The crush was tremendous and the girl who was infront of me was

pinned to the fence I heard the policeman who was observing this

say "ITS NO GOOD DON'T BOTHER SHES GONE*'.



I eventually clambered over the bodies st ewn around until I reached

up and scaled the spiked fence whereupon I collr sed onto the pitch.



Once I got onto the pitch I was crying and walking around not believing

the sites I had Just seen or the crush I had just been in.



A group of Stewards walked over to me and asked me "WHAT HAS HAPPENED".

I couldn't believe this and just walked away.



The stewards appeared not to realise the seriousness of the disaster

and appeared totally bewildered.



As I walked around the ground I prayed that it was thanks to got that
                                           for
I had been released from the crush and also the people who I had

realised were already dead.



Eventually I sat down and watched a supporter telling the police what

to do.   The supporter was teariitg down the advertising boards and using

them as stretchers to ferry the fans over to the medical services.   At

this point I was in shock when my other friend came over after spotting

me on the pitch and sat talking to me for a shile.



We eventually left the ground at about half past four and made our way

to the car.   This took me about 40 minutes as the car was a good distance

from the ground.
                          , • -3-




On arrival at the car we tried to telephone by the public telephones

that where situated by the car park but unfortunately the queues

were too large and this couldn't be done.



Eventually we decided to climb into the cars and go home hoping that

we could telephone our families and friends on the way home.



Ve arrived back at about 9 o'clock that evening and 1 m s in a

terrible state and infact had to keep the car window home all the

way home as 1 was sick.    By the time 1 arri ed home my mother was

watching the television and 1 observed myself climbing over the fence

and onto the pitch.



Since the incident I find that I cannot sleep and I have since differed

intense headaches I thought I would o.k. but had to attend at my doctor's

1                          Blackpool on Thursday 27th April 1989.
P.O.B. 28.10.51.

D.O.S. 9.5.89.

TftKEM m GT/LJ/

FILE NO 88/16300/lHillsbogouqh



On Saturday naming 35th April 1989, I travelled with friends with Barnes Travel

to Sheffield to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cap final between

Liverpool - v - Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Ground.



m   left Liverpool at appttoodnately 11.15a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at about

13.45.



On arrival we went for acne chips and walked up to the ground immediately.



On arrival at the ground at an&xa±naibely 14.25 we entered to the main fence and

the ground outside was quite heavy.   By the tine we got to the tum-stiled the

ground was unbelieveable and at one point they even at to pull a girl out of the

way of a police hearse to step her being trarapled on.



Whan we eventually $ot to the turn~stiles at about 14.45 after being shuffed and

crushed we went intthrcugh the tunnel and notice that there was no movement whatsoev

in the ground.    All X could hear was screens shouts, so we forced our way backwards

and into the left enclosure just adjacent to the tunnel.



At this tine all we had do was watch the mayhem in enclosure B foam our position

in enclosuee A.



lie would hear the screams and bodies being carried out it was an absolute carnage

113 had to stay and watch what was happening feeling total ill and very shocked.



Eventually, we left the ground at about 16.30 hrs after the aitoulanoes had cleared

and by the tine.
we got to a telephone at X7.00tirs ay wife was absolutely hysterical-     She had bean

running arcund to friends houses to see if 1 had telephoned and was in fear for ay

life.



After telephoning, we walked back to the m m & i to wait half an hour so fcr a couple

of people who had not turned vp.



(to the way bade everyone was In tears and w@ were all very distressed.    V   was a

terrible journey home.



We arrived back in Liverpool at approximately 20.45hrs and I went straight home.

X wished to add that X have been in a distressed and shocked state since this match

and even mtching the television upsets me.      I did not go to the Doctors as I though

of all the people who had died that day and I didn't want to bother the Doctors

feeling that ny own case was trival.



I wafe badly bruised and I am still in shock.
D.O *1. 16.5.89.

D.O.B. 5.2.70.

TftKEN BMGT/LJ/

FILE NO 88/163217hillsbarough



On 15th April 1989, I had travelled with my friends by hired car to Hillsborough

to watch the sM»-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup final between Liverpool - v -

Nottingham Forest .



We left Livecpoool at 11.00a.m. that mornii*^ and arrived just before 13.00hrs at

Hillsborough.



Outside there was lots of people around in no organised foenn and so there appeared

no form of queuing.



I was eventually allowed into the ground at about 14.55hrs just about the time

that they opened the gates the police and the crush forced me forward through the

tunnel and into the enclosure.



At this time I was about 10 -12 foot from the fench infact ay photograph appeared

an the Daily Mirror on Monday 17th APrii 1989.



With in a minute or so I had been forced further towards the front and I was unable

to breath.



1 was very nearly unconscious whan a lad picfced me up and passed me over a fench

ware mother lad mid a policeman had me out end onto the pitch.



I lay on the pitch trying to get ay breath mtila     ooqple of people came aver and

got me to sit vp and put ny head between my knees.
    . #

2 .. ... ............



After a while 1 felt as tjtough I could walk so I stood up and looked around for a

v*ile looking around far friends, 1 did this for about an hour.



I could see bodies being carried out and saw people trying to resusitate people but

with no look.



I eventually found aiy friend and because we could take no more we left the football

ground at about 16.3Qhrs once the itobulanoes and medical staff cleared.



Me want back to the car and travelled hone arriving in Liverpool at about 19.0QErs

were I went straight home aid straight to bee.



All that night I kept on waking qa because of nightmares and I didn't sleep very well



On Sunday mornign I awoke and sat around the house in adaze and   tried toread the

papers.     But I felt constantly vpset and unable to eat.



On the Monday morning I went into work to try and get things out of ray mind the

instants that had happened on the Saturday.



Both of soy friends pointed out to me my photograph in the Daily Mirror and this

made me feel ill.



Since the above event I have not been able to sleep at all, or felt like going to

work however, I attmepted to continue ray routine, but because of my state of mind

I was late on a number of occasions for wo



On 20th April 1999, I received a letter fran my Employer stating that my time

keeping had to improve or I would risk loosing ray job.



1 was still in a bad state of mind mid could not make any effort toinpocve this

so subsequently a received a further warning letter of 28th APril 1989, that

stated if 1 was late once more I would be dismissed.
                                    \




3.....™*..*.



On 5th Hay 1989, my toss told me that I had been laid off and that I know I would

not have been for nay latest - poor time keeping.



My Solicitor has advised me to go and see my Dr, who is \

                     pnd I have an ap|»intia@nt on 17th May 1989, to do this.
         \




 D .O.B. 22/8/72

 Home Telephone No.

 P.O.S. 3/5/89




 I_was present at the Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday 15th April

 1989.




 I   travelled down to Sheffield for the weekend in another friends friends

car.




We arrived at SheffieH at about 1.20 p.m.     We parked up in the car and

went to a nearby pub and remained there until about 2.10 p.m.      I had

two pints of bitter.    I had had noting to drink in the car on the

way down we just had a quick drink because we were a bit early for

the match.




We then continued from the public house in the car and parked up about

a 5 minute walk to the ground.    We walked to the ground arriving there

about 2.30 p.m.    As we approached we could see that there was a crowd

     PeoPl6 outside the turn styles.   We made our way slowley forward

until we passed two mounted Police Officers.      We then got caught up

in the crush outside the ground and gradually we were pushed in the

direction of the turn styles.



We had not got to the turn styles by 2.40 p.m. and we were getting

pushed to the right away from the turn styles due to the pressure

of the crowd.    I was abit worried about this.   I would say that it

was very uncomfortable outside and I thought that the people up

against the turn styles might be in some danger because they were

being pushed up against the wall by the pressure of the crowd.     I

was further back and had people all around me so although it was
 2




 uncomfortable I would not have said at this stage that it was directly

 dangerous.




 As I say about 2.40 p.m. I noticed that a door into the ground was being

 opened.   I noticed the door and at the time I saw the door being opened

 it was almost fully opened and I pointed this out to my friend and we could

 see that people were running into the Stadium through the open door.         Hie

 door was quite close to where we were in the ground I would say about 15

 feet away.   We then managed to make our way towards the door and walked

 quickley into the ground.   We did not run.   We found ourselves in the

courtyard behind the turn styles and then made our way through the

underground tunnel into the standing area.     We must have arrived in the stand

about 2.45 p.m.   I would say that conditions were already crowded when we arrive^

there. We were pushed forward by the pressure of the crowd behind us and pushed

slightly to the right so we ended up to the right of the rear of the goal           We

managed to duck under a barrier and I would say that we ended up in a position

about 6 ft from the safety fence at the front of the standing area.        I do

not know how it was that we came to be pushed over to the right, but looking

back on it this was obviously what saved us     from grave injury.



I was already feeling apprehensive because I     was aware* not only of the

pressure in the stands, whioch already existed, but also had in the back

of my mind the whole time the large number of people who were still

outside the ground waiting to get in.



By this time, the crush in the standing area     was worse then anything

that I have ever experienced in any other match that I have been to.



However I put these feelings down to the fact that I was in a strange ground

that I had never been to before and away from home and tried to dismiss

■my fears from my mind.



I remember the teams coming out onto the field.
When the teams came out and started kicking the ball about, I remember having

a strange feeling.   Some of the lads around me were singing.        I think I was

singing   but it was a half hearted feeling.    It wasa strange      feeling and I

cannot describe it but I have not asked my friends about this.



At 3.00 p.m. the Wistle blew for the match to begin.



Almost immediately I felt a tremendous pressure on my ribs, and I was

struggling to breath.    I am used to pressure in the standing,      area in other

matches but this pressure does not usually last very long.        This pressure

was different it did not seem to go away.



I remember thinking to myself that I was not enjoying the match as I should

be.



Something happened to my vision, I could see the players and then I could

only see a red blur moving across my eyes.     My vision must have cleared

because I remember seeing a uniformed Police Officer walk by on the other

side of the fence.   I heard people to myleft, shouting out to him that

there were people dying.    He glanced over towards them but did not

stop but carried on walking.    Although at matches, usually in the crowd

there is a lot of movement backwards and forwards that did not happen here

everyone was standing rigid because they were all being crushed together.



When the pressure came on, I was with my two friends one of them is

6ft 4 ins tall but another of my friends is even smaller than I am.

Because of the pressure from the crowd my arm        was around my        friends back

and around the back of     his neck.   I could see   thathis facegradually began

to turn red and that he was uncomfortable because of my arm around him.

I tried to move my arm     but I absolutely could    not. I could not move any

pa»i of my body, I wasabsolutely locked in by the       pressure on me.



I turned to my tall friend and said to him 1          FOR GODS SAKE HELP ME".        He
                                                                             I




    4...,




    knew he could not; move either but said that he would and tried to give me a little

    encouragement.



    I remember seeing two lads who had got over the fence and they had managed

    to get   out and had climbed up the inside of the fence that is on the pitch

    side.    They were on the top of the fence and they were pleading with the crowd

    to push back and they crowd were screaming at them to push back and I could

    see hands clasped as though they were in prayer.    They were jointed by a

    uniformed Officer but I did not really see him doing anything to help.



    One of the lads on the fence managged to reach down into the crcwd and took

    hold of my friend Steve and tried with all his strength to pull him up

    but could not do so.    I remember seeing the camera man taking photos

    through the fence and wondering why they were taking photos when I

    was thinking that I was about to die.



    This feeling persisted for what seemed at least 10 minutes but I cannot

    be sure everyting is very disjointed.    I am not sure if a barrier collapsed

    or what it was but I remember seeing a pile of dead people at my feet.       The

    pile seemed to me to be about 4ft - 5ft in height and I even to this day

    I can clearly see the colour of the shirts and the colour"of the hair of

    some of the people in this group.    I realised only too well that they were

    all dead.     It seemed to me that I was pushed up or got up onto this pile

    of people in order to get up to the fence. I think my friend        must
                  a
    have given me/hand because I had to shin up the fence in some way to get

    to the top.    I managed to get over the top, but then my shirt and jeans

    caught in the fence and I was trapped.    Someone took hold of me I think

    it was a Policeman arid he kept trying to pull me off the fence and I kept

    shouting "MY JEANS, MY JEANS".    He must have thought that I was worried about



!
my jeans but all I meant was that I was caught up by my Jeans.         He said

"FUCK YOUR JEANS" and by pulling on me managed to get me off the fence as my

clothing     ripped.   I was now down on the ground and stumbled forward onto

the pitch.     I was in a daze.   I was stumbling around.     I remember trying

to catch my breath someone said "LIE ON THE GROUND".         I lay on the ground

a I could feel myself struggling to breath trying to take big gulps of air

into my lungs.     I was conscious of the fact that my ribs hurt.      I took

five or six breaths and got back onto my feel I was         acutely aware of my

friends and started screaming "MY MATES ARE DEAD, MY MATES ARE DEAD" because

I believed that they were still inside the fence.       It was then that I saw

my smaller friend and rushed over to him and said'WHERE IS               and he

said "HE IS ALRIGHT HE IS OVER THSRE.HELPING".    My friend and I decided that

we would go to help.      life ran across the pitch we came to the Police line

across the pitch and a Police Officer asked us where we were going and we

said that we were going to help and he let us through.        We ran to the far

side of the pitch where we saw a uniformed Officer tearing down the

hordings to use as stretchers. He      gave us one and this must have been

when I cut my right arm just about the wri&t although i did not notice

this at the time.      life aran back across the pitch with the hording and

put this down and someone was placed on it and then someone else took

this away.    We sat down on the pitch then and I could not* believe that

I was on the pitch 1 was very confused and Iknow that the pitch is

restricted and could not quite understand how I got there.



We then saw all the hordings being piled up and throught'that there must

have been no more use for them.      We could not believe what had happened.



By this time we were walking around the ground, sitting down for a while

and then getting up and walking around again.       This went for about 30 mins

and wo remembered the two men who had been with us in the car.         They had

stand tickets by this I mean they had tickets for seats we tried to find

them and eventually saw them and made our way up to them.         They did not

seem to understand what had happened, and explained to them we thought
 someone had been killed and I remember them looking close into our faces.




Eventually we managed to make our way back to the car and set off for

Liverpool and put the car radio on and tuned into the news station and

firstly we heard that 5 or 10 people had been presumed killed and then

20 and then 40 and by the time we got to liverpool they were saying 70 .



Everytime that we heard the next number given over the radio it was like

a physical blow to us.




As far as my own injuries are concerned I had some bruising to my right

side of the chest and also a small cut on the inside of my right arm which

did not. need stitching.   Whenever I look down to my left, I can see very

clearly the pile of bodies that I saw there.    The whole incident and is

still very much on my mind.    I often lie awake in bed thinking about it.



I told my friend______ the tall one a couple of days after and asked him

why he appeared much calmer than we had in the Stadium after the incident

and why he still appeared to be much calmer and he said   that he had never

thought that he was going to die.   That is the difference between           and

me but I truely believed that I was going to die.
D.O.B. 9.1.70

D.O.S. 4.5.89.

TOKEN m   GT/LJ/

FILE N0Q68/16240



On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I travelled with same friends by car down

to Sheffield to Hillsbrough Ground to watch the said final between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest.



We left Liverpool at about 11.30a.m. in the morning and arrived by the ground at

about quater past 3.00.



We walked up to the ground and arrived at the ground at 14.30 there was quite a

few people there but we got in through the turn stiles.



Me walked into the ground threw the tunnel and we made our way to the front of

the standing area aid about 5 foot away from the fench.



In fact ray picture was in the Daily Mirror an Monday 17th April.    Me stood there

for a while until about 3.00 O'clock when the Match kicked off.     All of a sudden

there was a serge forward but unlike a normal natch the crush did not subside



A douple of lads in front of me climbed over the fench were on the police pushed

these two lads straight back into the gatoedsand back into the ground landing on

their heacte of the people who were already being crushed.



The crush carried on and police then deftMed that it was deadly serious so they

qpened the gates until the police allowed people to get out onto the pitch to

escape at this point X was still being crusted and two men tried to pull me

out but unfortunately X was trapped against a cocple osf other people in faoont

of me.



X couldftt apeak or hBBtWi became of the crush and X felt faint.
'       •
2


At about 10 xniraites later the grcwd started to ease off and I regained ray breath.



tty brother who m m in front of me clinbed over the fench and looked to see if 1 was

lie.



The next thing that X knew X was dragged back by semeenf the supporters who were

behind me over the bodies and towards the back after seeing all the people idho were

crushed bodies lying all around the ground and dii&eover the fench into the next

pen.



X climbed out onto the pitch threw the enclosure ofi the left hand side and sat d a m

on the pitch crying.



X must have sat there about half an hour before finding my friends and leaving the

football ground.



We left the ground at about 4.30p.m. and made our way backfcto the car and because <shee

queues were so great outside the *ocal telephones we decided to use the telephones

    situated at the service stations on the Motorway.



We arrived about 7.30p.m. back at Liverpool and x went staaight heme. X awoke on

    the Sunday morning i had terrible pains in ay chest so X went to Broadgreen Hospital

were X was exmined and X was told that X had bruised ribs.



    fhe Or. told me to take tablets for the pain and if it got any worse to |o and see

    my G.P,



    X seemed to be ok during the week until the Thursday evening 20th fpril 1989# vften X

    went to Carvers Nighclub on the Wavertree High street, I started to loose my breath

    and began sweating very badly and x had to leave early.



    On the Friday morning X went to see ray G.P. who is
        •
        6



'




    3           ..



    and he suggested to me that this was a result of my shock and ray nervousness.



    My Solicitors has advised me to seidsadyioe frcna a Counsellor and I vdll do that

    if I feel any worse £ will do this.
D.O.B.

D.O.S. 25.4.89.

TftKEM BY CT/LJ/&EVIL




On Saturday naming 15th April 1989, X travelled with a couple of friends          down

to Hillsbrough notching Liverpool - v - Nottinghan Forest.      We cueued lap about

2 *3 w»,iiT«**,«»w everyone just seemed to be forced forward through the gates.



Having bean forced through the turn-stiles X couldn't move side-ways or backsrards

X was just passed foward until the              stopped and it was then that ny face

ended up being slammed against the railings and X ound that X couldn't breath

and X was feeling . dizzy X oust have been t h e m for about 5 - 6 minutes when a

couple of supporters were nearby pulled me upwards and out of the crush and into

the stands far safety.



X had to stay in the stands       w/atch «• they w®** carrying out dead bodies

and trying to resuscitate people,     x eventually got out of the ground at about

4.30p.m. and headed for a house were X could use a telephone.      There were people

coning out of the houses and offering us to use the telephones to ring our

fanilies.



After telephoning ay family and letting them know that X was still alive X walked

back to the mldn bus and met up with my friends.     Hie travelled home and arrived

at Liverpool at about 8.00 O'clock.



X was very badly shocked and didn't realise just how badly that X had been injured.

Because X was trying not to think about it and putting it out of my mind.



On W ednesday morning X was in such pain that X had to go down to the Boyal

Liverpool teaching Hospital X arrived there about 2.00p.m. and I was examined y          ^
'         ■     •
    2   .....       .       .

    ex-ragped by the Doctor and they had said that I have dislocated my neck and hnii9t«i the

    side of my right leg.



    I explained to him that I hadn't been eating or steeping and at the hack of my

    was in constant pain.       3he Dr. told ne that the pain in the back of ny   was

    common with injuries of this type and had probably only been felt on Wednesday after

    owsr-oaning the initial shock.



    I new waring a surgical gqaport ccxLIor on my neck and I am tedding tablets for the

    pain I an in need of sleeping tablets and I have been given these by ay Dr.



    I am hairing nightmares and keep waking whenever my neck hurts.



    I will never go to a football match again and I am very frightened of croMlad places.



    I blame this on the police and the football organisation.
STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS;

D.O.B.    22.08.63

STATEMENT FOR FILE:     16245/GT/PS




On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I travelled down in the firms van

to Hillsborough with eleven (11) of my friends.



We arrived at Sheffield at approximately 12.50 pm and my friends had a

couple of pints.     I could not have anything to drink as I was driving

on that date.



We eventually walked up to the ground and arrived at the ground at

14.40 hour..



Outside the ground there was mayhem and only two police horses guiding

and shoving people into and through the turn—stiles.



I eventually gained access to the ground at about 14.55 hours and walked

through the tunnel.    As I did so I looked behind and I could see the

gate being opened so I moved to the left of the ground and was shoved

towards the front about 2—3 foot from the fence.



People were climbing all over my head and my shoulder was a foot step

in order to climb over the fence.     On seeing this another supporter

tried to get me out by pulling me but I was trapped in the crush.



I eventually gained some room to move and I puohed a child over the fence to

safety.   I continued helping people in trying to get out and then after

about 10 minutes I attempted to slimb over the spiked fence iqyself.



On doing this my jeans were ripped by the spikes but I managed to avoide

being impaled on the fence by being helped over.
Once on the pitch I met a couple of other lads and helped carry the

dying and dead bodies acoras the pitch into the medical services.



I tried to res usitate some people but to no avail and a policeman

came over and informed me that they were dead.



I was verycconcemed and frightend for my brother who was 21 and as I

had taken him there I felt responsible for him.       I looked   everywhere

for him but couldn't find him at all.       Eventually my friends came

over and told me that they had found him and he was o.k. and he would

meet us later on.



I left the ground at 5 o'clock through         the exit atthe main area.



What I aaw there was horrific and will         remain withme for the restof

my life.     There were bodies strewn all      over in lines some        ttth covers

over their faces and some just laid out.



I eventually went home with my friends and arrived at my girlfriend's

at 9.30— 10.00 pm that evening.



Since this incident I have found that I cannot sleep, I have nightmares

1 cannot talk about thissto anybddy and find that I am now feeling tired

because of the stressful situation I have been through.



I would like to add to this statement that on arriving at the goaund there

were no Stewards present whatsoever and the police had no idea how to control

the crowd.
■         •
    Statement of

    D.O.B. 23/1/73

    P.O.S. 9/5/89

    Address:



    I travelled to HilMjorough with my friends on a mini bus to watch the

    semi final off the F.A. Challenge cup between Liverpool and Forrest.



    We left Liverpool about 10.00 a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at 12.30 - 1.00 p.m.



    Jfy four friends and I stayed together whilst the other six older men went

    to the pub.    Wewalked around for a while and then walked straight into the

    ground.



    On arrival at the ground about 13.40 hrs the queues were quite large but

    after waiting for a while we went through the turn styles about 14.20 p.m



    Once inside we took alleft turn into the left hand side into the enclosure

    and stood waiting for jour friends to come in and the match to starts



    The game started and as soon as Beardsley hit the bar i watched the commotion

    as people piled over the fence and into our enclosure and thought that it

    was another pitch invasion.    I saw a friend of ours who was with us climb

    out of the stands and over the fence onto the pitch where he proceeded to

    help people over the fence.



    he was white and crying and held up four fingers to us to tell us that

    four were dead.    About 5 minutes later he came up to us and said that

    he had just seen 12 people dead,   he was still crying and vomiting

    at this point and we did not realise the seriousness of what was going

    on.   Jfy friend said lets go and I turned around quickly   to see what was

    going on arounddand turned back but he had already gone.     I waited for
to see if he would return but as he did not I walked back to the mini bus

on my own.   On my way I called in behind the pub to use the telephone

to let my parents know that I was safe.



I then went back to the mini-bus and sat listening to the radio a local

Nottinggham Station that was blaming the fans for the incident that had

Just occurred.   After about half an hour we left Sheffield this was

about 6.30 p.m. and got back to Liverpool about 8.00 p.m. that

evening.



Bfy father met me at the pub and took me straight home.



I was upset all that evening crying and had to sleep on the setee.       Although

Id did not realise I had been told that on Sunday morning but I knew that

I did not want to be on my own.



On the Sunday evening I went to the Catholic Cathederal to the service

in memory of those who: had died it was not until I got home that night

it all hit me.   I was crying and I could3not speak about this to anyone

not even my young family which caused then a great amount of distress.



On the Monday morning I went into school for the first lesson but

sotiinany people were talking about this and asking me questions i had

to go to the Secretary and sign out to go home.



I attend




On the Tuesday morning my mother telephoned the Doctor that is

________________*ho suggested that I went to Walton Hospital.



Jfy mother decided that she did not think that this would be a very good idea
because of the waiting inside the hospital and also the fact that this was

a Psychiatrist.



My mother eventually telephoned the Helpline for the victims of the

Hillsborough Disaster and a Social Worker dame out that evening to see

me at home.



I spoke to the Social Worker             from 4.30 that evening until about

10.15 that night and also                |one of the teachers from the school

came and sat talking to me as well and he left the house about 12.15 a.m.



Agter they had gone I ate some tea and toast the first that that I had

eaterissince the Saturday mornirgbefore travelling to the match.



The Social Worker has been seeing me two or three times aweek since

the incident and               has taken me to Melwood ie. Liverpools

Playing ground to speak to the team.



The other evening Keiiny Dalgliesh ran the house and spoke to me and

tried to console me but i did not find this of any help.



My G.C.E. Examinations are due between May the 18th and June 16th but

i am not in a positionto sit these exams.



The Head of                    the Teacher that is says that he will try

and gather the Medical and Social Workers evidence in order to try and

get the Education Board to assess my work over the year for submission

instead of sitting these examinations.



 I also wish to add that I have been accepted by South Mersey College

 to study a B. Tec Diploma in Nautical Science pending the examination

 results mentioned about.   The problem is I may not be accepted if I

 fail to sit these exams.
The Social Workers name is
Statement of (

P.O.S. 26/4/89

D.O.B.



On Saturday morning the 15th April 1989 I travelled with my friend to

Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A.' Challenge cup match.



We left Liverpool at 12.00 p.m. on that day and travelled down arriving

at 2.30 p.m.



On arriving the area was packed and the turn styles were still shut

and we waited outside the ground entrance just inside the large metal gates

that had been left closed by the Police.



At this time people were being crushed and screaming and this was prior

to 3.00 p.m.


                                     and
The Police them opened the main gate/the rush carried us in through the

gates and into the tunnel inside the Leppings Lane end enclosure B .




Once inside enclosure B we were forced about 20 - 30ft against the fence

and we could not believe how tightly packed we were.     The   crush was

terrible and I realised that I could not breath.     Because of this my

legs felt weak and I could not hold myself up any longer and fell to

the ground.




I started to try and scramble up through a small gap that appeared and

as I did I helped a young lad up and passed him to an older gentleman

to hold up.



Before I could actually get up and the     crowd pushed forward again and

I again fell to the ground.    This time I did not think that I would ever get

up I thought that I was going to die and I wat; v ry If it?hl.eneil.   'II   t   l
people were crying and screaming in panick.




          seemed to lean down from no where and picked me up and held me

thjere because my legs were very weak and he tells me my face was

purple.



The next thing that I could see was that              had climbed over and

was on the pitch he started shouting to a Policeman that I could not

breath and could he help and and all he said was hang on.



Eventually after 5-10 mins a lad pushed his back towards the fence and

helped me upwards using his hands as a footstep whereupon a Policeman

grabbed my hand and pulled me over the fence.



i lay down on the pitch to get my breath and on doing so started to

help          grab people out of the crush.



Eventually St. John’s Ambulance man came over and told us to sit down

and that he would get us a drink.



I was trembling badly and every shocked.       I stayed there for   a while

and left the ground at about 4.00 p.m.



We went to the car and on the way home called into a Granada Service

Station on the Ml to phone home and say that we were O.K.      We eventually

arrived back home in Prescot about 6.30 p.m. that evening feeling

pretty bad.   On the Monday Morning the 17th April 1989 I went to see

the Doctor who told me that I was suffering from shock.      Hy knee

cap was also badly swollen and he gave me an elastic bandage to support

:!-    I told my Docotor that I could not sleep and he gave me sleeping

 - 'eta and also pa:i*i killers for my neck.    I have also been told that

1 need to see a Councellor.
STATEMENT 0F_

D.O.B. 14.11.71.



FILF 16270/CIVIL/GT/IS



On Saturday morning, 15th April 89 I travelled by Barnes

Coaches to Sheffield with my friend_____________ to watch the

semi-final of the F.A.Chellenge Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest at Hillsborough.



We left Liverpool at 11 a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at around 1330.



On arrival at Sheffield we walked around town looking at the shops

until about 1405 hours when we walked into the ground.



The crowd outside was disorganised but at this time there was no pushing

or shoving.

WE walked straight through the tunnel and into enclosure B where we stood

for a while waiting for the match to start.



After a while the pushing started from the rear and edged us towards the

front and over to the righthand side fencing.   This was about ten foot

from the fence just in front of the barrier.



As the crowd grew worse I was crushed constantly until I was gulping and

gasping for air.   By this time by friend and I had been separated and he

had been pushed elsewhere in the crowd.

I think I may have blacked out because when I came around or realised what

was happening two men had grabbed me by the shoulders and arms and stasrted

dragging me out towards the back, over the bodies of people who had been

crushed.
I was pulled up by other supporters into the stands where I stayed

in a daze for about 20 to 25 minutes.

The officials announced over the tannoy that the game had been cancelled

and we had to wait the anbulanced to clear the area before we were allowed

out of the ground.



Once outside of the ground I made my way via the rear exit where they

had laid out all the people who were injured and dead.

I made my way back to the coach and this was about 1730 hours.

I waited on the coach to return home after the driver had suggested that

we would telephone from a service station.

My friend telephoned his mother who rang his grandmother and she in

turn passed on a message to my mother to let her know we were alive

and okay.



I arrived home at about 2115 hours and was informed that I was flushed

and appeared to be trembling.



Jfy brother is an ambulance driver and checked me over for any initial

injuries such as broken bones etc. and checked me suggesting that I was

in shock.



I was exhausted and went straight to bed and slept through until early

Sunday afternoon.



All I did on that day was rest and tried to get the previous days occurrances

out of my mind.



On Monday morning, I awoke with my arms legs, ribs and spine hurting

tremendously.     I had a terrible headache and felt nauseaus so I decided

to go to my G.P. who is
The doctor examined me and said I was in shock.




A couple of days later my mother noticed a line across my stomach which

was bruised.   I can only think this could have been   causedby        mystomach

being forced against the barrier by the crush.

I am still having bad headaches and I had to take acouple    of days

off vollege which is Sofeth Mersey College to try arid recover.



I wish to add that my clothes were filthy on my arrival home and my training

shoes were completely ruined.
STATEMENT 0F___

D.O.B. 14.11.71



FILF16P70/CIVIL/GT/1S



On Saturday morning, 15th April 89 I travelled by Barnes

Coaches to Sheffield with my friend               to watch the

aeai-final of the P.A.Chellenge Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest at Hillsborough.



We left Liverpool at 11 a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at. around 1330.



On arrival at Sheffield we walked around town looking at the shops

until about 1405 hours when we walked into the ground.



The crowd outside was disorganised but at this time there was no pushing

or shoving.

WE walked straight through the tunnel and into enclosure B where we stood

for a while waiting for the natch to start.



After a while the pushing started from the rear end edged us towards the

front and over to the righthand side fencing.   This was about ten foot

from the fence just in front of the barrier.



As the crowd grew worse I was crushed constantly until I was gulping and

gasping for air.   By this time by friend and I had been separated and he

had been pushed elsewhere in the crowd.

I think I may have blacked out because when I came around or realised what

was happen4'v two men had grabbed me by the shoulders and arms and stasried

dragging rae out towards the back, over the bodies of people who had been

crushed.
I was pulled up by other supporters into the stands where I stayed

in a daze for about 20 to 25 minutes.

The officials announced over the tannoy that the game had been cancelled

and we had to wait the ambulanced to clear the area before we were allowed

out of the ground.



Once outside of the ground I made ray way via the rear exit where they

had laid out all the people who were injured and dead.

I made my way back to the coach and this was about 1730 hours.

I waited on the coach to return home after the driver had suggested that

we would telephone from a service station.

My friend telephoned his mother who rang his grandmother and she in

turn passed on a message to my mother to let her know we were alive

and okay.



I arrived home at about 2115 hours and was informed that I was flushed

ar»d appeared to be trembling.



My brother is an ambulance driver and checked me over for any initial

injuries such as broken bones etc. and checked me suggesting that I was

in shock.



I was exhausted and went straight to bed and slept through until early

Sunday afternoon.



All I did on that day was rest and tried to get the previous days occurrences

out of my mind.



On Monday morning. I awoke with my arms legs, ribs and spine hurting

tremendously.     I had a terrible headache and felt nauseaus so I decided

to go to my Q.P. who is
The doctor examined me and said I was in shock.




A couple of days later ray mother noticed a line across ray stomach which

was bruised.   I can only think this   couldhave been caused    by my stomach

being forced against the barrier by    the crush.

I am still having bad headaches and    I had to take a couple   of days

off college which is Softth Mersey College to try add recover.



I wish to add that asy clothes were filthy on my arrival home and my training

shoes were completely ruined.
  Statement of

  D.O.B. 14/10/65

  P.O.S. 9/6/89

  GT/GH/CIVIL/16281




 On Saturday morning 15th April 1989 I travelled with my two friends

                             in my car to Hillsborough to what the

 semi-final of the F.A. Challenge cup between Liverpool and Nbttingham

 Forrest.




 We left Liverpool at 11.30 a.m. that morning and arrived at Sheffield

 about 1.30 p.m.    On arrival at the ground we decided to walk there

 from the car and we must have got there for about 2.00 p.m.    On

 arrival my friends went into a different section and I started queuing

 at approx. 14.00 hours.    Because of the lack of organisation I

 eventually moved onto another side about 14.45 p.m. and the Police at

 this point opened the gates.   I rushed inside the ground and was carried

 by the crowd in through the tunnel and into section B.



 Once inside Section B I was forced down and towards the front of the

 the enclosure to about 4ft from the fence.



 Just as the players came out there Was a massive surdge forward and I

 started to cry out for help and i was shouting to the people around

 me "HELP, HELP, I CANNOT BREATH,I AM GOING TO DIE".   Everyone around

 was in the same stressed situation and could not help me.   I then

 shouted to the Policeman who was standing in front of the crowd

but my voice was weakening due to the breath being crushed     out of me

 and the Officer appeared to do nothing.   After about 20 mins a gap appeared

 in the crowd and there were bodies scattered all over the steps.    I then fell

backwards and passed out.    The next thing that I remember is waking up

on the pitch and a Policeman and Woman were lifting my t—shirt and undoing

my jeans in order that they could feel my stomach and told me to take deep

.breaths.
#
2



I must have lay there fore about 10 minutes and I tried to stand up but

as I did I became light headed and again fell to the ground.      I eventually

stood up but my legs and arras were hurting so I limped around to try and

find my shoe which had been lost in the crush.   A policeman and Police

woman came up to me and helped me around the ground and told me to lie down

and she wrapped a blanket around me.



i was then taken by ambulance to Hallersham General Hospital in Sheffied.



The Doctors there sent me for X-Rays and examined me.    They told me that

my arm had been strained and that my groin appeared to be strained.



On looking at the X-Rays the doctor sent out for one of his colleagues to

come and have a look at these   and confirm his opinion.    The two Doctors

then asked me to urinate and asked me that if this hurt in the future I

should go and see my own G.P. at home.   I was discharged from the hospital

at about 7.30 p.m. that evening after my friends had come to meet me.



On arrival at the car I realised that I could hot drive because I was

in so much pain and I also felt light headed.    My friend drove the car

home for me.



We left Sheffield abut 8.30 p.m. and arrived in Liverpool about 10.00 p.m.

and went to my friends house where I had a glass of coke.       I went home

and went straight to bed that evening and relaxed all day Sunday but my

back was hurting quite badly at this time.



Oh Monday morning and I awoke I decided that my back was hurting so badly

and went to see my Doctor who is ______________________________________

She told me to stay off work for one week and gave me some pain killers
                                  !'                        '
which I was to take if I started to feel anymore pain.
A was in pain for a couple of days after the visit but on Friday the pain became

so unbearable I had to go to Walton Hospital.   This I did at 12.00 p.m. on

the Friday.   The Doctor examined me and said that I had a groin strain with

torn fibres and said that I should take at least another week off before

going back to work.   All the following week    I was still in    pain and

decided to go back to   the Doctors and said that I could   not standthis

any longer and that I was having difficulty in walking.



She signed me off for   another two weeks and   said to return     to seeheron

Monday 15th may which I am going to do.



i am still unable to drive or stand and can onlywalk if I take the

pain killers and even then not for too long.



I wish to add that in the crush I lost my trainingshoeDiadora    - to the

value of £50.00
«
    .   •


        O.O.B. 19.3.66.

        D.O.S. 16.5.89.

        TftKEN BY GT/LJ/

        FILE NO 88/16319 /Mllabocoucft



        On Saturday morning 15th APril 1989, I travelled with ny fitends by Barnes Travel

        to Sheffield to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between Liverpool

        - v - Nottingham Rarest.



        We left laverpool at 11.00a.m. bhat morning and arrived at Sheffield at about

        14.10hrs.



        On arrival we walked up to the ground arrived at the ground at 14.23irs aid there

        was no guanos present whatsoever it was just mayhap, everyman for himself.



        He eventually entered the ground through the tumfcstiles on the lefthand side and

        walked through the tunnel into the right enclosure.



        We started off in the middle because of the crrati but becauseit was tight   we mowed

        near the front to the left about 4 foot frcm the fence.



        Just        the twaa w » out it went absolutely fetoywire 1 was beingcrushed and

        my chest was hurting so such that I oouldn*t bceath.   I had a pain in ny sttmach

        and I felt quite ill.



        I noticed people cliobing out at this point ori&y to be thrcwn aixdt by the police

        standing at the panimiber fence.



        A girl who was standing by me was screaming and crying but ncbody could do anything

        to help her.



        After a while people started to get out.   A gab appeared and a lad infrent of me
said that there was somebody on the floor, l realised that 1 was standing on whoever

it was so a few other supporters and myself decided to help this young lad but

unfortunately, he was dead.



1 then just wanted to get oat 7 acu3d tak® it no longer      so 1 walked to the front

and climbed over the fence onto the pitch.



Whilst on to the pitch I sat down and i had a cigarette to try and calm my nerves down

but a lad walked up ton e and said 'Gome on give us a hand*.



We walked over to the enclosure and started helping people out.      A lot of these people

were having difficulty tanaathing so 1 was telling them to put their heads against

and between their knees and to try and relax whilst I loosen their clothing.



After we got about 6 or so people out 1 was in a daze and I couldn't find any

ambulances anywhere.     We looked for seme strechers to try and ferry these people but

couldn't find aM£ so we walked up to the hoardings and started pulling them down to
lia«a j-htam .




We carried about 6 people to thr .vhsrside of the pitch were the medical services

were some of which ware dead, infact a policeman ies stood there saying 'Alive or

dead1, aid pointing left or righ to which ever answer tie gave him.



Bnsntually Z just had to sit down on the pitch and vomited I felt sick and unsell and

1 was crying.




1 soon noticed sane St. John’s Anbalanoe girls where hysterical.      Ctt approaching them

1 rwiiised       that those girls were crying because they couldn't help anymore than they
                                                     ':
did and felt useless.      1 tried to comfort them but they ware in much the same positibfo

as I teas*



X then started running around like a lunatic trying to find my friends this was

because I had realised that i had forgotten about them in all the mayhem.      1 eventually
X eventually found them and they cane onto the pitch to see if X was Ok#



He eventually left the ground at 14.45hrs after the aafculanoes had cleared

and on leaving the ground went Jnlso m csweet shop to use the telephone.



I telephoned ay girlfriend to let her know that I was alive and tell her that I

would be heme as soon as possible.



We arrived back in Liverpool at 20.2Qhrs and I went to the pub with my girlfriend.



My friendb were also there and a ranter a£ them were still crying, I cxuldoAt

take anymore so I went hone and went to bed*



On Sunday zooming I woke at about 7.30a.m. and I started crying as I watched

the reports on T.VJV.M* and what had happened |Jhe previous day.



A H that day I felt terrible I wait to the pub at dinner tine and just cried all

the time that X was there so eventually I had to go home and stayed in the rest

of that day.



On Monday manning 17th APril 1989, I went to see ay G.P. j___________________

j              because I had pains in my ctoest and back and I couldn't sleep.     She

gain that X       haHiy hrinidnri but the main thing was that X should talk about my

experiences on the Saturday to try and get it off my chest.



I   telephoned week work that afternoon to tell them that X wouldn't be in and on

Hafaesday morning I decided to go to Anfield.    I telephoned my friend tfto works

at John Moores Centre with me mid he agreed to acme with me.



On arriving at the Gentre to meet him so that we oculd go down              X got into

a lift but unfortunately, X felt so ciaustrcphic     *****            1 110(1 to

out to tite ths stOvcs,
.   •

He went to Anfield that: afternoon and X found this to be like hell, but unfortunately

X didn't sleep                 fwning iFttfrw* •



On Thursday 20th APril ii®9# X went into work in the afternoon and found that ay

friend was being buried an the Friday so X had to go b a m became X couldn't stood

it any longer.



X went to ay friend's funeral cn Friday and because X was so v$*et X still couldn't

9 0 into work.        Suit eveni nf Friday 21st Upril 1989, X went to Crosby Squash &«i»

with a couple of friends to try and forget about it, this didn't work h o m m e as

them was so m a y people there X wanted to y                             and started crying.   this went

afiffor an hour or so until the lads told me to have a few scotches which X did and

thif r?lam gg dOMl abit.



tin the Monday ancning 24th Jeril 1989, X went into work and they arranged foe m                         to

see a Counsellor which X did cn Humaday 27th ABril 3389, is name is |

from Liverpool Personal Services and they are based on StaMay Street, this helped

afait and he told rae to cose bade on Thursday 11th May 1989, siiiich X did.



X dW l l had to go and see him on Wednesday 24th May 139®, X wish to add that X can

still not sleep and X spend alot of time on my own in the house crying.                         X also

wish to add that cn 6 th May 1989* the West Midlands police came to nay house to

liflOWr   »\gK*3ftnPBW . %JK1 « g f   jMaUUIttt sJL   w i B t U a )f •
D.O.B. 12.6.65.
P.O.S. 26.4.89.
TftKEN BY GT/LJ/
FILE IP 88/16198




Cta Saturday 15th april 1989, I travelled with my three friends            and

___________________________down to Hillsbrough to watch the natch between

Liverpool and NottingffuBi Forest in the semi final of the F.A. Cup.



We left Liviacpool at 10.00a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at about 1.00 Otelock



We daMBdcd on arrival that we would go and get earn chips and then walked down to

the ground.



We arrived at the ground at 14.15p.m. and walked straight through as they were not

that many people and walked into Section A we had realised what we had door so we

then moved out and went into Section B   ( B already packed).



It was packed but not completely so we walked straight through the middle tunnel

and just behind the goal.



At this point idle pushing and shoving statted and we ended qp being forced to the

left hand side of the goal about 15 foot from the rails.   Ihe time was about

14.40 to 14.45.



Things started getting packed just before 3.00 O'clock there was a serge forward

were we ended vp against the left hand enclosure fench.    1 could not breathe

and leaned over against the fench to try and pull myself out.



X eventually got into the next section and I was trying to re-gain ray breath

there weee dead bodies everywheere I coul&i't believe it and X just sat watching
I dsdidedthatl could take no more and may ay way over the fench and onto the pitch

were Z had spotted isy friends.



He deftided to leave at Wboat 4.00 fftclock and walked back to the car.



On arriving at the car we decided that we should telephone from one of the Service

stations in order to let ray family know that w— tax,    alive and eta.



On arriving hcne we dejfcdad that would have a pint.    Which we did and Z wasnot

effected very much until Tbesday morning 18th April 1989.



Z awoke on that day ray back wes W £ g g badly.   Z decided that I should go and see

ray G.P. Z went to see             who gave me pain tablets in the farm of

Paracetamol and told me that I should see a Social Mocker.     On speaking to s Social

worker she spent most of the time telling me the experiences of her two son's who

had been there at the match.   Suffice to saythat Z did not appreciate this advice

and left.



'Hie Social worker has since been to see me each week on 26th April 1989, and Z did

not wish to speak to her.



My Solicitors told me to consult a Social Marker it is in ay best interest
 STATEMENT OF

 D.O.B. 6.5.69.



 P.O.S. 5.5.89

 GT/IS/CIVIL/16254



ON Saturday morning, 15th April 89 I travelled with ray friend

________ Iby special train from Liverpool to Sheffield to watch the

semi-final of the F.A.challenge cup between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest at Hillsborough.



The train left at 10.30 a.m. and arrived approximately 12 o ’clock.



We walked around town for a while and looked at the shops and eventually

we met some people who had organised a coach to the ground.     WE climbed

aboard the coath and arrived at the ground at about 1440.



The crowd outside was chaotic, there was no organisation and it was just

a mass of people milling around.



Eventually, we got into the ground through the turnstiles at about 1455

hours.   We walked through the tunnel and into enclosure bay.    At first

the crowd appeared to be just as a normal game but after about two

minutes or so we realised it was becoming dangerous.



At this time I was standing about 15 feet     from the front fence just

behind the goal.     The surge from the back packed us closer and tighter

together crushing the breath out of us.    At this time my friend was

being carried away by the crush and towards the front.     The crushing

became worse and people started screaming and crying.    WE were all shouting

to the police to open the gates, this proved to no avail.



Eventually, about ten minutes later, the gate was opened but because I was

too far away, I couldn't ascape the crush.    I was being forced nearer and
2   ...
nearer the front fence.



Within a couple of minutes I was forced all the way up *■     he fence and

felt as though I was going to die.     At this point I almost passed out.



I summoned all ray strength together and climbed the fence oily to

find that ray lege were still being crushed and because of this I fell

back into the crowd.



I thought I would have one last go ofclimbing out so I climbed up onto

the fence and hung there.     After what seemed like a lifetime, two policemen came

over and hoisted me out by the arms and although this hurt it was still a

great relief.



I got onto the pitch and collapsed.     At this point I went completely

unconcious and the next thing I knew was that I was being slapped in the

face by some supporters who were trying to help me.     I couldn't

breathe and the supporters called over the St.John's ambulance who

asked me if ray ribs were broken.    Because of the pain I pointed at my ribs and

shook ray head.    The St.John's amubulance people then stretchered me across

the pitch and lay me down by the dead bodies.



I became hysterical but nobody attended to me and I must have laid

there for about 10 minutes.



An ambulance came and took me to the Royal Hallisham Hospital at about

half past three.



On arrival at the hoppital I was examined and my reathing was so eratic

it took about three or four injections over a couple of hours to calm me

down.




At this point I was asked if there was anybody I wanted to be informed

of ray presence in the hospital and I gave them ray mother's and father's
    3 •••

phone number.        They received this message at about 6.30 p.m.



About 10.30 p.m. the doctor came down and examined me agaii                                decided

to send me for x-rays on my chest and ribs.



I was kept in overnight after being told X was badly bruised internally.



At 12 p.m. the next day a specialist c a m to see me and said he was prepared

to let me go home if I would see a social worker.



This I did and spoke to the social worker for about an hour.                             I found this

helpful and felt a little relieved after talking about the experience.



I was subsequently released at 4 o'clock after being held back to :ze Margaret

Thatch P.M.       My family had travelled down to pick me up in their car and I

returned to Liverpool and arrived home at 6.15 p.m.



I stayed at home that evening and tried to relax and get the situation out of my

mind but found that I could not sleep and was still distressed*



On Monday morning, 17th March 89 I went to see ray




The doctor gave me a quick examination and took my blood pressure which he

said was low and asked me how I felt generally.                    I told her that I still feAt

bad and she subsequently signed me off work for a week.



I went back to work the following Monday, 24.4.89. and am at present still at

work.



I wish to add the events on that day will always be at the back of ray mind and

I am still having nightmares regarding this.



X    blame the lack of* Orffftniftfttiftn   ftn   hAhfll f rtf' thA riAl if**,   finrl   fh*
 *

4...

ground for all the events described above.
Statement

Address:

D.O.B. 22/2/61

P.O.S. 2/5/89

JSL/GH/




I am a season ticket holder with Liverpool F.C.



I attended the Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday 15th April 1989

for the Liverpool and Notts Forest Football match.



I had in my   possession a ticket for the Leppings lane standing at Hillsborough.

The price of this ticket was £6.00.



A friend of mine hired a car and the two of us went to Hillsborough together.



As soon as we arrived in Sheffield we parked up and went to a local chippy

to buy some lunch



We ate our lunch on the way to the ground entering the stadium at approx.

2.00p.m. I cannot give toe exact time but I know that we were in plenty

of time before toe kick off.



Hy friend and I were still together when we went through the turn styles.


                 i            '            .                    -                    ’   •


I would say that the crown situation outside the turn styles at the

Leppings Lane end was nothing out of the ordinary for any other matches

that I have ever attended.



Hy friend and I passed tlirought he turn       styles without incident, we passed

through the underground tunnel through the stands. We made our way around

the stand until we reached the position about half way down the stands on the

right looking at the goa.     We decided that this was the position that we would

take up to watch the match.       We did not go down any further that it is traditional
         %
2....




that the young kids because they are smaller go down to the front where they

have a better view whilst the lads and the adults stand further back.



By 2.30 p.m., it because obvious that there were far too many people in

the Lepping Lane stand area it which I was confined.



I would like to say immediately that I am quite aware that there was a

"wing” both to my le'ft and right but we could not got to those because

of the wire fencing.



There was no way of getting into the other totally empty areas of the standing

area and we were not directed into them.



I cannot recall ever seeing a uniformed officer inside the standing

area.



Last year, I was in the same area of the same standing area for the semi­

final.   Again we had over crowding, and I was pulled up into the stands

from below by other fans.



I can say, that as an experienced man I am often used to pressure that

is bodily pressure in the standing area as a result of the crush.



The crush always eases after a few seconds.



However on this occasion pressure started to built before the kick off

and kept oh building and did not drop away.   I districtly remember

Peter Beardsley hitting the cross bar and that is the lastrecollection

that I actually have until I found myself on the pitch.   My recollections
 3 ....




 are not entirely clear but I seem to recall being carried forward

 in the rush out of the stands onto the pitch.



 I cannot say where it was when i actually caught my breath whether it

 was just inside the standing area or when I got onto the pitch.     I

 remenber trying to help someone and someone grabbed hold of me to pull ine

 out as I needed help which I felt that i did not need at that time.



 I remember seeing a young lad who was clearly dead.   When I felt

 a little better, and realised that there was a shortage of stretchers.

I was one of the lads who can be seen on the television going to the

advertisement hordings on the outside of the pitch pulling them

free and handing them to    other lads to use as stretchers.



I met up with my friend on the pitch and after we got together we

managed to make our way out of the ground, back to the car and

returned to Liverpool straight away.    We could*not stop and telephone

our parents because there were big queues outside the phone boxes we

just decided to get home as quickly as we could.



I do suffer from bronchitus, but after this incident I-spat up

blood for about 48 hours.   That has never happened to me before,

i did not suffer any bruising that I can recall.



Since this incident, I have found it extremely difficult to sleep,

I have consulted my G.P. and he has prescribed Temazapam.



I have been taking that regularly from the 15th and have been on

a course of penicillin for my chest .



Part of the nightmare is seeing in my sleep seeing this young lad

that I saw after he had been crushed to death.  I had been asked
                                 to the match and in this
by my young daughter to take her/in my dream, it was not the boy
          t
4 .....



that I saw but the daughter.



After we had got onto the pitch, and I was Eecovering, we were by a

T.V. Monitor.   We could see what was happening   on the monitor but

thought that this was just a recording of what had already taken place.

We did not realise at the time that it urns still going   on.   Thinking

hack about it, although logically that there was probably not a lot that

I could have done to help in my mind I still feel upset and frustrated

because I was not able to do   more to help.
*




STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS!

D.O.B.     23.10.68

P.O.S.     03.05.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE;     88/16179/GT/PS




On Saturday morning 15th April 1989. I travelled down to Sheffield with

ray friend to watch the Serai-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between

Liverpool and   Nottingham Forest.



We travelled by Easeways Coaches of Ashton leaving the city at 11.30 am

and arriving in Sheffield at 14.45 pm.    The late arrival was due to the

police checking all the 'coaches for alcohol and if any was found the

coaches were being turned around and sent away.



On arrival at the ground there were lots of people milling around and

1 wish to state the organisation outside the ground was disgusting.



There were no queues outside the ground just losts of people pushing and

shoving and we walked straight in through the turn—stile.



(feice inside the ground we walked through the tunnel and on hearing a loud

cheer behind looked around to see about 1000 people pushing towards raet I

couldn't get out of the way and was knocked to the ground and traapled ora*



I was very frightend and started punching out at people who were walking

past.    There was no were for me to go I was just forced on through and into

the ground where I eventually escaped by being pulled up and into the stands

by some of the supporters.



There were people strewn all over the floor dying* screaming and crying for

help and nobody appeared to be doing this.   The police looked lost and appeared

callous.
 •
«

By the time we eventually got out of the ground it was 4.30 pm       andI

was glad to be alive.    Once I had arrived home I      went   straight      to bed

but couldn't sleep for nightmares and I was very upset and crying.



All day Sunday I was vomiting blood and edecided        at 5   o'clock that

evening that I could take the pain no longer and        went   to Wigan

Infermary.



The doctors x-rayed me and found I had a cracked rib and that was the

reason for the blood.    My foot also had a cracked bone in it and I am

on crutches.



I am self-employed and am not paid when I am offwork which iscausing

me great distress as I am about to move.



I also wish to add that last Saturday evening I went with my wife to

a local night club.     Whilst in there a group of people gcame in through

the doors, I started sweating profusely and it took me right back     to

when I was in the ground and I grabbed the nearest person and     started

punching him.



The door man dragged me off and my wife explained the situation.     I apologised

for my behaviour and had to go straight home.



I now realise 'that I have to get some medical advice in order that I may

continue to live my life as normal.



My solicitor has informed me thai. he will give me the name of a Counsellor

that I can consult in relation to this matter.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS HILTON




D.O.B. 22.9.69.

D.O.S. 8.5.89a

FILE 16269/CIVIL/GT/IS




On the 15th April 1989, I travelled with my friend                 ]and

STeven Robinson (deceased ) to Sheffiled to watch the semi-final of       the F.A.Challenge

Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough.



We left Liverpool at 10.30 a.m, from Tower Hill and stopped just

outside Sheffield for a couple of pints.    Chi returning to the coach we

went straight to the ground and arrived at 1440 hours.



We noticed lots of people milling around outside of the ground in a

disorganised fashion.    We stayed int he queue for about ten minutes and

despite the crush we got in through the turn-styles at approximately 1450

hours.



I retained my ticket stub and walked straight through into Section A at

which point I realised that I was in the wrong section and I came back

out to find my friends who had been with me on entrance.



I was then pushed by the crowd rushing through the gate that had

been opened into Section B at about five past three.

I then found myself being forced towards the front up to about five foot

from the rails at the front of the enclosure.



After the ensuing crush I eventually pulled myself up onto the railings and

over gaining escape to the pitch.



I then noticed that my nose was hurting and suspected that it was broken

realising that I had banged   it against the fence in trying to escape.
2a . •




A policeman walked over and took me to the first aid post as he

spotted me crying and noticed X was obviously distressed whereupon I

fainted.



I lost all track of time at this point but when I came round I was




I was then taken to a room where I had several cups of tea and talked

over the events    with other supporters.

I telephoned my mother from there to let her know I was     alright and was

informed that                had organised a number of mini buses to take

us back to Liverpool at 1830 hours,

I arrived back at Anfield at about 2045 hours and go 1a*a   taxi to the

George pub in Crosby to see if any of my friends had returned.



On entering the George I then found out that Steven Robinson was missing

but continued to ring his home to see if he had arrived.     W   waited

in the pub until about 10.30 p.m. that evening and went home to telephone

his family.     I was inormed that his family had gone to Sheffield because

they could not get through on the emergency telephone number that had

been given out by the radio and television.



I went to bed that evening, woke up early the next morning and just lay there

till about 9 o'clock when my other friend                   telephoned me to

say that Steven had been killed.



All that day I could not atop shaking and felt physically sick.     As
3. •••

Steven had been a very close of friend, I also felt sorry for his

family and felt helpless.



Farly Mondpp morning I went to see




I didn't manage to talk about these incidents until the following week on

the day of Steven's funeral.    That was Monday, 24th April and I had been

asked by the family because I was a close friend to be a pall bearer.




                              He took ray name and telephone number so

the police could get in touch to relevent statements.     I eventually appeared

on two of the police lists, the bereaved and also the injured lists and

the West Midlands police visited me to take the relevant statements,

the two officers names were
D.O.B. 1.11.69.

D.Q.S.   18.5.119.

m m mss/uAsjm
FILE MO 8aA6335/misbotct3ugh



On Saturday 15th JSpril 1389, I travelled in a hired car with 5 friends to Hillsborough

to tmtcfe the sea* final of F.A.Challenge Cup between Liverpool - v - Nottingham Rarest.



W es left Benkieth at ll.3Ga.ou and arrived at Sheffield outside the ground at 14.46hrs.



On arrival these was crowds everywhere and qpe foam of quening whatsoever. At first

we waited in the wrong area and wb were being crusted so badly that we moved and

realised that wb had bean in the wrong plaoein any event.



1*8 eventually got through the tunnel at about 14.55hrs and nade our way to the middle

of the enclosure aid realised that we couldn't wave, fie were betfig crushed from all

aides aid X had to force ray head up to try and breath.    I could only gain the odd cup

of air and I thought that I was going to pass out.



I realised at this point that if    I stayed there any longer I would have certainly

passed but X managed tdth the help of anyother stgpcrter to force ray way up and rmiifcirl

across the head of the people in the crush towards the front were X would climb over

the fencfe.



When X arrived at the front X tried to pull myself i$> and onto the fence but in wf

weak state it took me a number of trys.



Eventually X did get onto the fence and drop down onto the pitch as soonas X did this

a policeman cane over to ise and punched me in ray ribs shouting d o o m at rae causing rae

to fall down onto the pitch in pain through .exhaustion



When X eventually looked up in a daze X would see the peole who ware being crushed up
against the fence who ware obviously either dead or dying and other screaming for

help.



X reiiised what was happening and had to lock away and eventually a lad came over to

me and asked me if I was Ok.

I answered by saying that X was acing and exhausted m l eventually after gaining a

torn of caqposure I began to look for ray friends to see if they were ok.



X eventually found       and he started asking about his brother who had been with me

in the ground but unfortunately I £i§ not grow what had happened to them as we had

bane sjblit vp in the earlier crush.



We feared the wonst fit® M m and we could see peole dying on the pitch we were

obviously disraught.



Nevertheless, we continued to look for him until about 16*30hrs but to no avail.
                                                                                             I
                                    *                              *
We eventually decided to go bade to the car and) on leaving the ground we spotted

another friend of c u m who had seen                           and told us that he was ok.



On arrival back at the car all the lads were there and we hand around for about

an hour and a half to try and telephone home.



Wet left Sheffield at about 19.00 firssand arrived back heme at Baafceth at about

20.0Qhrs.

                                                                       T

On arrival back in Benteth we decided that we wanted to hove a drink bu t X c a n n o t m m
                                                     \   ' ’


remember what was said inside the pub as we were all in a daze atrthat time.
                                       .   i>;4


X eventually wait home that evening at 22.60 hrs and X did not sleep as I was too upse



On the Sunday morning X went with a a y friends to the Cathrda} since X wish to show my
          4




3




reject® to tbom who had dies and at this point He did not know whether or not if

any our friends had also been killed in the diaster.



On the Monday morning 1 telephoned wade and told them that I was going to the qpapital

Which I



I vent to tterringtan general. Hospital at 13„0Qhrs were the Dr. examined me and ex-rayed

xae and told me that I was badly bruised internally and they prescribed pain killers*



I wish to add that 1 still think about those incidents and find it difficulty to

ocrae to teemswith it w e n now. I had to stay off wok Jc seven working days and blame

this on the incident prescribed above.
STATEMENT O F _____________

HOME ADDRESS:

D.O.B.   18.12.73

P.O.S.   26.04.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE:      88/16186/GT/PS




I travelled down to Hillsborough to watch the football association

challenge cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

I di this by means of Hardings Coaches a subsiduary of Amberline

with a firend called |



We arrived at the ground at approximately 1.30 pm and walked straight

thr'wi'£»h the turn—stiles andinto enclosure 'B1.



At 2.45 pm the ground was becoming more and more packed and that

was when the pushing started.



People at that point were starting to climb over the fence to get

away from the crush.



The ground was too tightly packed fome to 4ne able to do this and at

3 o'clock panic broke out.



The police were standing around but looked completely lost.     They

appeared to be shouting at us to stay in the enclosure.     At one point

a lad who was trying to escape from the crush had his hands knocked

forcing him away from the f nee and back into the crowd.



I was then forced up against the fence and realised I couldn't breath

properly.



Eventually I climbed up the perimeter fence once the crush had subsided

slight and realised there were dead bodies everywhere.      I could see

this distinctly from the        section were I regained ray breath.
                                 -2-




Eventually 1 walked down to the front and climbed through the gate

in ' C Section which was open and onto the pitch.



I started looking round for ray friend and when I eventually found him

we helped the St. Johns Ambulance and supporters ferry fane across

the pitch to the medical services.



At 4.50 cm we made our way out of the ground to a house where I telephoned

home to let my parents know I was still alive.   We eventually made our way

back to the coach and arrived back in Wallasey at 8*10 pm.    I went

striaght home to my parents.



I stayed off school on Monday 17th April and my parents had informed

the school of my predicament.



I couldn't sleep until the Thursday evening when my brother moved back

into ray room to confort me.    'r



%   House Master                                          has suggested

to my father that I obtain a counsellor regarding this.



I intend to do this as I am still very upset about the matter and feel

as though I do reed some help.
P.O.S. 22.5.89.

FILE 16330/GP/IS/CiyiL,



Will say:

I an 14 years of age, ay date of birth being 11th July 74.



On 15th april 89 I travelled by coach to see the semi-final cup game between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at the Sheffield Wednesday ground.      I was

with two friends,                                             aged 14 and 13 yrs

respectively.        ticket was for the Leppings Lane end of the ground.



The coach arrived at Sheffield at about 2.40 p.m. the aatfch was due to

kick off at 3 p.m.     The coach had been delayed by traffic and roadworks,     we

had left Liverpool at about 11 a.m.     When the coach stopped a police constable

got cm and told us we were not to take any cans etc. into the ground but

we were not escorted to the ground.     It took a few minutes to get to the grounds

I was searched by a P.C. before going into the ground, my ticket was dealt

with and I went in.    Anoither P.C. was making random searches and I was

searched again.     I bought a prograane and followed everyone who were going

into a tunnel, there was no one there to direct us and the policeman was

merely carrying out random searches.     When we emerged from the tunnel   we

were on the back of the terrace, there was still no steward or anyone else about

to help us as to where to go.    We couldn't see from the back of the terrace so we

pushed our way down towards the front.    WE got down to the first barrier back

flro* the pitch, we decided we could see from there and stayed there.

■hen we first got there we were fairly comfortable but after a couple

of minutes the crowds started to build up around us.

We could still see and at first weren't bothered because we were used

to watching matches from the Kop at jjgftnfleld where we often were in crowds.

At this time the players were on the field but the match had not actually

started.    A short time after the kickoff, only a few minutes after, things
2. . .

in the crowd around me started to go wrong and I began to feel worried

for my own safety.

I panicked and started to cry*       I lost contact with ay friends and a large

man who was trying to push his way to the front fell on ae.       He was shouting 'Keep me <

lads'.   1 was able to keep my feet but was being crushed against the side fence.

I was terrified of falling because I thought that if I did I would die.

A man could see I was crying and in trouble rand he got hold of me and

helped to keep me upright,     a   path was eventually made for people

to get through with stretchers and sane of the crowd had got from the front

and things got a bit easier.       I had not bothered with the game   since I

panicked, but I think by now the game had finished.



The man who had helped me took me through the tunnel and outside.
Before moving I had seen some bodies lying in the front of the terrace.

Wien I got outside the ground there were a lot of ambulance men and St.Johns men

attending to injured people and there were bodies with their faces

covered up and I realised those people were dead.



The man who had helped me met sane friends.      Be made sure I was alright,

I thankAd him and he went off with his frient’s.     My two friends had got

out safely and were waiting for me so we made our way back to the coach.

There was no one in the coach but the driver was sitting      on the back seat

reading his paper.   First the driver wouldn't let us on as he knew nothing

about the trouble, he eventually let us back on the coach and put the radio

on and he then heard about the trouble that was happening.

Other people started to cone back to the coach in ones and twos, it then

said on the radio that they might try to restart the game but we said we weren't

going back on that ground even if they did restart it*

I think it was Radio Nottingham we were listening to at the time who said

this.



Our coach filled up but we didn't leave for some time, all the coaches seemed to learn
3* •*




at once as though an police instructions.

It would be about 6 p.m. when we left.

Our coach stopped at a service station to give us the opportunity of

using the telephone to ring bama to say we were safe.       I wasn't able to get through

to ny hone but was able to get through to soneone else who took a message to my

mother and father.



I arrived home at around     9 p.m.

I keep getting a recall about the incident, particularly when I am on my

newsround, I keep feeling claustrophobic, and in frustration one day

I kicked out at a door at hone.       I don't like ay mum giving me a goodnight

kiss or hug as I used to, I don't like it and throw her off because it

makes me remember when all the people were crushing round me at the football

match.



It sometimes cones back to me at school, my teachers have noticed that my

experience has altered me.



A boy f**oa our school died, his name was Philip Howard.

I had seen the dead bodies and it has made me think about death.

Philip and Byself played together in a Sunday League and my team should have

played the team that Philip was in the following day.
Will say:

I have three sons,                being the middle one.

Over the last few years           has enjoyed football and has been a

season ticket holder at Anfield over the last year.

He got a ticket to go to the semi-final game at Sheffield and he went

off with his friends,



I saw the trouble on the t.v., I was then frantic.

i was constantly calling the telephone number shown on

the television but couldn’t get any response.,    The brother of the two

friends with my son eventually came and told me that they had rang up and

were safe and eventually           arrived home safe.



Since this incident,           has been unnaturally quiet and withdrawn for

periods which are completely alien to him.    A couple of weeks after the game

there was a parent’s evening at school and one or two of the teachers told

me they had noticed a change in          |at school and about a week after

that another teacher rang me up about his altered character at school.



On a couple of occasions there were incidents where he has kicked out at

doors and he has been far less patient with his younger brother than he used

to be.



I consulted a counsellor on Helpline about him who seemed to think that he

would be alright eventually.



I feel angry as to what my boy was exposed to, the risk to his life and

what he saw.   I feel that a boy of his age would give little or any thought

to death but this incident has made my boy think about it and he talks about
it.   I consider that in a way he has lost part of his childhood by this

terrible experience.



I was not too happy about him going to the match and thought very

carefully about giving permission for him to go, bot because of any thought

of what did happen, but because of possible violence towards him but my brother

who is a transport policeman said I shouldn't worry as they would be escorted

by police to the ground and back to the coach and there would be little

prosppc# of violence towards him.   He also said that there would only be

Liverpool supporters in one area of the ground where my boy had received his ticket
6




    STATEMENT OF

    HOME ADBRESS

    D.O.B.   20.07.60

    P.O.S.   02.05.89

    STATEMENT FOR FILE:    88/16220/GT/PS




    On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989, my friend and I travelled

    by hire car to Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge

    Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



    Ve left Liverpool at 9.45 am and arrived in Sheffield at approximately

    12 o'clock.    On arriving we had a couple of pints and left the public

    house at 2 o'clock.



    On arriving at the ground we walked up to turn—stile 'B' where there

    were quite a lot of people queuing to gain access.     A Mounted policeman

    was using his horse to force people into the rails and through the

    turn—stiles.    As I watched he knocked two people over and did not appear

    to be apologetic at all.



    As I entered through the tura-stile I noticed ghat the police had opened

    the concertina gates to the left of     ae and there was only one policeman

    on that gate who was not checking tickets at all.



    I walked through the tunnel on the inside and into the ground.     The

    crush from the people who had gained access through the gate forced

    us down through the ground and up to about 10-15 foot from the fence

    at the front of enclosure *B'.    This was about 2.55 pra.



    Just after kick-off everybody appeared to crush forward causing ne to

    be forced towards the fence at the front.     The screams and shouting

    and crying were overwhelming, all I wanted to do was to escape the crush.
                               -   2-




 Because of the downward movement of the crowd and my proximately

to the gate I was eventually catapulted out and onto the pitch.

I tried to regain some composure but my back was hurting so much

I doubled over in pain.



Eventually, to make room for other people to be rescued from the

crowd I climbed over still in pain to section 'O' where I was

helped by the police.     I just stood watching what was happening

and disbelieving py own eyas.           I stayed in the stand for approximately

10 minutes when I could take no more, I climbed out of this section

and into the side of the stand where there was a gap and walked out of

the ground.



My three friends were with me,

            *6 walked together back to the car and used some nearby

telephones to ring home and let them know we were o.k.



Later on, about an hour later, the lads from the other car came and

we realised that Eric was missing.          We went to the nearest Police

Station where they told us which hospital people were being taken to

proa the ground.   On finding that the Royal General Hospital was being

used we all decided to go there to see if Eric had been admitted.



On arrival, we were told to go into a waiting room n'here we were

give descriptions of the dead and injured but Eric was not described

as one oi these.



Two of the lads stayed whilst we went back to the Police Station were

they had opened up a hall for people looking for friends and relatives

involved.   This was to no avail so we walked back to the cars to see if

he had made his way there.



At about 6 o'clock the other lads arrived with no news whatsoever of

Erics whereabouts so we decided to go back to the Boys Club Hall that

the police had opened.
                                <-3-




We were told at the police station two hospitals had a number of

people who had not been identified.    We decided to drive to these

hospitals to see if Eric was there.



On arrival at the hospital at      \isham we were told to described

Eric but he was no there and that the dead were being kept for

identification at Hillsborough.



We travelled back to the ground and two of my friends went in and

looked at some photographs but realised that Eric was not amongst them.



We then went back to Hie Boys Clubsbut by this time it had closed

and policemen directed us to a ch irch hall that had been opened

to cater for friends and family of the injured and dead.



We sat there for a while and kept on ringing his home as we had been

told that a number of people who had been ‘slightly injured had been

taken back to the station art} put on a train home.



At about 1.00 am we travelled back to Halisham hospital to see if he

was there but this was also to no avail.



After about half an hour we went back to the church hall and stayed

there.



Four of the lads who were with us went back to the ground to see if he

had been placed there and after looking at some photographs went in and

identified his body and came back and told us that they had identified

him by a cheque that He had on him with his wife's name on it.



We eventually decided that there was no point in staying and decided

to go home to Liverpool.



           |had to ring Eric's mother-in—law to tell her that Eric had

died and pass the message on to her daughter who was Eric's wife.
We eventually arrived back at Liverpool at 6 o'clock in the morning.



I went to hospital on 17th April with bruising to my ribs whereupon

I was x-rayed and went to see a Social Worker.



I was told by the doctor who examined me tha there was nothing broken

but I had internal bruising so he gave me tablets for the pain.



Since then I cannot sleep at all and when I do eventaully fall asleap

I wake up screwing in the night waking my wife up and waking up in

the morning with splitting headaches and find that they are now

continuing on into the day.



I went back to work on Wednesday 26th April 1989 and started trembling

twice.   Although I feel a bit better whilst in work because my mind1

is active I still cannot get these occurances out of my mind.



I have had to take 11 days off work and may even need more time.



I still have my ticket as proof and have given this to my solicitor.
%



     ’   •

    D.O.B. 23.5.66.

    D.O.S. 15.5.89.

    TAKEN BY GT/LJ/CLAIM

    FILE NO 88/16315/Hillsborough



    On Saturday morning 15th APril 1989, I travelled with 6 friends of a Sunspan Coach

    to Hillsborough to watch the semi final of the F.A. Cup Challenge between Liverpool

    and Nottingham Forest.



    We left Birkenhead at 8.00a.m. and arrived at Sheffield at about 13.45hrs that day.



    On arrival we went and bought sane chips and walked up to the ground arrived outside

    the ground at approximately 14.25.



    We queued outside the outer gates and then eventually after about 10 minutes or

    so we entered and there was absolute chaos.   The police did not appear to what was

    going cai or what to do.   I only notice four policeman that was three on horseback

    and one on foot and he was stood just by the turn—stiles.



    I got into the inner circle at about 14.50 and we stood getting our breath and

watching fans climb over the rails and pass their tickets to the police.



We then waited through the tunnel in the enclosure B and straight through to the

    front of the ground just behind the goal were we found seme roan by the railings.

This was about 14.55.



Within 3 minutes I was pinned against the fence and the pressure started to increase

rapidly.



There was a little lad infront of me and I was crushed into him forcing the breath

out of him.
 2




 'The lad vrtio was with                tried to pull me up by my hand because at this

 time he had cliirfaed onto the railings.



 Unfortunately, his hand had slipped out of mine     and he couldn't do this.



A man behind me shouted don't move it's hurting      and he was digging his nails into my

back.   At this point all I could do was shout at the police to open the gate and

eventuallythis became to hard and I gave up.



 I though at that time I not going to get out of here alive and looked over towards

 the gate, eventually the police opened the gate     and that is all I can remenfaerseeing.



 I can only assune that I was pulled out through     the gate unconscious because Icame

around by the half way line with t&ro policeman stroking my face after lying me in the

recovery position.



 I had to sit there for a while with my head between my knees to try and re-gain

composure and get my breath back.



After a while I walked away and stood up and walked over to where I last seen Alan.

He was still perched on the railings and was helping people             out of the groundby pul

them up.



Once he had seen me he jurtped down and came over to me and then walked back with me

up to the half way line we wsre we swilled ourselves.            kept on telling me that

I was pale and I should sit down and try and relax a bit.



I continued to feel faint and infact still did   w h en   we left the ground at about 16.30hrs

after the crowd had subsided.



Wien we got out of the ground we tried a number of telephones but none were available,

as the crowds were far to large,
We eventually made our way back to the coach whereon the driver decided that he would

call in at one of the service stations for us to be able to use the telephone.



We arrived heme at about 20.30hrs and went for a couple of pints before going to my

own house.



I woke on Sunday morning about 11.00 O'clock and felt so sore that my mother took me

with my brother to H&rrcw Park Hospital.



At the Hospital the Doctor examined me and said that   I had crush injuries and gave

me a collar.   He signed me off work for a week and told me to relax.   On Tuesday

18th i\pril 1989, a                     who was the Cenraunity Worker frcm S&rrcw

Park, came to see me.   He talked to me for a number of hours and what I had seen

and this appeared to help me.   he also called again on Thursday 20th i\pril 1989,

the same day that the Vicar fran Saint Saviours also arrived.



On Monday morning 24th AEril 1989, I decided to go back to work to get things out

of my mind.    I work for a week and three days but felt so bad on Wednesday 10th

SMrch 1989,    thMt I had to go to the Hospital at HBrrcw Park again.



I had pins and needles in my arm and I couldn't move it,   The Doctor said that my

shoulder was still damaged and gave me another collar to try and take sane of the

pressure off my neck.



On Friday morning 12th May 1989, I had to go again to my Doctors this time I went to

see my G.P.                                        he sent me again to Arrcw Park

Hospital and done sane ex-rays.



The EX-ray department took Ex-rays of my body and hips up to my neck infact 7 exprays

in all and I have to go back to my G.P. On Friday 19th May 1989, for my results.



I would just wish to add that if I sit for too long I get pains in my hips and if I
   ••

4..........



walk for any distance I get terrible pains in my chest and sides.   I also find that I

new get out of breath when I walk and my arm also becomes numb causing me distress

and the pins and needles are uncomfortable.
1




    Statement of

    P.O.S. 26/4/89

    D.O.B.




    On Saturday morning the 15th April 1989 I travelled with my friend to

    Sheffield to watch the semi final of the F.A. Challenge cup between

    Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest.



    We left Liverpool at 12.00 and arrived at the ground about 2.30 p.m.



    Outside the ground there appeared to be a great deal of confusion, it

    was packed and the turn styles were still closed.



    We were inside the ground entrace inside the large metal gates.



    These were kept closed by the Police and people at that point were being

    crushed and were screaming for them to open those gates.



    Instead of opening the exit agates to enable the crush to subside slightly

    the Police opened the main gate into the ground and the run forced us through

    the gates and in turn right into the ground through the tunnel.



    Once inside the ground the crowd was like a solid mass of people and we

    were in the middle of this.   The Police were on the barriers shouting

    to people entering   the ground to push back but of course we could not and

    everyone seemed to be screaming and shouting for them to stop the

    match and help them out of the enclosure.    At this point I had to stand and

    watch as my friend Colin fell to the ground and after he had managed to

    crawl back up again because he told me his legs had gone and I held him

    up and looking at him his face was purple.



    I then crawled towards the fence and over a mass of people and bodies and

    the Policeman helped me over the fence and through the gate onto the pitch.
*




     2     .




    A St. John's Ambulance man pulled me onto the pitch and told me to lie down

    and to wait until I got my breath back.



    This I did until I felt better and then I made my way over to   the gate and

    helped drag some pepple out of the crush.



    One of the lads I pulled out was quite young about 17 appeared blue in the

    face and because I could not feel him breathing I tried to   give him the kiss

    of life and a Policeman came over and said to me "LEAVE       HIM ALONE    LAD,   HE IS

    DEAD" and a St. JohASs Ambulance man came over and told me to   sit down and

    he would get me a drink.



    I was trembling and shocked.   I stayed there for a while and met

    and left the ground about 4.00 p.m. and because we could not get to the

    phone we made our way to the car with the idea that on the way home we

    would call into a service station to do this.



    We eventually arrived home in Prescot at 6.30 p.m. that evening.



    i went to Whiston Hospital at 7.00 p.m. that evening and the Doctor X^rayed

    me and told me I had bad bruising on my ribs and shoulder and may be a

    hairline fracture and he sent me to have my arm put in a sling and I now

    have to go to physio every few days.   I have not been able to eat and

    cannot sleep since this incident and the Docfcdr has also suggested a

    Councillor for me.
D.O.B. 14.11.54

D.O.S. 4.5.89.
TftKEN M GT/LJ/CIVIL
FILE NO 88/16238




On 15th April 1389, I travelled down to HillsfoBough with my two brothers              ^nd

       Midi also        by scan.



We left Liverpool at 10.15a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at about 12,00 O'ciocf.



Once we arrived we decided to go for a cup of coffee and then onto a pub further

up that road called the 'KHX*.



We sat outside the pub having a qpupfe of pints until it was time to leave for

the ground.



We arrived at the ground at about 20 past 2.00 and it was just a mass of people

around trying to get in.



On entering the ground                    went into the stands whilst         [
                                                                              and

nyself went into the Lappings Lane at about 25 to 3.00.



It was quite pancked in the ground and as tie entered we mere pushed towards the

(fiance at the front were a young lad who was caught in front of us just passed out.



I shouted at a policeman to open the fates to release us the policeman told me

to *F Off* 1 was only a accuser.



Eventually the gate was opened and           climbed out I tried this but I got

trapped muI my arm was caught against the fence.



AEtoEQT A          of   tmtffiigjtof struggling and trying to escape to free my arm,

eventually dragged me out.
We stayed birch on the fence helping people out of the cxmsh I was leaning into

the ground grabbing hold of hands and bodies whilst people and|          had hold of

my feet.



At ante point I had hold of a man's hand but due to the crush his hand slipped

away.



As the ground clear&d slightly 1 could see this man K$ing with his toe sticking cut

and he had purple lips and he was blue in the face. A supporter jumped down back

into the crush to try and give him the kiss of life this proved to be useless

he was already deadfe



Me then started using the boardings in relation to be used in advertising to

ferry fans across the pitch to the MedSdmdSut to the Nottingham Forest end.



Oae chap who we were trying to get to safety diedon the way.   We did not realise

this until a policeman said there was no use in giving resuscifcbfcion as it was

already too late.



Whilst carrying fans into the area the Nottingham Forest end 1 fell over a nunber

of bodies which had been laid out in straight lines.



Eventually at about quater past twenty past four 1 left the pitch to find my brother

and my sen and whilst we were walking we heard shouting from the stand and realsedd

that it was my brother who was on the pitch.



At about 4.30 left the ground and made our way back to the car.   Wiilst we were

cn our way we met a friend followed him to his car were we used his car phone to

ring hone to let my wife knew that we mere all ok.



We arrived hade in Liverpo&l at about 5 past 7.00 and 1 dropped my sen off at the

house and told my wife that I was going over to the pub to seeeif    m   friends were
ok and they had returned saf&ly.



It was painted out to tm thatay face was covered in foot parks I can only imagine

that this mist have been caused by bis pulling people out of the ground.



I was very shocked all the following wade and didn't realised how such until

last Monday 24th April 1989.



1 went d a m to see ray G.P.                             who gave me sleeping tablets

aid advised as to see a Counsellor which I intend to do.



1 still tatave nightsiates relating to the pqpole that 1 couldn't save and l have now ha

to cancel all ray driving lessiaa due to nynervouses.



1 have been getting nervous twiches in ray eyes since the incident and l cannot

stand in oonfiad spaces and blame these incidents.
statement

Address; <

D.O.S. 20/4/89



I travelled with friends on a coach to Hillsborough Football ground to watch

the Liverpool —v— Nottingham Forest Semi final.     I arrived at the ground at

about 2.15 p.m. on Saturday 15th April 19§9.     I approached the Leppings lane

end of the ground and every-thing appeared to be O.K..



I walked in through the turn styles and handed in my ticket and retained

my stubb.     I walked in through the tunnel and made my way to the middle of

the crowd to try and get a better view of the pitch.     Just after kick off

there was a large crush obviously caused by people coming in at the rear.

I was pushed sideways and forward until I ended up against the railings

on the left hand side of the ground towards the pitch.    I was being

crushed by the crowd and couldn breathe. My face and body was forced
         the
against:/railings and I thought that I was going to die. My chest

was hurting really badly.    I may have blacked out because the next thing

that I knew I was being taken out of the crush by two men on either side

of the railings.



I staggered onto the pitch and headed over to where I thought that my

friend was.    This time there were dead bodies lying all over the pitch

around me it was all that I could do to avoid standing on them.     I

eventually found my friend and we were standing around looking to see

if we could help but it was no use.    At 4.15 p.m. I told my friend

that I was leaving the ground and to get in touch with my parents because

they were probably worrying about me if they had seen this on the television.



I walked out of the ground and to the nearest house    that I could find and

telephoned my parents and said that I was alright and still alive.



I got back to the ground and found my friend and we sat there discussing

what had happened and feeling glad to be alive.
It was about that time that instructions came over the tannoy to

say that the match had been abandoned and that could we return to the

coaches to be accounted for which we did.



The coach eventually left Sheffield after waiting about 1 hour to

see if anymore would return and wwe eventually arrived home at Liverpool

at 8.30 p.m.     I have been in pain with my chest since Saturday.   My

chest is bruised and I cannot sleep due to depression and nightmares.

I feel absolutely shattered and cannot eat.     I thought that I would

get over this and eventually I had to go to the Royal Liverpool

Teaching Hospital Casualty department on the 19th April 1989 because

I could take no more pain.



When I arrived there they examined me and said that I was badly bruised
                                             to
on my legs, arms and chest and told me to gp/the G.P. locally which I

am doing later on this afternoon.    My losses are as follows



My Contact lens £50.00

Shoes value        £15.00

Money              £30.00 in £5.00 notes

Watch              £30.00

Personal Hi-fi     £35.00.
 STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS:

D.O.B.   10.02.53

P.O.S.   24.04.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE:   88/16175/GT/PS




I travelled down to Hillsborough on the morning of Saturday 15th April

1989, with my three friends by Barnes Travel on a coach.     My three

friends were                                 ]and another lad who goes

the match with us _____ whose second name I don't know.



We arrived at the ground at approximately 2.55 pm.     The queue had

diminished at that time so we walked straight through the turn—stiles

and into the Leppings Lane end.     The inside of the ground I walked

through the tunnel but as I got in there was a lad being dragged out

unconscious, ,>eople were crying and then I realised that there was

something dreadfully wrong there was also people being carried out

who appeared to be dead.



I couldn't believe this so I approached a police man and asked him if

these people were dead and what was gaing on.



The police man said that these people were dead and to try and avoid

blocking up the entrance.



I went back to my friends and told them we should wait for the crowd

to disburse which we did then made our way out to the nearest phone.



I rang my daughter to tell her I was o.k. and wouldn't be back until

later on that   evening.    We then went back to the coach and travelled

back to Liverpool after waiting for a short period.for people to arrive.



There were a lot of young lads on our coach and we urged the driver to

pull into the nearest service station to use the telephone.
♦

                                -2-




    The police were waiting with road blocks at the front of the service

    station to prevent us from entering and using the telephones.   We

    carried on a bit further along the motorway until we caae toanother

    service station where we again tried to gain access but      werebarred

    from entry by the police.



    Eventually we pulled Into Huddersfield and used the nearest public house

    telephone which was grately appreciated.



    We eventually continued our journey and arrived back in Liverpool at

    about 8.30 pm were I had to go    for a couple of pints to   calmme down

    but this proved too ouch and I had to go home after one      pint.



    I was crying all night and couldn't get to ^daep just thinking about

    all that I had seen that day but I realised that I couldn't forget

    all I had seen.



    One week I have been thinking about it and this ha^> been causing me

    great stress.



    My family had to put up with me and my wife and daughter have had numerous

    arguments with me over stupid little things that don't matter very much.



    I am still very tence and tired because of the might mares and lack of

    sleep.



    I am in the T.A and thoughayself well enough to cope with this but the

    siejht of too many people dying has proved too gross for me to bear.    I

    never want to go to a football match again if this is goiog to be the

    outcome.
*



    -    •
        STATEMENT OF

        HOME ADDRESS;

        D.O.B.   30.03.71

        P.O.S.   20.04.89

        STATEMENT FOR FILE;




        I was present at the Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest match at Hillsborough

        Stadium, Sheffield on 15th April 1989,



        I went down with sane friends in a mini bus, we arrived near the ground

        at about 2.35 pm.     I walked with my mates towards the ground.   I had a

        full ticket which I still retain possession of in my pocket.



        We joined the crowd milling about outside the gate and eventually managed

        to push our way through towards the turn—stiles.     As we got near the

        turn—stiles we queued to get in and eventually I passed through the turn—stiles

        but there was such a crush I couldn't even get my arms into my pocket to

        produce my ticket nevertheless I managed to pass through the turn—stile into

        the ground.



        By this stage I had become separated from my friends.



        As I got close to the mouth of the tunnel leading into the Leppings Lane

        Stand, I heard a cheer from behind me and when I looked I saw a gate had

        been opened and that there was a crowd of fans running into the ground.



        I decided that I had better get into the stand it I was to see the match

        and made my way into the tunnel.



        The tunnel was already tightly packed with people making their way into

        the stand.



        I eventually got through the tunnel to the back of the stand but as I

        arrived there the pressure of the people coning in behind me pushed me down
♦



    '   «                              -   2-




        the stand towards the front.



        I was pushed within a few feet of the wire mesh fence but could not be

        pushed any further because of the bodies infront of rae.



        ifi|r arras were pinned at my side by the pressure of people around me.     I

        felt the pressure growing on my chest and then I passed out.



        When I came to, it was to find myself still lying in the stand on the

        ground with a young man whom I assume to be a fan pumping on my chest

        saying "FIGHT IT, FIGHT IT".



        I could Jfeel a weight across my legs and when I looked I could see it

        was a body   lying across ray legs.     Next to me, there was a body of a

        young man and I could see that people were trying to revive him but

        apparently without any success.



        This lad whom I would not re cognise again pulled me from under the

        body across ray legs then I began to crawl towards the back of the stand.



        Eventually I managed to pull myself upright and left the ground unassisted

        and went back to the van.



        I waited at the van for my mates to come back eventually we all got together

        again and we drove back to Liverpool.       Luckily none of them appeared to be

        injured but we did stop on the way to telephone my parents and their

        parents to say we were alright.



        As a result of what took place, I did suffer bruising on my chest, back

        and arms.    I drew the attention at the hospital to this when I attended.



        I have also lost the feeling of the three outer fingers of my right hand

        along the outer e<$ge of ray right hand as well.
♦




                                          —3—
    '   •




        I have been told by the doctor that I could be suffering from a nerve

        in my ttligjh which could be affecting the feeling in my hand.



        I attended Walton hospital under unit number 095 on 18th April

        where I was seen by ]____________



        1 have to go back on 16th May for x—rays to the fracture clinic.



        I would like to say that I have been very upset at what happened and

        have still not recovered fully.
\



        %
    SBOHgWrCF
    HSE AECRESS:

    D.O.B.

    D.O.S.   26.04.89

    SEftMECT FDR FILE;   9B6/16173/CT/PS




    We left Liverpool at 7.30 era on the train to Sheffield to watch the

    Serai-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup Final between Liverpool and

    Nottingham Forest ®t Hillsborough.



    %   friends who were with me were                                    and




    We arrived in Sheffield at 10.15 am and hailed a taxi to a public house

         the ground.     We had a few pints at this public house The Mason Anns

    and left at approximately 14.40 hours.



    I walked up to the ground with my friends and arrived outside the gates

    at approximately 7 minutes to three.      I know this for a fact because a

    follow supporter asked me the time and I looked at my watch.



    As I was about to walk in through the turn—stiles the police opened the

    corrigated iron gates and the crowd rushed in and         we proceeded towalk

    through these gates into the ground and nobody checked our tickets*



    Once inside the ground we were pushed by the ensuing crowd all the way

    through to about 5 foot f rom the -^ance -ip the front of the Leppings Lane

    'B* enclosure, infact I appeared on the News at Ten that evening in full

    view of the cameras and videos of the match.



    Because of the crush I could not breath and thought I was going to collaps

    or even die    peopel were holding me up to prevent me falling and I began

    to lose consciousness.      The peop e in frontrtof me ^ere dying and I realised
         t help because I was trapped.    I eventually freed   my

and helped my friend                 over the fence.   As soon as I had

done this I looked down and saw a man lying against the wall who was

bearly conscious I picked him up and passed over to my friend and in

the process ripped my jacket, t-shirt and jeans on the fence.



After climbing over the funce myself I just lay on the pitch in pain a

St. Johns ambulance man came over and gave me a glass of water.



1 just lay there watching people being carried around and other people

being rescusitated.



At about 4.30 pm when I had regained composure I ireft the ground and

went back to the pub to find my mates.



°nce we had arrived we walked up the road to a near by house were we

knocked on the door and asked someone to let us use the telephone to

ring home and let our family know we were o.k.



The ownere of the house offered us a lift up to the station and I just

wanted to get home.



We caught the train and arrived back at Lime Street Station at approximately

8.30 pm that evening.



We want to the Crown to wait for another friend who we could not find in

Sheffield as his girlfriend was waiting on the platform for his arrival.



I went home that evening and could not sleep.



I was in shock all day Sunday and still feel ill.



On the Monday I went to my doctor,

                 who gave me sleeping tablets and painkillers for my ribs

and muscles.   I had to go back to him on 24.04.89 and he has now told me

to stay off work and gave me a doctors note, a copy of which I have given to
   %
solicitor.



I will never go to a natch again.   I atil- Teel very tired and ill and

despite being a fanatical Liverpool fan I cannot bring myself to

continue.
4


     k

STATEMENT OF

P.O .S.   as»4»@9.

DiO.B.    3.6.1911

16202/TG/IS/1



Chi the 15th April 89 I travelled by coach on my own down to Hillsborough

to watch the semi-final of the F.A. chellenge cup between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest.     The coach arrived at Hillsborough at about 1410 hours

and I decided I would shuffle in with the crowd.



I walked in through the turnstiles and retained my stubb and then

jostled my way through the tunnel and found myself pushed up to the railings.



My chest was forced tight against the railing and I was gulping and gasping

for air and almost was on the verge of blacking out when        ayounger lad

picked me up by my ankles and that is all 1 remember.



I regained conciousness by the Cola flag and a man helped me to the hoardings

adjoining the outer wall and watched them pumping another man's chest and

covering dead peoples faces.

I had lost my shoe and decided to have     a look for it. I foundit and

just sat there for about an hour.



I left the ground and arrived hom at around 8 p.m.

I was unable to telephone my family as the queues were far too large

at the local telephone.     I had to go straight home and arrived home just

after 8 o ’clock.    My wife was waiting for me and understandably was

distraught as was     my son.   My chest was hurting badly and my shoulder

was also hurting.



At the prsent time my son and wife are not speaking to me because

of the stress of the whole situation and also my unwillingness to talk

about the whole situation.



My solicitor has advised me to see ray doctor for advice on counselling.

I intend to do this as I do not feel I can continue in the present
frame of mind.
      I
STATEMENT OF

D.O.S* £6,4.09.

D.O.B. 9,6,1911

16202/T0/XS/



On the 15th April ®9 I travelled by coach cm my own down to Hillsborough

to watch the semi-final of the F.A. challenge cup between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest#    The coach arrived at Hillsborough at about 1410 hours

and I decided I would shuffle in with the crowd,



1 walked in through the turnstiles and retained my stubb and then

jostled ay way through the tunnel and found myself pushed up to the railings.



Hy cheat was forced tight against the railing and I was gulping and gasping

far air and almost was on the verge of blacking out when a younger lad

picked m   up by my ankles and that is all X remember.



I regftined canciousness by the Cola flag and a man helped me to the hoardings

M|Mf|ing       outer m i l and watched them pumping another man’s chest and

covering dead peoples faces*

I had lost my shoe and decided to have a look for it.     I found it and

juat sat there for about an hour,



I left the ground and arrived horn at around 8 p.m.

I was unable to telephone my family as the queues were far too large

at the local telephone.    I had to go straight home and arrived home just

after 8 o ’clock.   My wife was waiting for me and understandably was

distraught as was    my son.   Wy chest was hurting badly and ray shoulder

was also hurting.



At the praent time my eon and wife are not speaking to me because

of the stress of the whole situation and also my unwillingness to talk

about the whole situation*



   solicitor has advised me to see my doctor for advice on counselling.

I intend to do this mm X do not I'm ! t rnr. eftnHnu* in fiK» ormicnt.
frame of mind.
•          :


    Statement of                                              v

    D.O.B. 5/8/49

    P.O.S. 5/5/89



    On Saturday morning the 15th April 1989 I travelled in a friends car

    to Sheffield to watch the semi final of the F.A. Challenge cup between

    Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest at HiHdiorough Football Ground.



    We left Liverpool about 10.00 a.m. and arrive at Sheffield at

    approximately 13.15 hrs.



    On arriving at Sheffield we went to the Bass Charringtons Social
                                                                for
    Club where we went last year for a couple of pints and left/the

    ground about 14.10 hrs.



    I was in the main stands but my son who was with his friends had

    travelled down with us were in the Leppings Lane enclosure B.



    At about 15.05 a commotionstarted in the enclosure B.    At this

    point i started to panick when I saw people being carried out.



    I told my friends that I was going to look for my son and left the

    stands to do so.



    I went down the stairs to the rear of the ground where there were

    bodies laid out and I looked through them all to see if my son was

    there but luckily he was not.



    Just by where I had been looking at these bodies a lad was standing

    crying and wetting himself and the Policeman said he had cracked

    ribs and was distressed.   At this point my friends came up to me

    and said that they had spotted my son outside the ground with his

    friends and we had arranged to meet him there.    I wish to say that

    two of the friends who travelled with us are   now deceased and I have been
    most distressed and attended both of their funerals and have tried to
2




comfort the families but have found myself in a constant state of distress

and in fact I had to go and see My Doctor who is

______________________ to obtain tranquilisers to help me sleep.



I am self employed and have found that alot of my time has been

taken up.
Statement

Address:



On Saturday 15th April 1989 1 taavelled by coach to Hillborough in

Sheffield to watbh Liverpool play Nottingham Forest in the semi

final of the F.A. Cup.    1 arrived at the football alarm at about

13.50 hrs.   At this time there were no queues and there was no

problem whatsoever in getting into the ground.



I showed ay ticket at the turn styles which they retained and returned

to me ay stobb.   One I had gone through the turn styles I walked through

the tunnel and walkid into enslosure B and noticed at this time that

it was pretty full.   As I am quite small I could not see the pitch

very well so 1 walked down as close as 1 could to the front where I girl

moved to one side to let me in.



About 2.50 p.m. 1 realised that there were move and more people m9 m

coming in and it was getting a little tighter and then just after kfeck

off all hell let loose.



i was forced up against the fence and had to tain off my gglasses after

they were forced against the bridgeof my nose.     I held them in my hand

and tried to protect my fact by       raising my arms againstthe ralings.

tfy head ins banging and ay chest was being forced against the fence

by the Moreasing pressure of people and bodies behind me.     1 coulnot

breath and lost conciousness completely.



The next thing that 1 knew was that the top of ay body had come away

from the rails mid liwas iniaraence pain and still feeling faint.     By

this time my hearing had started to return and 1 could hear people

screaming and crying for help and to be got but.    1 then felt something

or somebody was down at my feet and 1 tried to pull my legs away but

could not so i turned around to       see   what was going on.All I could see
loads of people lying in heaps and roost of these people appeared to be

unconcious.     At this time people we climbing all over ne using ay

shoulders as steps in order to push themselves over the railing to avoid

the crush mid chaos.    My legs were still strapped and the people underneath

Imi bere being tramped over and everone was crying and screaming.      1 put ay

hand up for someone to pull me out and after what seemed a longg time some

one eventually grabbed by arm and pulled me out of the pile of people.            Many

of these people appeared to be dead and alfhaqgi 1 tried to avoid stepping cm

them in an effort to get away it could not be avoided.    1 just sat in the tunnel

mid just cried with shock and horror as to what was happening.      Ity next

thought was to get in touch with home to infora ay family that 1 was

still alive.    Bfy wife had just had a baby on Friday 14th and was still

in hospital and 1 knew that she would be watching An the television.          1

went lack to the coach and hardly noticed the journey home.    1 was still

crying and was very shaken.    Me arrived back in Liverpool about 7.40 p.m.

and 1 went to see my wife and baby at the hospital immediately.



1 did not steep very much that evening 1 felt tired and sick all that 1

could think of was that how licky 1 was to be alive.



In Sunday i was still quite numb and spent the time {getting in touch

with relatives who had been ringing earlier on to see if 1 was O.K.



On the Monday by chest and side and lower ribs were becoming increasingly

more painful.    I visit ay Doctor who is

and he examined ae and said that ay lower ribs were either broken or cracked

and just below the collar bone had also been damaged.



He said that 1 did not need to go to the hospital because they did not

strap up ribs anymore and that they would heal themselves. He gave ae

paracetamol tablets for the pain and i have been taking them since.       I

want to the Sefton General Hospital today 1804/89 at 10.45 a.m. the pain
was so bad that I flit I mist have them seen to again.          They took X-Rays

of my ribs, collar bone mid lower back.



On speaking to the Doctor he told ae that my breathing was very tense

and 1 am in fact finding it very painful when I inhale or exhale.           I am

having terrible nightmares and       when I dok get     to sleep it is notvery

long because as soon as        1 move the pain in ray   ribs wakes ae up.



1 have also had to go to the Opticians to replace my lost gglasses.

1 had to pay £10.40 for        an eye test and 1 had    to buy new glassesfrom

Bennetts tor £35.00 the        bridge of my nose is still hurting ae and 1 am

suffering very severe headaches end i aa extensively bruised on my

arms and left hip.




Signed                .... .



In the presents of:
P.Q.B.      16.9.31.

D.O.S. 18.5.89.

TftKEH BY Gf/LJ/

BUJS NO 88/16334/Hillsboroogfa


Cta Saturday 15th April 1989, I travelled by hired car with ay friend

t° Hillsbnoough t» watch the aaii final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between Liverpool

- v - ttottinghani Barest.



We left Liverpool at approximately 11.00 hrs and arrived in Sheffield at about 14.00hrs



On arrivalwe walked to the ground and notice that the ground was completely crowded

at approximately 14.15 hrs.



We eventually entered the ground at 14.30 hrs and walked in threw the tunnel into the

enclosure.



Q» entrance %«e were pushed toy the crowd and I appeared on a photograph in the Today

tfewepapers a copy of which i have given to my Solicitor.



At about 14.40 hrs the crush was becoming unbearable and my friend                  began

to panidc because he couldn't breath.



He   mbs   screaming and most disraught because of this.     I considered that if I hadn*t

been trying to help hia 1 would have           tout myself



There was absolute mayhem in there and although we tried to get towards the one gate

that we could see that had been opened we were constantly pushed and stauffed in all

directions.



Eventually, we approached the front fence and gate and ptm police were pulling police

out of the crowd i.e. that corpse     .e. one every five seconds or so with a great cteal
of effegt.
Wte remained in this crush *ntil about 15.20hrs when after the crush had eased

slightly we pushed our way backwards away from the fence towards the tunnel.



I notice as the crush eased off that people were dropping to the floor many of them

were dead mid certainly unconscious.



On escaping the crush we stood in a state of shock gasping for air and watching the

suporters carry out tfie dead and injured.   The police were standing and watchingf

and agppeared to be quite beiiidered. At one point I saw a supporter who was standing

over a body viiich appeared to be either his father or older brother with a polioe-

woaran looking on.   Bie supporter grabbed hold of this policewoman by the collar

mid said * Are you a qualified polciewoman*, her reply 'Yes of Cousse'.

He then pulled her down and said give him the kiss of life.



I personally think that if the police had given the kiss of liie to nore people

instead of standing around, the injuries would have been far lass.



After feeling really disgusted and also questioning the head police officer who

also appeared bewildered I was so madethat I left the ground at 15.50 hrs.



We eventually left Sheffield and returning to the car and arrived home just before

7.00 O'clock that evening.



On the Tuesday maiming 18th J^aril 1989, I went to my G.P. who is            and told

him that I oculdn&t sleep and • was acing from head to foot and I also found that I

was breaking down unoontroably in tears and would sob for 20 minutes at a time and

about 10 or 20 times aday.



He immediately, told me that l couldn't work for 2 weeks which caused me great

financial difficulty.



I find this so because I work on a ccmraision basis for the Independent Orders of

flanasters, a Canadian Company.
Although I am employed by them l have to sell three memerships per week in order to

continue ray eaplytesoent.   1 have been told that 1 should obtain this figure as a

mimirami S tandard.




Because 1 have bean in a state of shock 1 have been not able to gain the enthusiam

necessary for a sale job such as this and 1 bftame the above incidents described for

this.



I have been to my Or, twice since these incidents to ask for a tonic or something

because of lack of sleep and a geeeral feeling of tiredess on beinf run down*



1 new wish to see a Sjpecdklist and 1 an prepared to do so as ny back is still painful

which l believe that it is due to the crushing effects on that day.



1 also wish to add that 1 now have to go back to my Dr. tomorrow for mare abdication.
 D.Q.B. 24.9.70.

 D.O.S. 25.4.89.

 TAKEN BY CT/LJ/CIVTL

 FILE NO 88/



 On Saturday morning 1 5 th April 1989, I travelled with my family and friends ctown

 to watch the semi final of the F.A. O p between Nottingham ftorest and Liverpool.



 I arrived at the ground at about 2.30p.m. I was eventually forced in through the

 turn stiles and towards towards the Stands aainly because the gates at the bade

 had been opened and there ware many crowds coming into the ground.



 I had just about fallen into the Main stand behind the goal when I rr»ild see the

crush below me, people were putting their arras tp trying to protect themselves

against the crusfr and it was like a solid mass.



I felt so helpless because I couldn't help I stayed there and watched for about
15 minutes.



I walked down the steps and seen three people lying dead whilst another supporter

was giving the kiss of life to fchperson v*x> was obviously unconscious.



At this point I couldn't take arrpooce and decided to get out.



I ran out of the     ground and into the Main Office area were X knocked on the door

to try and use the telephone the woman who was inside the office refused

and said 'you cannot cane in to which I pleaded,' will you please let me in
and she said 'NO*.



I then san around to the Nottingham Barest end of the ground and knocked at an
adjacent,
•_      house door where in the owner allowed me to use the telephone.
I then returned to the ground where I met taf brother as prior arranged.



We then want back into the ground and met up with a few more friends who we

could find and sat in there tendering what exactly had happened vwwere all

very shocked and trembling and realised that we couldn't help any further.



My friends and I made our way away from the ground to a local pub were we had

arranged to meet after the match and eventually maiie.our way           the train

stattfftjau



We arrived bade in Liverpool at about 9.30p.m. where tpcn we went heme and

stayed in all evening wonderibgexactly what had happened to me.



I went to Walton Hospital on Monday 17th April 1989, because my chest was hurting

badly and also      muscles and back were very stiff.   The doootor at the hospital

fcfae hospital a            told me that there was not anythign broken but I had

internal brusing.



This was after Bx—Rays had been taken . And I was given a course of tablets fear

the pain for a cotple of days.



I am new going to see ray G.P. at the Vauxhall Health Centre because I cannot sleep

mid I have constant nightmares, cold sweats and I am still very, very sore and

very much shocked at what I have seen and been through.
 Statement of

D.O.B. 5/7/70

P.O.S. 2/5/89

Address:




On Saturday morning 15th April 1989 I travelled to Hillsborough by

Special train to watch the semi final of the F.A. Challenge cup.



We left Liverpool at 11.00 a.m. and arrived at Sheffied at 14.05 p. m.



We were then escorted to the ground by the Police and I arrived at the

ground at approximately 14.10 p.m.    On arrival at the ground there were

ho queues and we just walked straight in and through the tunnel which was

quite full at this time.



I walked into the middle   of the ground in enclosure B and because it

was getting over crowded I moved to the left hand side of the goal

at about 10-15 ft from the fence.



At about 14.30 hours this started filling up and the crush became

far worse.



1 eventually hauled myself over the barsi and escaped this crush and

began to help the medical services.



I was carryibng one chap on an advertising board but he died and the

Police Officer told me to put him down,    i carried another chap to

the Gym and repeated this process carrying the dead and dying bodies

across the pitch until about 4.30 when i just sat down to regain my

breath.


                                                ->!il.
I eventually gained composure and left the ground'about 17.00 rafe where
                                                          -        i
I go I. on a bus to the main station and the train left the station about

18.45 and I arrived back in Liverpool at 20.30 hrs when I i?hng: inqmqis
                                                                  u
.V




     2   . -

     Although I was not hurt very much I have terrible nightmares and I am still

     very shocked that I did not expect anything like this just going to watch

     a football match.
Statement

Address:



On Saturday 3.5th April 1989 I travelled from Liverpool to Hillsborough

to watch the Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forrest semi-final.



We arrived afc the ground at about 13.30 to 13.45 and everything appeared

to be O.K.   I joined the queue about 6 or 7 people went through the turn

styles and 1 put ray ticket in and detained the stubb.   1 made ay way

to the middle of enclosure B in the Leppings Lane standing area.     At

this time there were quite alot of people there but nothing unusual for

a semi final.   It remained like this until just after the kick off.



As soon as the players kicked off 1 realised that we were being pushed

forward a number of people had done in at the rear and I fell forward

and was trying to protect a young child who was in front of my who

was being shielded from the crushingg crowd.    1 did this until I was

forced against the fence and could do no more to help the child.



My chest was forced very tightly against the fence and is bedly

bruised and 1 could mat breathe and 1 must have lost conciousness

and the next thing that 1 knew 1 was lifted out of the crush by a

Policeman said a Police woman.   All that I could hear was screams

of people shouting help I am dying help me please.



1 was hoisted on the pitch where 1 collaposd for about 20 minutes

St. JohnSs Ambulance man then approached me and asked me for help.

Although I was feeling very weak 1 did carry a body using an advertising

board as a stretcher and tied to avoid stepping of other people who were

obtasiously dead.   We placed the man down and 1 just sat down Hi the pitch

and cried.



1 realised that 1 could tata* no more I did not know what time it was but

1 walked out of the ground and made fciy way to the coach park and returned

to home to Liverpool at 7.30 p.m. 10 went straight home, stayed in and
2




feeling glad to be alive. I was badly shocked and did not go out to ay

doctors or the hospital for fear of m a t i n g their tiae.



iaa goingtfco the hospital tomorrow to have ay rite and back looked at as

I ara still in alot of pain.




Signed...... .



In the presence of
D.O.B. 11,9.65.

P.O.S. 13.5.89.

TftKEIl BY GT/LJ/

FILE NO 88/16226/__                                                                   f



On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I vent by coach with my friends    to Hillsboaxu^

to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Cup Final between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest.



We left Stoke at 11.30a.m. in the morning and arrived at Sheffield at 14.30hours,



The crowd was tremdous when we got there but ws got through the entrance into

the tunnel and we were carried by the crowd into the ground.



Because of this crush I think that I must have been force against the barrier as

I vfisin great pain   and I felt my jeans ripping when it was caught on the edge of

something I felt a terrible pain in my ankles and I couldn't breath I must have

been about 3^-4 foot off the ground.



At this point I passed out and came around as I was being passed over the heads of

other fans who was slapping my face and saying don't die, stay awake the fans pushed

me over their heads and I headed towards the back of the ground where I was lifted

into the stands above the enclosure.



At this point I was semi conscious and I only rementoer being carried through exit

X and being laid on the floor by the tall entrance against the wall.



Another fan approached me and said that he was a trainee Nurse and placed me into

the recovery position he asked me where I was hurting and I told him my ribs

testicles and ankle.     In talking to this man he explained that he was from

Woo].ton and that he would stay with me and keep me awake until the medical sarviceS

arr i red so I could be attended to.
•   ................................




After a while a policeman came over and asked this roan was I breathing the man said

he has broken ribs and suffering fran shock I still semi conscious at this time

and kept on wanting to go to sleep.

                                                                                                          *
Although things were vauge a nisrber of other people came over including an ambulance

man who said that he would get a stretcherto me                      as soon as possible.



After about 40 minutes an Anbulance man came                      to me with a blanket and proceeded to

put me onto the blanket with the aid of two policeman and this man fran Woolton.



They carried me to the Anfculance using this blanket where I was taken with a nuntoer

of other fans to the Northern General Hospital in Sheffield at about 4.45p.m.



On arrival at the hospital there was absolute chaos and I was left in a corridor

until aDr. came to see me.                      The Doctor examined me and went away.



After a couple of minutes a woman came over to hold my hand and take me away and

to generally canfort me.                      She explained that she had been off today cane in to

help to attend to the dead and injured.



Eventually, they took me into the instant ward ware there was canplete chaos whilst

I was lying therewas people who were close to death and people who ware being

resuscitated and I just didn't want to watch,                      everytime I closed my eyes so to

not to look at this the nurses and Dotors cane and shook me to make sure that I

kept ray eyes open.



I really didn't know what was happening, I just couldn't belifeve that I had just

prior teen to a match and all this was actually happening to me.                        They were times

when I actually felt that I wanted to die with them and I didn't have to observe

this any longer.                       Also I was in great pain and I just felt like giving in completely.
After a while the Doctors came over to me and stripped   me and again me left me there

for a While.



Another Doctor came over and said 'Your Ok now you can go', at this point I couldn't

even lift my head.   Just after this Doctor walked away another Doctor came over and

said 'Your going nowhere son', and wrote on my leg    testurine fear blood and send for

full ex-rays.



This they did.



They ex-rayed my ribs and pelvis and I was then taken to Ward 66 were I was placed c*i

a bed.



At about 7.00 O'clock   the nurse came and I was given injections in my rear and I

eventually went to sleep.



I wake up at about 8.00'Clock that evening and sanebody had brought in a portable

television so ws watached the news.   When I heard that at least 70 was dead I

couldn't believe what was going on it really hit me then and I just broke dewn

in tears.



At about 11.00 O'clock that evening my mother , father and girlfriend cane over to

me to see me and eventually left at about 12.45p.m.



I stayed in hospital until the next day I was discharged at 13.30hrs.



On (tonday morning I went to see my G.P. and he signed me   offfor two weeksand give

me pain tablets and advised me to see a social warker.



On the Friday before I was due to go back for wark he signed me off for another week

and insisted that I relax.



I was told that I had suffered frcm bad crush injuries that is severe brusing my
4


wjjp^ipe was crushed and   testicles were badly cut and bruised.   Also my ankle was
bruised and sprained and I had severe shock.



In the crush I lost my trainers and my jeans were ccnpletely ripped into two at seme
                                        -                                            i
point or other I wet myself in pain my underpants were completely lost as they were

cover* d in blood and urine and had to be cut off.


                                                                                       %
I also wish to add that my shirt was ripped and this cost me £40.00.    Mp training

shoes were also lost as mentioned above and these cost me £50.00,
      STATEMENT OF

      D.O.S.      26.4.R9

      IJ. 0 , H




     On h< turday 15th April      L909 I travelled with my friends by mini-bus to watch the

     Semi -■inal of the P. A. Challenge Cup Final between Liverpool and Nottingham

     Forrc,;t.




     I arrived at the ground about       1420 hours and it was absolute chaos.




     There where no Stewards and only a couple of       Police on horseback, whoI noticed

     where from Liverpool.




     Some f'oliceman told us to stop crushing that the match was being put—back until

     ever/body had entered the ground.       We eventually got in through   the gate that
if

     had ()M(?n opened and walked through the tunnel.




     Al]    i. and me people vere screaming and I noticed that we could not move.     The

     lad ia/1     vias stood next to me fell down and as I tried to pull him up I noticed

     he way unconious.       We had to hold his scafe so as we kept his head up above the

     ground       to avoid him being trampled on.                      ^




     There was bodies strewn all around us and we could'nt help them because we were

     all stuck.




     There was a man in front of us who was obviously dead and I tried toget        to him

     to pick him up but could'nt.




 We begged and shouted at the Police to kick in the fencing so that we could get

 people out for medical attention, but because the gate was totally inadequate we
   f




could not do this.




       i.remit!uip and riVi.y^c;.iI iy     ok and at the same time also concerned for my

        and looking for- hint.




We a ked the Police why this had happened and why Notts Forrest had the larger

end < f the ground to which they give no reply.




All 'hat going through my mind was the Heysel tragedy and how those people must

have felt.




I war told to go out of the ground and as I did I passed by a lot of the dead

bodies with coats over their heads and at one point noticed a Policeman giving

the kiss of life to someone.




We (”■.-••■ritual !y left the ground and I arrived back in Liverpool at around 9.30

aft.: - trying to use the telephone on the way home.




I was still in shock until the Thursday when I went to see Dr. Blakeborough of

Smithdown Road Health Centre.            He has put me on nerve tablets and I had to go

back in a fortnights time as iriy back, arms and legs were all-strained and my

chest was hurting.     This was explained to me as crush injuries.




I feel as though I will never go to the match again, not even the Derby Match

where my friend Terry Derracot has bought me tickets for the Stand.




I wish to add that on the Sunday I went to the Service for the bereaved but had

to leave because the que and crowd was overwhelming.
STATEMENT OF

HOMEjADDRESSL:

P.O.B.   30.03.71

i O.S.   20.04.89
                                                                               ■   ■


E                niJl




I was present at the Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest match at Hillsborough

Stadium, Sheffield on 15th April 1989.



I went down with some friends in a mini bus, we arrived near the ground

a t about 2.35 pro.     I walked with my mates towards the ground.   I had a

full ticket which I still retain possession of in my pocket.



We joined the crowd milling about outside the gate and eventually managed

tn push our way through towards the turn—stiles.       As we got near the

turn-stiles we queued to get in and eventually I passed through the turn—stiles

but there was such a crush I couldn't even get my arms into my pocket to

produce my ticket nevertheless I managed to pass through the tum-stile into

the ground.

                                                             I

By this stage I had become separated from my friends.




As I got close to the mouth of the tunnel leading into the Leppings Lane

Stand, I heard a cheer from behind me and when I looked I saw a gate had

been opened and that there was a crowd of fans running into the ground.



I decided that I had better get into the stand it I was to see the match

and made my way into the tunnel.



The tunnel was already tightly packed with people making their way into

    Fitand.



    entuai I,y got through the tunnel to the back of the stand but as I

arrived there the pressure of the people coming in behind me pushed me down
                                -2 -




ih? stand towards the front.



I was pushed'withih a few feet of the wire mesh fence but could not be

pushed any further because of the bodies infront of me.



My arms were pinned at my side by the pressure of people around me.        I

felt the pressure growing on my chest and then I passed out.



When I came to, it was to find myself still lying in the stand on the

ground with a young man whom I assume to be a fan pumping on my chest

saying "FIGHT IT, FIGHT IT".



I could feel a weight across my legs and when I looked I could see it

w;tr. a body   lying across my legs.   Next to me, there was a body of a

yo'.mg man and I could see that people were trying to revive him but

apparently without any success.



This lad whom I would not recognise again pulled me from under the
                                                        f
body across my legs then I began to crawl towards the back of the stand.



Eventually I managed to pull myself upright and left the ground unassisted

and went back to the van.



I waited at the van for my mates to come back eventually we all got together

again and we drove back to Liverpool.      Luckily none of them appeared to be

injured but we did stop on the way to telephone my parents and their

parents to say we were alright.



As a result of what took place, I did suffer bruising on my chest, back

     sum;,     I drew the attention at the hospital to this when I attended.



 i !>ivc also lost the feeling of the three outer fingers of my right hand

along the outer edge of my right hand as well.
                                  -3 -




I have been told by the doctor that I could be suffering from a nerve

in my thigh which could be affecting the feeling in my hand.



I*attended Sailton hospital under unit number 095 on 18th April

v/here I was seen by



I have to go back on 16th May for x-rays to the fracture clinic.



I would like to say that I have been very upset at what happened and

have still not recovered fully.




                                                        f
STATEMENT- OF

HOME ADDRESS:

D.O.B.      20.07,60

D .0. S >   02.05.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE:          88/16220/GT/PS




On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989, my friend and I travelled

by hire car to Hillsborough to watch the semi-finalof           the F.A. Challenge

Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



We left Liverpool at 9.45 am and arrived in Sheffield at approximately

12 o'clock.       On arriving we had a couple of pints and left the public

house at 2 o'clock.



On arriving at the ground we walked up to tum-stile 'B' where there

were quite a lot of people queuing to gain access.           A Mounted policeman

was using his horse to force people into the rails and through the

 turn-stiles.      As 1 watched he knocked two people overhand did not appear

 to be apologetic at all.



 As I entered through the turn-stile          I noticed thatthepolice had opened

 the concertina gates to the left of me and there was           only one policeman

 on that gate who was not checking tickets at all.



 I walked through the tunnel on the inside and into the ground.          The

 crush from the people who had gained access through the gate forced

  us down through the ground and up to about 10-15 foot from the fence

  at the front of enclosure 'B'. This was about 2.55 pm.



  ■uf!1          kick-off everybody appeared to crush forward causing me to

      |(     |    j ir<i   the fence at the front.   The screams and shouting

  and crying were overwhelming, all I wanted to do was to escape the crush.
Because of the downward movement of the crowd and my proximately

l.o the gate I *was Eventually catapulted out and onto the pitch.

I tried to regain "omc composure but my back was hurting so much

I doubled over in pain.



Eventually, to make room for other people to be rescued from the

crowd I climbed over still in pain to section 'C' where I was

helped by the police.       I just stood watching what was happening

and disbelieving my own eyes.       I stayed in the stand for approximately

10 minutes when I could take no more, I climbed out of this section
             Hi
arid into the side of the stand where there was a gap and walked out of

the ground.



My three friends were with me,

I           We walked together back to the car and used some nearby

telephones to ring home and let them know we were o.k.



Later on, about an hour later, the lads from the other car came and

we realised that Eric was missing.       We went to the nearest Police

Station where they told us which hospital people were being taken to

from the ground.       On finding that the Royal General Hospital was being

used we all decided to go there to see if Eric had been admitted.



On arrival, we were told to go into a waiting room where we were

give descriptions of the dead and injured but Eric was not described

as one of these.



Two of the lads stayed whilst we went back to the Police Station were

they had opened up a hall for people looking for friends and relatives

involved.        This was to no avail so we walked back to the cars to see if

he had made his way there.



    !       >\    o'cl o< the other lads arrived with no news whatsoever of

Wrier; whereabouts so we decided to go back to the Boys Club Hall that

the police had opened.
We were told at the police station two hospitals had a number of

people who had not been identified.   We decided to drive to these

hospitals to see if Eric was there.



On arrival at the hospital at Halisham we were told to described

Eric but he was no there and that the dead were being kept for

identification at Hillsborough.



We travelled back to the ground and two of my friends went in and

looked at some photographs but realised that Eric was not amongst them.



We then went back to the Boys Club but by this time it had closed

and policemen directed us to a church hall that had been opened

to cater for friends and family of the injured and dead.



We sat there for a while and kept on ringing his heme as we had been

told that a number of people who had been slightly injured had been

taken back to the station and put on a train home.



At about 1.00 am we travelled back to Halisham hospital to seeif he

was there but this was also to no avail.             t



After about half an hour we went back to the church hall and stayed

there.



Four of the lads who were with us went back to the ground to see if he

had been placed there and after looking at some photographs went in and

identified his body and came back and told us that they had identified

him by a cheque that he had on him with his wife's name on it.



V>e eventually decided that there was no point in staying and decided

!.o go home to Liverpool.



            Iiad to ring Eric's mother—in—law to tell her that Eric had

died and pass the message on to her daughter who was Eric's wife.
We eventually arrived back at Liverpool at 6 o'clock in the morning.




I went to hospital on 17th April with bruising to my ribs whereupon

I was x-rayed and went to see a Social Worker.



I was told by the doctor who examined me tha there was nothing broken

but I had internal bruising so he gave me tablets for the pain.



Since then I cannot sleep at all and when I do eventaully fall asleep

I wake up screaming in the night waking my wife up and waking up in

the morning with splitting headaches and find that they are now

continuing on into the day.



I went back to work on Wednesday 26th April 1989 and started trembling

twice.   Although I feel a bit better whilst in work because my mind

is active I still cannot get these occurances out of my mind.



I have had to take 11 days off work and may even need more time.



I still have my ticket as proof and have given this to my solicitor.
STATEMENT O F ___

D.O.S.             26.4.89"




On die 15th April .1989 I travelled with my boyfriend                                       in his car
in     iillsbot'ough to watch the Semi-Final of the F.A. Challenge Cup Final between
Liverpdb| aKd NbttMghfem Forrest.                  My name is


We arrived at the ground at 1440 hours and                     queued up outside theground        until
about 1450 hours when all of a sudden they                     opened the gates.


The growd just seemed to pour into the enclosure through the tunnel into
enc Losure B in the Leppins Lane end.


When we got by the gate we tried to turn back but                       could'nt because of the
forward rush of the queue.
       v                  " ■■'
                              ■      *'■
             .

We were shoved to the front of the ground in the middle about 10 foot from the
fence and then we split up.


I was elbowed in the                 eye and fell to the floor, I managed to pull myself up
but as I did so the pressure was tremendous and my face was forced into an­
other supporters back.


It   vj-.i s only the presence of mind of another supporter who pulled my head back
and sure saved my life.


I did lose conciousiness and fell to                  the floor again but tijfosupporters who
were behind me picked me up and held me a loft.


I actually regained conclousiness and was picked up and passed overhead to the
crowd and onto the pitch.                  As I arrived onto the pitch I          noticed therewere a
number of dead bodies stacked up and I passed out again.


I don't know how long this was, a Policeman gave me a drink of water after
bringing me to,


I could'nt walk and sat against the barriers before making my way back to the
car to meet Andy and I must of sat there for about an hour.


I walked back dodging the dead bodies and out towards the car.


After meeting                     Iat the car I arrived back in Liverpool at 7.40 and rang my




                 ■hi. I   nt tp t,(u; Royal Liverpool teaching hospital and they gave me
                                                   ■■'1 ! ■;.11l.-’M !/• -Im   ;i::          "•   ' '.' ''
tin ■■! x-ra,ys on my back and said I was suffering from the effects of crushing.
I have not been eating or sleeping and I am going to see my Doctor who is

                                            tomorrow as I have an appointment.


I !"“lit to work on Wednosd'iy 19th April 1989 because I could'nt stand being
■o   tome alone and also 1 life right next to   Anfield Football Ground, and
tju ;atm.osphere,. was .upsetting me.


I to am suffering from shock I being       and I am in a similar situation
as my experiences were almost the same as that of




                                                            f
lAJiWi-SS   Sb^Aemsi^c^

. i<Ce^                   Co^OLAp-^lUv^ \u v   l 6v\ ^                  A
            ivcx-^)-f- uApCU/                                           1?

            LooOkUjT-^VvoJeL^S J2CU, t, ec Vtvv'j U i a -<''            c

            Co>T\CXt-^C>- cTj ~ToGt,C& A j^        (3 "^ a—X-           3
                                                                        £.




                                                                3   )
    L   l    __________________________________________________________________ |/

    Cheshire will say as follows:-



    O n S a t u r d a y the 15th April              1989    I travelled          to She f f i e l d   for

    the p u r poses of a t t e n d i n g           the Semi - F i n a l     of      the      F.A.     Cup

    between             L i verpool and N o t t i n g h a m Forest at the Hil l s b o r o u g h

    Ground.             I had a ticket         for the m a t c h      and        travelled          there

    wit h my teenage Nephew.



    I       arrived at T u r nstile            'B' at the L e p p i n g s Lane end at 2.30

    p.m.       It was obvi o u s            to me that there were            too      many      people

    attempting              to get into the turnstiles and a crush s i tuation

    developed.              Police/     I noticed/         tried    to shut the           gates       but

    the       weight         of    the crowd pushed          them open again.                I noticed

    three horses             trying to control             the     crowd     but       the     numbers

    were       such         that    this      made little d ifference.                    It was also

    obvi o u s     to me       that/    despite      the concern at          the crush/             there

    was       no    v i o lence        in    the     crowd/        although        we/    as regular

    supporters/            were amazed at the              apparent         inability          of     the

    Police         to      organize         the crowd in such a fashion that would

    have      led us into the ground                 in an orde r l y fashion.



At 2.35 p.m.            I got out of the crowd and stood                     by       the     gate

that was e v e n t u a l l y to be opened.                 At that time          I really was

    not interested                in going back into,the queue and was prepared

    to miss         the game.          At 2.45 p.m.         I d e t ected    impatience         in the

    crowd          as      no-one seemed        to be going through               the turnstiles.


                                                    PAGE    1
     I did    note          a beer    can was     thrown at one Police                   Officer.




At 2.50 p.m.                the gate at        which         I    was     stood      was     opened.

Myself        and others by the gate entered                            in an orde r l y fashion

and we all wen t               through the tunnel w hich                  led into the middle

s ection of         the s t a nding area.               There were         two      much     smaller

entrances           nearby           which     w ere     not being used.                 The y looked

like m i n o r d o o r w a y s as compared                   to    the     wid e     tunnel.         We

could        have           entered      through       these d o o r w a y s had we known or

been led that wa y but no-one e x plained                               the situation.             Once

t hrough          the        tunnel      I could       see that the s t a nding area was

full.        I tried          to turn back but the weight of people                              coming

in     from        behind        prevented         me from d oing so.                I knew there

were several                thousand people who had come                   through        the tunnel

and at this             time    I was e x t r e m e l y c o ncerned and             frightened.

At 2.53 p.m.                as we were all being crushed and moved d own the

t erracing         I came a g a i n s t a crash barrier.                    I could not            move

to a void         it/       although    I was c o n t i n u a l l y b eing pushed            forward

by     the        crowd        entering        from      the rear.          I at t e m p t e d    to go

u n d e r the barrier,               rather than risk g e t t i n g              pinned      agai n s t

it.      There was a man                to my right who was pinned agai n s t                       the

barr i e r and          I could hear him screaming but                          could      not     help

him.         As     I wen t down my head stuck agai n s t                        the barrier,         I

some h o w mana g e d          to get free but           I injured          my      neck     and     my

back.         My        left     arm     was     then stuck around                 the leg of the

barrier.           I was pushed dow n w a r d s but could                   not mov e        as     the

leg     was        a g a i n s t my armpit.            I suffered much b r u ising to my

left a r m and              rib-cage.        I d on't k now        ho w     I      got     free     but

eventually              I    did.       I tried to stand up but couldn't,                          so I


                                                PAGE     2
   pushed       both hands upwards and someone must then have                              pulled

   me up from the floor.



   At 2.56 p.m.           I was a p p r o x i m a t e l y halfway        d own the steps.          At

   this        time     I had lost my watch,             scarf,     glasses and shoes.               I

   found myself walk i n g on a body.                     I c o u l d n ' t help w h o e v e r      it

   was on the floor as                 I just could n ' t move my limbs              to protect

   myself let alone help anyone else.



   We     shouted        to      the Police on the pitch beyond                   the b a r riers

   that there were people under foot but they o n l y shouted back

   t elling us to "push                back".       Myself         and     others     told        the

   P olice       to     ope n     a small     gate which we noticed               to our right

   and    to cut dow n           the     front     fencing         but     ou r   shouts         wer e

   ignored.



  At     3.00     p.m.     at kick-off,          I felt myself getting w e a k e r and

  weaker.        Panic started           to set in amon g s t the crowd as                 there

  was     no     wa y     out.         Many     people     wer e    s c reaming and others

  si m p l y walked       over our heads,          desperate        to get out.

The match was stopped at 3.06 p.m. and at that time we                                  were

still    fighting for our lives.                   Several     times I felt the air

   was    totally squeezed out of me and I had                           to make a c o n scious

   decision       to stay calm and              to keep br e a t h i n g d e e p l y as best I

   could.



   At a p p r o x i m a t e l y 3.15     p.m.    a gap a p p eared on my left             and        I

   went        into it and was           fo r t u n a t e l y helped o ver the fence into

   a n o t h e r sect i o n of the ground.


                                                 PAGE 3
  Throughout          this   terri f y i n g        incident      there   was    no     crowd

  violence,           simply     panic         at     the   situation      we    were       in.

E v e ryone   tried     to   hel p    each          other   but     unfortunately        to

little effect.

      As   I wa l k e d onto    the pitch           I noticed several Police Officers

      si m p l y   s t a n d i n g there not helping those            left in the Lepp i n g

   Road Stand.          I was   in a state of shock and simply got out of

   the ground as bes t I could.                     I have since      been      to    see     my

   D o c t o r with    regard   to the crush injuries               that I received.



           Signed




           Dated
    /lAr         raffvj f                   ............................

                            i- k£.                          She*"*                  tu ifis(a             iU vj    .                               .......

            ^ no Xm. (_l                   0uo



    2- * ^ ^ ^ A \                                  (yoo^A./v^                — ■ ^          O'Vn.cVC-e^           Wv~^            UJc^^'V

    2 - “ '1 > s                (s~ciV C \a \        © - ^ \V jl        Ct \A .i\v                          V^rs^v^o                    vjO O o        0 ^ 5 -^

                            w      _ Vs**           c^Majou^                                       OovO^Le             <#^       .'*Av'wcV-fi.o,

    2 -                W\       Cr^'^^,             N V'-'v'^CV^ \5<v'-fiv               -                                           CsJcAv.V

    2. * S o ^                                                                -—             O    ml   <^l/-€.(\       vA/v ^

    'X.' S 3 ^vn.           .^...^m.'»s\?<x.(tV^C                                  *-~       ^         V\oAv

                        -Q.v^v£ KJt(\                         <-^C Ova»v^                    _         Qo\s ^ «toi\                              -V \ «vv-e .

2-s4> y *                   SV A \                  (^(v^sV             ■—          Vk«. \>£ C^v^2.r 3                                  ^OOsjf *'V» »v ^
                                      c \.v >.<^v   '^{N-0kx\          \j_^%_ v\             "^5^                       ‘‘V ' V A A .      V w     VA^OV-#^


                            *\        WJi*£XD\/VC*\i&5C                                                                V*-S*A&..

3 'O O f y ^                     Q N O 'j'v O 'J y iV v ^       V    ’x C l C - o ^               \ ' ^     V

3>'C>*^>^V^v                     ^ V cX^l V v                                      --^-V'\ ^                            "\v w^*.           '■‘"V

                                r^L^j^&C^je (                   v\4.>^V            A.tx^         .
3       ^                                                   Q_ •( v \ S ^ v         —            <X w \                          V W * d ^ ' 0v" ' ,




            *"     \   —     NxaJla.;^                       v w ^ /“V s v ^                                “\^>             W
N O T E S O F C O M M E N T S RE:   HILLSBOROUGH GROUND




LESLIE N O R M A N BUSH Liverpool City Building Surveyor will state :-



I     am a Chartered Surveyor and Chartered Structural Engineer and have

been employed by Liverpool City Council for over 38 years, engaged in

the     City     Building           Surveyor's     Department, which is responsible for

enforcing statutory standards of design and construction for                            general

and     specific         uses of buildings and other premises.               For the last 21

years I have been personally concerned with these matters in relation

to     ingress       and     egress, means of escape in case of fire, density of

occupation         and      the      like,    in     licensed      premises,        places      of

entertainment and public resort, shops, offices, football grounds and

other spectator sports venues,                   for 6 y ears as       Principal     Assistant,

for 9 years as Deputy City Building Surveyor and for the last 7 years

as City Building Surveyor.



Relevantly,        I have been involved with the certification of the safety

aspects of the two first division football grounds within the City of

Liverpool - Liverpool and Everton - since 1971 which was                            before   the

obligatory licensing under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.



I     have full knowledge of the two grounds at Liverpool.                          I have also

visited Hillsborough three times since the disaster and have made                            and

been     supplied          with some drawings of that ground.              I am aware of the

23 turnstile allocations and layout at the Leppings Lane end.



When the Safety             of      Sports   Grounds   Act      1975    imposed a    specific

obligation         on      designated grounds to obtain a licence from the Local

Authority, the licensing authority was to be the Metropolitan                            County

- in our case the Merseyside County Council.
This came about in the following way :-



The     Licensing           of     sports grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds

Act resulted from recommendations made by                                    Lord    Wheatley,           following

his      Inquiry            into         the         Ibrox      disaster.             At        that     time     the

reorganisation of Local Government was not complete and Lord Wheatley

was     under       the impression that the Building Regulation Officers were

going to be transferred to the County                                 level.         My     predecessor          Jack

Bennett thought that that particular function would be transferred to

the County, when he gave evidence to that enquiry and                                             Lord     Wheatley

recommended           that the responsibility for certifying safety at grounds

be allocated to County level.



In the        event     the           Building           Regulation      control           function        did     not

transfer to the County but remained at district level.



In      accordance               with         Lord        Wheatley's          recommendations              the     Act

transferred the responsibility to the County but the government added

provisions          whereby            the        District      Council        Building           Authority        was

designated "interested                       parties".           As     an     "interested             party"      the

District        Council           -     in        our case the Liverpool City Council - could

appeal against the contents of, or omissions                                    from,           any    certificate

and     had     a     very        loud        voice       in practice in Liverpool, because its

expertise was readily accepted by the County.



In the case of Merseyside County Council because the only                                                two     first

division        grounds           fell        within the area covered by the same District

Council - Liverpool City Council - the procedures were agreed whereby

I     continued        to        take        an     interest      in     the licensing and I had all

dealings        with        the       buildings           and    grounds        of        the    Clubs.          This

conveniently           overlapped                 with    Building       Regulation and drinking and
public entertainment                functions              for   which      I    am     responsible.              In

relation to those other functions within my responsibilities I had to

deal with applications for alterations to                                the     Clubs       premises,          the

applications            to     the      Licensing                Justices       and     applications             for

entertainment licenses for the 300 and 500 Clubs at Everton                                              and    the

Trophy Room and Kemlyn Lounge at Liverpool.



The    County         were     therefore             happy and it was sensible that I should

also deal with the certification requirements                                   under       the      Safety       of

Sports Grounds Act 1975.



From     the     implementation             of        that       Act to the Liverpool and Everton

grounds on the 1st January 1977 until 1986 that was the                                            position.

With     the     demise        of     the County Council in 1986 Liverpool City took

back completely the responsibility for the                                issue        of        those    general

safety      certificates.              Prior          to     that time the County would consult

with me and my Department before the issue of any                                      amendment          to     the

certificates.            The        City Council delegated all the certification and

Act enforcement functions to me on its behalf.



Before 1977 and at that time, we did go through all matters                                              that     we

thought        were     relevant       to        a     Safety       Certificate             and put down the

important things.              The certificate was counted to be                             a     pretty       good

one - i.e. it covered most elements - at the time.



Between 1977 and 1986 when I took the job back wholly little was done

with the document itself.                   My         Department         kept        the        drawings       upto

date, which was quite a task because of continuous developments.

When   we       took     matters       back           in     1986    I    realised that some of the

drawings were out of date and some improvements to crowd                                            segregation
were      due.          Although             th e     L i c e n s i n g p r o v i s i o n s h a d a p p e a r e d g o o d in

1977,     s i n c e t hat t i m e f u r t h e r e x p e r i e n c e ha d b e e n                   gained         and        t here

had      b e e n th e B r a d f o r d F i r e and the P o p p l e w e l l Inquiry.                            I had given

s u b m i s s i o n s to P o p p l e w e l l and l ea r n t a lot                 from        the         evidence           given

there         and      t h e report,          in p a r t i c u l a r the e m p h a s i s w h i c h n e e d e d to be

laid o n stewarding.



P r i o r to S a f e t y Certifi c a t i o n ,              S t e w a r d i n g u s e d to b e d e a l t w i t h o n              a

v e r y ad h o c basis.              F r e q u e n t l y the s t e w a r d s w e r e e i t h e r v o l u n t e e r s or

e v e n o l d age p e n s i o n e r s p a i d small a m o u n t s of money.                               Stewarding           was

treated         as       a    way       of      getting           a     free      view        of     th e match.              That

u n s a t i s f a c t o r y s i t u a t i o n n e e d e d to be                            and wa s          to     a        g reat

e x t e n t b y E v e r t o n an d Liverpool.



It      was     c l e a r to m e f o l l o w i n g P o p p l e w e l l that s t e w a r d i n g o u g h t to be

w r i t t e n in to th e c e r t i f i c a t e s in total d e t a i l and w h e n I r e n e w e d the

certificates.                 I     first           rewrote           the    whole       of        th e     part        of     the

certificate dealing                     w i t h the stewarding,                 b e f o r e the 1 9 8 6 - 8 7           playing

season.             I n c l u d e d in the c e r t i f i c a t e is a jo b s p e c i f i c a t i o n for e a c h

steward.             T h e r e ar e m e e t i n g s w i t h the s t e w a r d s t w i c e a year.                        I told

t he C l u b t hat no o n e o v e r 65 w o u l d be c o u n t e d fit to do the job                                          (this

c a u s e d s ome d i f f i c u l t i e s       for th e Clubs)              I als o w a r n e d th e C l u b s               that

if      spot        c h e c k s d u r i n g m a t c h e s f o u n d s t e w a r d s a w a y fro m t h e i r posts,

t h e y w o u l d b e e x p e c t e d to t e r m i n a t e              their       e mployment.              Everton           at

t hat     time         were       not        paying         s ome       of     t h e i r s t e w a r d s an d t h e r e f o r e

c h a n g e d that.          The C l u b s got s t u c k into d o i n g a t h o r o u g h job.



T h e y a l s o m a d e m i n o r a l t e r a t i o n s to the                 ground         dealing         with           crowd

s e g r agation.             In     March           1987        the    General Safety Certificates were

reissued,           w i t h n e w drawings,            and h a v e b e e n          constantly              under        review

since.          In      Liverpool             City         we     c a l l e d the l i c e n c e in e a c h y e a r and
issue it afresh, dealing with any alterations to the grounds, and the

conditions         or     the     wording of the document which we think should be

done, so that these can be done during the closed season.



I am lucky in that the two Clubs under my care                          are         both     successful

clubs with a good income and have a good safety record.



We   put     particular           numbers,      which       are counted as minimum numbers,

necessary for safety for stewards.



The stewards are designated with particular jobs.                               There        are        'exit

stewards':     'relief exit stewards'                 (that is necessary to give the exit

stewards the chance of slipping away to                        have     a     cup     of     tea        etc):

'crowd      stewards' - who distribute and monitor people in seated areas

or standing on the               terraces      -     and     'safety    stewards'           who     patrol

underneath the stands.



These      latter        stewards      have     a     heavy     fire    responsibility and are

trained and certified by the Fire                      Brigade.        They     are        trained        and

qualified to raise the alarm and deal with minor fires.



Where      there        are     electric      gates        (at the Everton ground presently)

there is also provision for a                      'gate    controller'       who      sits        in     the

control      room        and is ready to push the buttons and release the gates

if necessary.

These are thoroughly set out in the terms of the                              Safety        Certificate

itself.



In   addition           the     club   have    more        stewards    who      are        not strictly

concerned with safety as such - for example to supervise car parking,
sell p r o g r a m m e s an d sho w people,                    e s p e c i a l l y guests,        to t h e i r seats.



D e a l i n g w i t h p e r i m e t e r g a t e s a n d fences,             t h e s e w e r e i n s t a l l e d and for

m i n o r e m e r g e n c i e s o p e n i n g s or g a t e s w e r e            provided,          originally               with

the     intention            of     a l l o w i n g th e p o l i c e to get in o r m o v e sick p e o p l e

out,    r a t h e r t h a n to e v a c u a t e th e c r o w d in an                    emergency.              They         also

permit       s ome       redistribution                   of     the      crowd        in     t h e e v e n t of u n e v e n

packing.



At L i v e r p o o l t h e r e w e r e 5 ft w i d e g aps in                     the        Kop     fence.            It     was

never       intended          tha t t h o s e s h o u l d be u s e d for l a r g e s c a l e e v a c u a t i o n

o n t o the pitch.                T hat w o u l d be a             last     resort.               There        is     a     very

a d e q u a t e p r o v i s i o n of e x i t s       from the K o p itself.



One     needs        t otal c o n t r o l of the n u m b e r of p e o p l e w i t h i n an e n c l o s u r e

and if tha t is not d o n e the m a t t e r is not ru n properly.

The b e s t a r r a n g e m e n t is to e n s u r e that s p e c t a t o r s p a s s i n g                      through         a

t u r n s t i l e o n l y h a v e a c c e s s to o n e enclosure.



The     n u m b e r s are c o u n t e d and c o n t r o l l e d t h r o u g h th e turnstiles,                             which

in th e c a s e         of    Liverpool              and        Everton         are     computerised                 and     the

information             is    fed      to     the          C l u b c o n t r o l p o i n t and r e p e a t e d at the

P o l i c e c o n t r o l room.             Liverpool              totally         renewed          their           turnstile

r e c o r d i n g s y s t e m s two y e a r s ag o and E v e r t o n ar e c u r r e n t l y v o l u n t a r i l y

renewing their counter with                           a        computer.              There        is     an        automatic

control        an d a b ell or b u z z e r r ings at the r e l e v a n t turnstiles,                                       when,

w i t h i n a n y a r e a of the ground,                   the safe c a p a c i t y is a pproached.                          For

example          th e        Kop       has       a        capacity         of      21,500,          when        there        are

a p p r o x i m a t e l y 30 0 left to go in,                   the t u r n s t i l e b e l l s ring,           the p o l i c e

previously           having         been     warned              that      t his       will       occur         and        t hose
t u r n s t i l e s ar e to b e closed,           and the t u r n s t i l e k e e p e r s s t a r t to                      shut

the     gates.           Th e    police       k n o w w h e n this is g o i n g to h a p p e n and m o v e

in.      T h e w a r n i n g s y s t e m al l o w s for an a f t e r f l o w b y              ringing             well        in

advance.



P e o p l e in a l a r g e c r o w d c a n b e l i k e n e d to m o l e c u l e s in a                        substance.

T h e r e is     a     period       when       they      can     move         about          at     will,             without

interferring             w i t h a n y o t h e r m e m b e r of the c r o w d              (a g a s e o u s state).

A h i g h e r c o n c e n t r a t i o n of i n d i v i d u a l s m e a n s        that       they        move          rather

l ike a liquid,           m o v i n g s ome o t h e r p e o p l e as t h e y m o v e              (A l i q u i d state)

and a l a r g e r c o n c e n t r a t i o n still,         r e s u l t s in a s o l i d state,                  when         any

i n d i v i d u a l m o v e m e n t is impossible.



The       green          guide        gives       guidance         as        to      density             on     terraces,

r e c o m m e n d i n g a d e n s i t y of no m o r e       than        54        people          pe r        te n      square

metres.          In      fact      on e    can      s a f e l y p a c k a c r o w d tighter,                   to p r e v e n t

misbehaviour.              T h e r e are o c c a s i o n s w h e n t h e y ar e p a c k e d t i g h t e r                   than

t hat o n L i v e r p o o l an d E v e r t o n terraces,             w i t h o u t an y ris k of injury.



A     density         of 60 p e r 10         square        m e t r e s is         r e a s o n a b l e in        practice,

60 to       70 is t i g h t and o v e r 70 b r i n g s the c r o w d i nto a                             solid          state,

with      risk        of c r u s h i n g w h e n s u b j e c t e d to f u r t h e r p a c k i n g o r m o v e m e n t

p ressures.          F r o m w h a t I h a v e see n of film (video) of the                               Hillsborough

d i s a s t e r t hat c r o w d w a s p o s s i b l y p a c k e d at w e l l o v e r 70.



The      access        to b o t h g r o u n d s in L i v e r p o o l - A n f i e l d and G o o d i s o n - is

good.       A s far as t u r n s t i l e s ar e concerned,                   t h e r a t e of e n t r y               through

t u r n s t i l e s d o e s d i f f e r an d d e p e n d s o n the c i r c u m s t a n c e s .                It c a n v a r y

b y four to five p e r s o n s p e r minute,                   if the i n d i v i d u a l s h a v e                  no t    got

p r o p e r c h a n g e etc,     7 p e r m i n u t e is a g o o d rate,                8 or 9 p e r m i n u t e is

a     m a x imum.        A slow turnstile              operator         with           a     problem            examining
tickets,          or     giving          change,           could        drop       the      r ate    to         5. C e r t a i n

t u r n s t i l e s m a y be d e s i g n a t e d for e.g.            0.A.P.'s which again may                                 a lter

the rate.



I    k n o w fro m m y o w n k n o w l e d g e that fans at the C l u b s do t e n d to leave

it a bi t late to g e t i nto th e ground,                              p a r t i c u l a r l y if it          is        an        all

tic k e t    match.           O n some o c c a s i o n s t h e y h a v e n o t r e a c h e d full c a p a c i t y

w h e n the g a m e h a s s t a r t e d a n d s om e c o m e in a f t e r the start.                                    This has

h a p p e n e d at b o t h L i v e r p o o l and Everton.



It     is    wise        to        h a v e r e g a r d to the n u m b e r of t u r n s t i l e s p r o v i d e d to

s erve      each        enclosure,              to     ensure       a      balance          and          a      sufficient

provision.              O n e c a n n o t be d e f i n i t i v e in this respect,                        it is a m a t t e r

for c a r e f u l c o n s i d e r a t i o n ,        coupled       with        a     need      to        get        a     sp e e d y

filling           of         the       ground         in    th e    worst           possible         circumstances.

Spectators             will        not       arrive        two     hours           before      a     match,               unless

entertainment                is      l aid      on,     which       c a n be a us e f u l w a y of s p r e a d i n g

t h e i r arrival.            F o r an a l l - t i c k e t match,            t h e r e is a         guarantee                 of     a

s p a c e a n d it c a n be e x p e c t e d that t h e y w i l l a r r i v e m o s t l y in the last

h o u r to h a l f an hour,               u n l e s s a t t r a c t e d to c o m e earlier.                  I have noted

that        the        tickets           for     the       relevant          Hillsborough                match           advised

s p e c t a t o r s to be in t h e i r s eats 15 m i n u t e s b e f o r e kick-off,                                but        g ave

no     indication             of      what       tim e t h e y n e e d e d to a r r i v e at t h e g r o u n d in

o r d e r to do that.



G i v e n a r e a s o n a b l e rate,           for an all ti c k e t match,                 of      7       persons               pe r

minute       per        turnstile,             a n d a full c a p a c i t y expectation,                     a reasonable

c o m p r o m i s e w o u l d be a t u r n s t i l e for a b o u t e v e r y 600 spectators.                                   That

would       mean        an        a c c u m u l a t i o n of s p e c t a t o r s o u t s i d e the g r o u n d in the

last h a l f - h o u r or t h r e e - q u a r t e r s of a n hour,                   which would have                     to        be

accommodated             safely           in     o r d e r l y queues.              That i n t r o d u c e s a f u r t h e r
fa c t o r int o t h e s t a d i u m f i l l i n g equation,              w h i c h is the safe o n stre et

qu e u e s     capacity.             A      good,      well-organised             st r e e t q u e u e s c a p a c i t y

means a higher capacity per                         turnstile         would       be    tolerable.                   P oor

st r e e t     q u e u e s capacity,         o r no o r g a n i s a t i o n of queues,           coupled with a

funnel-shaped            'dead-end'            entrance        condition,          s uch        as     existed         at

Leppings          Lane      at      Hillsborough,             calls       for      a v a s t i n c r e a s e in the

n u m b e r of t urnstiles.                I h a v e n o t e d that the 23             turnstiles            provided

at     t h e L e p p i n g s Lan e e n d of H i l l s b o r o u g h w e r e d i v i d e d for u s e int o 8

for t h e N o r t h Stand,           8 for the S e a t e d          (Upper level) of t h e                  West      End

Stand,         and     7 o n l y for the W e s t End and N o r t h W e s t c o r n e r terraces.

That r e q u i r e s p a s s a g e b y a total of 1,250 persons,                           563        persons         and

1,443 p e r s o n s p e r t u r n s t i l e in t h o s e g r o u p s r e s p ectively.                       The first

and last of t h e s e ar e c l e a r l y               very        much    in     excess         of         reasonable

needs,         and     could        have       been      expected         to p r o d u c e a g r e a t n e e d for

o r d e r l y a n d c a r e f u l l y - c o n t r o l l e d q u e u e s o u t s i d e the g r o u n d at           least,

if     no t      a d e c i s i o n to p r o v i d e p r e - m a t c h enterta i n m e n t ,          or the c h o i c e

of a b e t t e r v e n u e at a n o t h e r football ground.



It is d i f f i c u l t o n s t a n d i n g terraces,               particularly           at        th e     Kop,     to

maintain          a    balanced            density.           S o m e t u r n s t i l e s a r e d e s i g n a t e d for

O.A.P.        or s e a s o n t i c k e t holders,         s ome      turnstiles          are         more      popular

than         others.        T h e r e is o n e p a r t i c u l a r front c o r n e r of the K o p w h i c h

has g i v e n t r o u b l e fro m tim e to tim e w h e r e b y p e o p l e w h o c o m e                      in     l ate

c o m e to tha t end.              Those      who     c a m e e a r l y and c h o s e tha t spot w i l l not

move willingly.               If    that      h a p p e n s w e h a v e u s e d the p o l i c e to go in and

m o v e t h e m o u t b y th e n e a r e s t o p e n i n g in the p i t c h p e r i m e t e r fence and

in a g a i n f u r t h e r along,           a n d als o to m a k e a n n o u n c e m e n t s         about         this.

This         happened       in      th e     1977/78        season        D e r b y m a t c h w h e r e t h e r e wa s

u n e v e n p a c k i n g an d c o n c e r n o v e r the crowd.



We     have       used      thi s m e t h o d       of c r o w d     dispersal         on three             occasions
the     police       and        loud      speaker       annoucements,            t a k i n g t h e m ou t at the

front      and      in        again     at    a    less     crowded        place.           L oud          speaker

announcements               h a v e b e e n u s e d t w i c e s i n c e H i l l s b o r o u g h to ge t p e o p l e

to m o v e a w a y f r o m t his sam e c o r n e r and e a s e packing.



T h e r e is a g r e a t r e l u c t a n c e o n the par t of C l u b s to d e l a y                th e     start

of the match.                 If a n y m a t c h is d e l a y e d the r e f e r e e has an o b l i g a t i o n

to r e p o r t t hi s to the F.A.             and th e C l u b c o n c e r n e d g ets a r a p o v e r the

knuckles.            Th e       need      to s tar t g a m e s o n t ime d o e s not o v e r - r i d e the

a u t h o r i t y of the c e r t i f i c a t e holder,        o n th e a d v i c e of the Police,               to

delay      th e k i c k - o f f b u t it is v e r y r a r e that t h e r e w o u l d b e a d e l a y e d

start.       Only        in      exceptional         circumstances           is      it    a   constructive

practice.



I     di d h a v e s ome i n p u t int o t h e g r e e n guide.                  T his s t a r t e d lif e as a

t e c h n i c a l a p p e n d i x to th e W h e a t l e y report.           W o r k wa s d o n e b y a        Home

Office       Physicist            in to c r u s h b a r r i e r s a n d s e g r a g a t i n g fences.         This

w o u l d be in a p p r o x i m a t e l y 1973.



W o r k w a s d o n e in to the e f f e c t of             crushing         on      barriers,        potential

injury       to ribs,          and the s t r e n g t h n e e d e d to e n a b l e the c r u s h b a r r i e r s

to be e f f e c t i v e to e a s e p r e s s u r e o n c r o w d s and to a v o i d injury.



The r e s e a r c h wa s d o n e in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h       Liverpool          University          who

c o n d u c t e d o b s e r v a t i o n s of b o t h Li v e r p o o l and E v e r t o n at full c a p a c i t y

matches.         T h e y pu t s t r a i n g a u g e s o n the b a r r i e r s t h e m s e l v e s an d        made

video      recordings             of    t h e crowd.       T h e y w e r e t h e n a b l e to l ine up the

r e a d i n g s of a c t u a l p r e s s u r e w i t h the surges,          as t h e y a p p e a r e d o n     the

video      r ecordings,             so tha t o n e c o u l d b e g i n to s e e w h a t k i n d of s urge

r e s u l t e d in w h a t k i n d of pressure.
The ag e a n d v i s u a l c o n d i t i o n of c r u s h b a r r i e r s is r e l e v a n t to                     decide

whether          or        not       t h e y are still sound.                The g r o u n d s h a v e t h e m s e l v e s

b o u g h t at        my     suggestion             crush      barrier        testing           equipment.             Al l

barriers          were           tested        initially,          but      all       have      been        renewed        at

Liverpool         s i n c e 1975 a n d m a n y h a v e b e e n s i m i l a r l y r e n e w e d at Everton,

c u t t i n g d o w n th e n e e d for testing.



B o t h g r o u n d s w o r k o n the b a s i s t hat t h e y do not a r g u e if I sa y I wa n t

something needed                     doing.         The      final        batch       of     crush         barriers        at

Liverpool             were           renewed      in      1987.       P r i o r to that some of th e c r u s h

b a r r i e r s in t h e K o p fa i l e d th e test n e a r t h e b e g i n n i n g of the                           season

an d u n t i l t h o s e b a r r i e r s w e r e r e n e w e d and r e p l a c e d t h e y ha d to r e d u c e

the c a p a c i t y of th e Kop.



This p r o v e d to th e C l u b t h e r e w a s a n u m b e r of                      other          crush        barriers

t hat     might            b e l i k e l y to be c a u g h t o u t b y t e s t i n g and t h e y a g r e e d to

r e n e w th e remainder.



That w o r k w a s q u i t e c o m p l e x a n d e x p e n s i v e o n the K o p                      at     Liverpool.

Every      standar               end      (upright         leg)      is     foun d e d         an d        bolted     to    a

r e i n f o r c e d c o n c r e t e pile,         up to 14 feet             deep       i nto     the         ground,       in

order      to         d e v e l o p e th e r e q u i r e d strength.              D u r i n g th e r e n e w a l of the

last batch,            th e v i b r a t i o n w a s p o s s i b l y a c o n t r i b u t o r y c a u s e of a d e e p

sewer      collapse,                 w h i c h r e s u l t e d in the first few h o m e m a t c h e s of the

1987-88 h a v i n g to be p o s t p o n e d w h i l s t r e p a i r s and c r u s h b a r r i e r                      work

wa s compl e t e d .



There      is         not        a     r e g u l a r s y s t e m of t e s t i n g b a r r i e r s at a p a r t i c u l a r

time.      O n e t e s t s w h e n t h e r e ar e s u s p i c i o n s that t h e t ime                       for     repair

or r e n e w a l h a s approached.                     S o m e p e o p l e w o r k o n a r u l e of t h u m b basis

t hat o n e f i f t h s h o u l d b e t e s t e d e a c h year.                   I    do      not         subscribe       to
that theory,                 if on e or all are s u s p e c t e d of a                      d e f e c t t h e y s h o u l d be

tested.           If n o n e are suspected,                      t e s t i n g is not necessary.                     U n d e r the

Act     there           is        no     p r e s c r i b e d p a y m e n t to th e Local A u t h o r i t y for the

c e r t ificate.                 There        is     no     provision              for       an n u a l           renewal        of

Certificates.                      However           by     agreement             w i t h th e c l u b s I c o l l e c t the

certificate                 in         each        year     ,     make       the      appropriate                 inspections,

recommendations                    and        r e q u i r e m e n t s and c h a r g e for it.                T h e h o l d e r s of

p u b l i c e n t e r t a i n m e n t l i c e n s e s h a v e to r e n e w a n n u a l l y a n d p a y for that

work.         It        is        an     ongoing           c o n t r o l and is in m y v i e w r i g h t t hat one

s h o u l d do t h e sam e w i t h footbal l grounds.                                 When I           made        submissions

to     th e       Popplewell              Inquiry           I r e c o m m e n d e d that,         b e c a u s e it r e q u i r e d

annual a t t e n t i o n and e n c o u r a g e d a t h o r o u g h                    job        by     all        concerned ,

(see     recommendation                       in     the        P o p p l e w e l l Final R e p o r t            (Cmnd 9710)     at

p a r a g r a p h 3.68           (page 26).



As     far        as        Liverpool              and     Everton           are     concerned               I    have        total

co-operation.                    A n a g r e e d fee was a r r a n g e d i n i t i a l l y in 1987 at £2,000

b e c a u s e it is at l east tha t a m o u n t                         of     work        which        is        needed       each

year.         Tha t          fee g oes up e a c h y e a r to c o v e r w a g e inflation.                                T h e two

b o a r d s c o n s i d e r e d th e m a t t e r a n d said that t h e y a g r e e d w i t h that.



I can produce a copy certificate                                    for      either         of        th e       Liverpool       or

E v e r t o n C l u b s to s h o w the k i n d of r e q u i r e m e n t s w h i c h L i v e r p o o l p u t on

their certificates.



I h a v e h a d t h e o p p o r t u n i t y of t a l k i n g                 to      the     Council              Officers       at

Sheffield              since           the Hillsborough Disaster and I have also inspected

the S h e f f i e l d H i l l s b o r o u g h ground.                   I w ent f irst o n th e                   16th       April,

and     then           on        the     1 9th A p r i l an d 19th M a y 1989 w i t h a d e p u t a t i o n of

Councillors on                    g o o d w i l l an d fact find i n g visits.                        From what          I     have

heard,        I        understand              tha t w h e n S h e f f i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l t o o k b a c k the
r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for c e r t i f y i n g the              ground,          they        did      not    make        a ny

radical        a l t e r a t i o n s to the t erms of t h e c e r t i f i c a t e as i s s u e d b y the

County.



The s y s t e m o f d e a l i n g w i t h the c e r t i f i c a t i o n a p p a r e n t l y d i f f e r s                    from

Liverpool.              Th e     control           is      d i v i d e d b e t w e e n d i f f e r e n t C i t y Council

officers         an d        d e p a rtments,           an d     a      committee            of        members         rema i n s

r e s p o n s i b l e for decisions.



I     understand             that      the C i t y S o l i c i t o r m a y              h a v e o v e r a l l charge.              A

Council        Safety           Officer        is        partly            responsible             an d        there    is     a

Licensing           Officer           who     is        responsible               for       public         entertainments

licences who shares                    in     the        work.              The       Director            of     Health       and

Consumer         Services             als o    t akes           par t       in the c e r t i f i c a t i o n and takes

a d v i c e f rom m y S h e f f i e l d counterpart,                       the C h i e f B u i l d i n g Surveyor.



W i t h so m a n y v a r i o u s o f f i c e r s i n v o l v e d I w o u l d e x p e c t a s l a c k e n i n g of

t h e s e n s e of r e s p o n s i b i l i t y and d i f f i c u l t i e s to arise.



I     am     also       tol d        that     any        m a t t e r s in d i s p u t e g o to a C i t y C o u n c i l

C o m m i t t e e to b e resolved.                 I wa s        tol d       that        there          were      unresolved

problems         when          Sheffield           W e d n e s d a y w e r e e x t e n d i n g the S p i o n K o p and

t h o s e w e r e d e c i d e d b y Councillors.



H a v i n g s e e n th e S h e f f i e l d G r o u n d itself,                 I would            be      concerned          ove r

the        radial       segregating            fenc i n g            and     the fact tha t t h e r e is o n l y a

s mall       gate       at      the     backend            to        give      ac c e s s     to          the      adjoining

enclosures.              The         crush     barriers               are      no t      lai d         out in t h e m a n n e r

reco m m e n d e d .     O n e c a n n o t tell the s t r e n g t h of the c r u s h b a r r i e r s                         from

simply        looking           at     them,        bu t        they        d i s p l a y c o r r o d e d legs a n d p ast
r e p a i r s at t h e i r base.                 I u n d e r s t a n d that t h e y n e v e r t h e l e s s w i t h s t o o d

r e c e n t s t r e n g t h testing.                 T h e y v a r y in height.

Because               of     the lay out of th e H i l l s b o r o u g h g r o u n d and in p a r t i c u l a r

the c e n t r a l t un n e l at the Westend,                           w h i c h has a s h a r p s l o p e o n      it,     if

o n e is s t a n d i n g at t h e b a c k of the tunnel l o o k i n g o n t o t h e pitch,                                 you

c a n se e th e p i t c h in the distance,                             but y o u      ar e     effectively          looking

over           th e        h e a d s of m o s t of t h o s e a l r e a d y in p ens 3 and 4.                     Thus,      it

is i m p o s s i b l e to see from the b a c k of the tu n n e l w h e t h e r th e p e n s are

full,           empty,          or    o v e r c rowded.                 T h e r e are g a t e s at the b a c k e n d of

t hat t u n n e l and,               as far as I             am        concerned,         they       could     have       been

closed            and m a n n e d w h e n t h o s e t e r r a c e s w e r e full.                    If th e g a t e s w e r e

n o t shut,            it w o u l d o n l y need,            say,       6 police officers across                  the      end

of t h e t u n n e l to r e d i r e c t              fans to the e m p t y s i d e wings.



I     do        not         want      to    be       disproportionately                   c r i t i c a l of o t h e r Local

Government                  Officers,          knowing            that      we     have       high       standards           in

Liverpool,                  which      I    am       abl e        to     enforce       because         of     th e C o u n c i l

d elegation,                an d the c o - o p e r a t i o n and r e l a t i v e w e a l t h of t h e two c l u b s

c o ncerned.                 Th e s y s t e m of s plit c o n t r o l in S h e f f i e l d h o w e v e r is m o r e

d i f f i c u l t t h a n th e c o n t r o l w h i c h we h a v e in Liverpool.



A t m y first v i s i t to m e e t C o u n c i l l o r s a n d officers,                             I was     told       that

the        Safety            C e r t i f i c a t e c o v e r e d the m a t t e r of s t e w a r d i n g b y a s i m p l e

r e q u i r e m e n t that,           an       adequate           number         to    ensure         safety      must       be

employed               by      the    Club.             Whilst           this is n o t a m a t t e r s p e c i f i c a l l y

c o v e r e d b y S e c t i o n 2 of             th e     Act          of 1975,         I would          consider         that

sufficient                  emphasis       ha d b e e n p l a c e d o n it            b y C h a p t e r 2 of t h e G u i d e

to S a f e t y at S p o r t s Grounds,                   a f t e r th e P o p p l e w e l l      Inquiry,         to      call

for        a     more          detailed          understanding               and s p e c i f i c c o n d i t i o n s in the

Cert i f i c a t e .           T hat v i e w     was expressed by me                  to S h e f f i e l d   Council         in

telephone                  discussions           I      had with a Mr David                  Bownes,     Safety Officer
for the Council, in April 1986.         He had telephoned me to ask               how    I

would   be dealing with the Safety Certificate duties just handed over

from the disbanded County Councils.              My understanding,        confirmed     in

an   exchange    of   correspondence,       at     that   time   was that Sheffield

Council intended to      carry   out    a    complete      review    of     the    Safety

Certificate,     on   similar lines to that carried out by me for the two

Liverpool Grounds.      It seems possible that was not done in fact.




SIGNED...... LESLIE NORMAN BUSH



DATED           23RD MAY 1989
S D M / J S / H 2 5 5 7 0 .0 0 1 / C o l d i c u t t


I ____________________________________________________________________

D.O.B. 9.8.1965 will say as follows:



1)      I went to the Football                         match at   Hillsborough on 15th April

1989.         I got there               by mini bus with          members of my family and

friends.           There were eleven of us on it.                   There was no drink on

board.          I didn't have a ticket although everyone else on the bus

did.




2)      We parked up at 1-00 p.m.                         I bought a ticket for the Leppings

end "B" entrance just as I got off the-bus.                             I paid £6-00 for it

which was the proper price.                             We went to a club for a pint.   The

club was about 15 minutes walk from the ground.                             We left at 2-50

p.m. and got to the ground at 3-05 p.m. I had drunk two pints of

lager only.               When we got to the Leppings Lane end it was quiet

and there were a few people milling around.                             I got straight to

the turnstiles.                   I     noticed that one           gate was open at the sideand

two Policemen were                      holding a narrow           gate open.   We were askedif

we had tickets.                  We said yes and I didn't have to show mine as I

was let in.              We went to the central tunnel under the stand.                   It

was so crowded you couldn't even see the pitch.                             We walked to the

right hand side of the ground but I couldn't see anything from

there so as we turned back to walk to "B" entrance behind the

stand suddenly about one hundred Police Officers ran towards us

and went into the entrance we had just come from.                               They must have

 ran past the mouth of the tunnel under the stand in the centre.

We went to the toilet and then went up the stairs to the stand at
the left hand end.     There were no stewards there and we just went

in.     The pitch was empty except for about 20 or 30 people, not

players.     I could see chaos at the front of the terrace below.

People were in distress and being crushed.     The Policemen didn't

seem to be very helpful.     I saw them pushing people back in the

penned fenced in area where I could see that people were being

crushed because there were so many people within the pen.



3)    Before I arrived at the match I saw many groups of Police

Officers on the outskirts of Sheffield laughing and joking and

stopping vehicles and searching them.     They didn't seem to know

why they were doing this and certainly there were too many of

them doing this in my opinion.     I became very annoyed having now

seen what they were doing down below the stand.



4)    I stayed up in the stand for about an hour to an hour and a

half.     I saw the rescue attempts by the Police which did begin to

help.    What I did notice was that many Policemen went up the

pitch to separate the fans.     It was infact the Liverpool fans who

saved many lived and pulled people out and gave people the kiss

of life.    Certainly the fans did more that the Policemen did.      I

didn't see any Policemen being attacked although I did see some

cameral men who were attacked.     They were filming people dying

which was disgusting.



5)    I would like this statement to be submitted to the Government

Public Inquiry.    The above is as much as I know with regards to

exactly what was going on at the time the Disaster struck.
t>)   I do not work and I am unemployed.   I receive invalid care

allowance for my mother at the rate of £34-00 per week.



7)    Myself I was very upset by the whole episode seeing all those

people dying.    Emotionally it is very hard to explain.   I have

been to the football match since but I just broke down crying.        I

am still crying now and then.    I feel guilty about it all.   I am

not doing anything and I am very angry.



8)    I was disgusted at the way in which the Police dealt with all
of this, it was terrible.



9)    I suffered no injuries apart from my upset.
                     G l k x p ^ w ^        \ v/v T ^ v \

(-vOL^O'f- i/K2CU/

l v I K X O ^ U i r /V \ A O J d ^ ^ S   J2CU/1   \<2Js   VtvA^)   (Anc
G   sy \CX
A ' w a . . Wv'K^'SUS>S>




                                > <


                                y



                                  v
                                A , £

                           AJ3>,e         ,




                           A ,'B, C ,€, K

                           4, c, e
                           A >c       .
   To: Mr Colin Moynihan
        Minister for Sport



   Copies to: Secretary, The Football Association
                Secretary, Liverpool Football Club
               Secretary, Nottingham Forest Football Club
               Secretary, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
               I r v i n e P a t n i c k , OBE,MP. House o f Commons

   16 April 1989 '


   Dear Mr Moynihan,


   I attended and witnessed the awful and tra g ic scenes a t Hillsborough yesterday.
   I hope what I have to say may be of some value to you in your capacity as
  Sports Minister. I would lik e to divide th is l e t t e r into three short sections;
  f i r s t , a description of what I witnessed; secondly,questions which should
  be raised and l a s tl y , my suggestions as a life-lo n g follower of fo o tb all.

  The police on duty were, in     my   opinion, woefully inadequate in both number
  and t h e ir effectiveness a t crowd c o n tro l.I have spent ten years serving in the
  Royal M ilitary Policetwo of which were served in Northern Ireland whre I
* gained a great deal of experience in crowd control.
  The police I spoke to could not even t e l l me where a c ertain club o ffic ia l
  c a r park was, consequently I was driving around the ground j u s t adding to the
  already alarmingly large crowd. On a r r iv a l , by foot, a t the Leppings Lane
  end of the ground I was shocked to find only eight t u r n s tile s open to service
  the whole of the North Stand as well as the West Stand. The time was now
  I4.35hrs and the crowd was s o lid from the tu r n s tile s entrance backing into
 the road, a distance of about ten y a r d s .I t took me ten minutes to eventually
 gain access to a t u r n s t il e .
 Once tfee other side of the tu r n s t il e s I walked to the l e f t fo r the North
 Stand seating areas. As I looked back I could see the s itu a tio n was becoming
 more desperate with hundreds of people arriving by the m in u te.S till only three
 mounted policemen were attempting to control the crowd outside. I then took my
 s e a t in the stand. After kick-off i t became clear th a t f a r too many people were
 confined in too small a space in the West Stand.
The questions which have arisen from th is incident are:
- why should Liverpool FC, with a f a r greater following than Nottingham Forest,
  be allocated less tic k e ts ?
- why was the le a s t supported club allocated the larger standing area?
- l a s t y e a r's semi-final was controlled by s t r i c t marshalling a t le a s t f i f t y
yards from the t u r n s t il e s . What happened th is y e a r?
- why was there no early announcemnt made, to keep both Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest fans informed?
-why were the f i r s t aid services a t the ground under-manned and under-equipped
for a major sporting event such as th is ?



F inally, I would lik e to comment t h a t , in my opinion, a match of th is
significance and importance should be played a t a larg er stadium. Could the
sem i-finals not be staged a t Wembley on a lte rn a te Saturdays?
I fu rth e r feel th at i f the perimeter fences are not to be taken down a t grounds
around the country, small gates should be b u ilt into the structures every three
fe e t or so, with a steward assigned to each gate throuhout the match.



In conclusion, I think a f t e r an incident like th is i t is very easy to point
the finger and apportion blame. This is not my aim - I have j u s t trie d to
t e l l you what I saw and r a is e a few prctical suggestions.



                           Yours sincerely
                                                    'V-




           c v "        KVv/"   C ^ O ' V ' V ^3-e.^ ,



    'Vo       V c r v . CJCL                  d-^o

    ^                               « 5   l   Lc    a     ,          _ ^ ©                  voere-                 p ^ . o ^ ( r

    00=            o , ^ ,       K ^ U o b c y - e u g k                             t ^ o o ^ G i >                 i«T|4|y\

                S.<S®*>         M      c ^ S e L j t                                             ^
                                                                                                                    C w e
   fr«=-               toioc-fc.      oj.               - a l
                                                                                                       -^Sfc-Ov^-v.0^            out-
                                               1—         ~                   ^                             o ^ .

                        toe-        « - ' ^ e d                       „^fe                                  g » > x c /                             ;

                                     l"3 ° P        '" '              ^                 > _ O c^O            v '- i ^ - j       <s-.v. <\ . . x -

                                       OA_e,^f                            ^          £.e^o               e^_opi.e_

                                ^ O ^ o (                            O v ^ & O l t                       Q , ^              C ^ o ^ . i

                                       ~^v'~5                 -2iP                <Ste»/'<r>s~«_<^=r         vlv-'v            fc=CD

                                                          4 -> C >        -~<£l o —fc;               o ,—   O '!       4 - 0


                                                                 <^VPP>*^0>^v^^-v<^_.t ii_P_«^                                 2 •3 0

                                                                csA.-^e-o^                \c>xs-i^ cv-^o*
  t— e X > O y - \ p ^



 .SxOle
                                                                                              Osy-<2_o,




                                                                                                            5K_£L                Cv

                                                                                                 CrW2-                V^«^'V'<Jc_>V

                                                                                                        ^V~V<5^                         (r.



                                                                                               p o ^ o e » - w 5 w                   v^,
                                              ^                tSK-v^>                  \w=~

                                                                                        'V 0 -^t-           'vT> ^<?_
O r ^ ^ c c
                                                                                       ovJcscft-^t ,               eO^C...
    loesu^o                   (-'Lv-«3K^oI                \ocv_efc_         1^,,   .
                                                                                             Pc?UvXLJt?„       ,
                                                                        I
                                          crv--<?;
   cl
                                                  *^0 ^            -C=»— o*~fc
                                                O v ' s T X ^ i-C ct\

                                            ^        n
                                                                                                    P i o ^ C jL_
  ;t>«-l~V^CV                    CX^_                0<T>O-w\

  Oc>c_ovvve.                   VDcxr^               e v . oV

  *vv=*^-                                            -Sen   ,

                                                                                                    Vo^C-c/)

                                                                                                    cl   & c ^ < a ic ? o i



 icL<£[-^L.



                          O ^ C 6 vw^ - v ^ ^




0-fc=>        C^-e-O-G/vt

               u

iv>^_                                   ^..-OCJcL

          CX/V\               r\:^

v~>-*2-Ci-^        .-C- v^,v_t k^2>V-<^_


                                                                                                            Civ ^ 'Q
                   k=£>          r v 'x ^ v ^ L             C_^>

:®-V                               G i o < ^ ,

         < w o O U                K M S ^ h ' ^
                                                                                       ^   <-"t C l ..     tv-TQ_J
               P&OPC2.                                                                                                           C   gv   - Q ^ aa

                           s             Q,- n< 2 ^ j2_         T ) O f p                       OOi2r£                  ^rx^vpPc'ytM

 <?=v.xpl         Vo        •^•vCj             o^A-t-              o_c:.                   tr^-ya-v^'v. .              r \ A c v v c j       c f^j-

                          -e, t- ClA-£j^                  VO<2.CX                                 ^xa,-€U^^5_ol                   "VO

 te                                                         /j^            j3          C o ^ J ’o l
 IC^v^O               V - x O — 'P> P>-<?x\                        C3             C-OV-V.jc.

 CV^£L            tl> ^ O c . O *^'VCl--^<-^                           t X —«EL                 V'^vO^^oi                               c_a ^~

 C-OvxW rv^) IA                             Cl-<5_            VX!5 O^S. •              -"TW ? ^                  CKJSS2>          .<^<-H\As2C^

-K=>Vo^lxj                                                       o^.                                        o O o ^                                   |

 V~v^p(9^/V                        .                                                                                                                  I

                                                                                            c   L vcL            CM?-             p ^ l <-£-£-|
 t-v-xc^lC 2,             <o^             i —C ^ ^ e^ .           (Z^-C^QTG - S ^                           crx-c:_          p ^ i^ ti-^ J

 /^O'ri o ».-<wO '^-A-'                    ~Ko             S t e p                     ^                c V ^ o ^ e                               I

 tV><2-      V - ^ ^ v e r p .o c 5 \_             S lJ> p p x s « -< r i2 ^ .              C^rOOfc-              o -e .                          |

■^5C a''-S        Q^,C>           CV'^-           C-^yL_v CjE-             \_>Ol"J<-{'€.                    ^ex.C-*-'v ^O|               i*^ ■?       v

                                 )_e>^^<2_                                         vJZZXwi^,                     v^C3k_c_-r€_                         |

   -n^ _ a         ir\0^               UA.'^^tr^"0                          t=0       r-v-xO-ACjC.  cv                                            j
     --- '                                                                                  "           ^-J
                                                      C ^ - ^ - C L               <2^         c=wa_   pJnCU-^



O - C I c A              p\eJc^             c^vToo_o^i,-^                  -^3_ov^S«                              c?oO

      Vv-C-^-HP                                                 Uv-^tr-O                        pwSiOpv_£L_                      CVvol
                                       N/“c^ A«o O v -X d L q _                                       •        <C2^         f\"N o^'V.

                                                                                '— o       v^5 o (             j E ^ 0 4 2 0 ^ _ _ J O ^
            CJU-2<^/'              tZV'-C-            (H>*»_t?OC-                u O                 •
                                                                                                     <r_-\?5fc^         ^ O l ^ C |

                                       O y - v c ^ Q t-~vg.          Oi^                                                                 O-yj

                                          VA^,             S ^ o v - O i    ot              < 3 ^          \^-v.SL C b _ <r'^cf

                                            fcv^<2-           W<aJ2_4^                     C^ V            C   v v a   ^
t^TOv             d            w-v<?-oi ^ c j c U              W < d L - P             4 o                 ° p             V o

~^1
  '^''         ■Sc.<£^rv^_        . rDf           i^CJCV~-b>               V^Q t                     vJ>       trrvJk            t3^_

L.V_ < L ^ ^            k_-Ow-CS_^               tr^-~C’V-Jt;                          l~^CS_.o-v,"-q J
rv'^oA                                K-^eJ^jP



tlX'-^.GK.k^-           tV^_CL_                                  P o c X

c '-v -
      tsl        \o,-ev~vo^                v'^'vr^oAi?.

                       < 2 > t C * -                v_C - t n . O t /v   -^
                               ♦
                 \f~t_yC-Ar- L v v c O          *        •^TKi^                   S^ov;^                <s^

c Ic a a -^      v o               t^ ^ x _ A = ,              f c = v ^ - i 'e         i/O O o O               O v

^ C v ^ t ^ v - e J ^ c C,            L_rx_cJc_                   OP,^-                                  0 i^ t cJo ' D x ^ .

                    trv'N^O^Sft^          L ^ ' w O d K > Ov_ O r ^--j                           CK                               C_,£_

k_<3^cAc_            o(-            C©*^v>^Ue:

                               Sfisv-v^tx—                                                            f =fc>Li_-ce. ^     V^ejb^otJ

Cv-v^wa.               o^?A          te^e_                -^-<rx.CJc-                c x ^ o u t               t=b^2,                     1

.fcxcJc-eJ^                    (XjL^C.ocCccvtA                                    u o o ^                '*=-e^r--eJbL<-A                 *
                           _                                                                                                 —~ _ l3      1
                                             a-SbU_<il.cl                           lvu -\         <^1 S'"      CD-J"                     I

S j p p o M : ^                                                               A^UXLJ''                  U_ u -a_a *?--0           Civ^G
CX            C^v^~<2Lc>-Jt                  o A <S_c >~\                                         S s> O v<^v^'0«-C j             o-^cJl:

                                              L _ v > -* - ^             j                   o v -^ - rj y        ( ~ 3a <?_ i - g 9

.CO            V'-vO           -Jp_jy£-                                      <£>V                            £ v>0_CO Ca




                               M p ^ r - S .




               C_    S>e<xScv-\                                               V^csn aljQf~
STATEMENT


My name is

I have witnessed accounts in the media both on television and in newspapers

concerning the Hillsborough Disaster and I am disturbed at the inaccuracy

of many of these accounts and descriptions of what has happened*     I there­

fore wish to make the following statement;

I attended the Semi-Final Match on the day in question and went through the

turnstile at the Leppings Lane end to enter that part of the standing

ground enclosure*   I approached the Hillsborough Stadium at 2.^+5 P*m» I bad

a ticket with me and I was assured of entry to the ground but the street

and immediate areas around the turnstile was absolutely crowded.     I looked

at the crowd and did not want to have to push my way through them*


A policeman on horseback was shouting to the crowd that he was trying to

obtain a delayed start to the Match#   This was at about 2.50 p.m.    He was

trying to calm the supporters down*    He was pleading with them to take their

time*   In my view there was a lack of communication between what this

policeman was trying to achieve and the persons having actual control of the

game situation itself* ' If he could have assured the fans that the kick-off

time had been altered this would surely have relieved the tension and anxiety

of the Liverpool Supporters sis kick-off time approached*    There was in my

view ample time to get this message relayed provided that the policeman had

a means of communieating his concern to those responsible*    To my knowledge,

in the past this has been a regular occurrence if the police deemed a

later start was necessary in the interest of crowd safety*



Due to the fact that two to three thousand people were still outside the

ground and in view of the message this policeman was trying to relay, 1 could

see no possibility of obtaining entrance to the ground myself without
                                   _ 2 -


pushing or shoving my way in.      I walked away from the Stadium for

approximately 50 yards to obtain use of a telephone to make a personal

call home.    After that call I walked back to the Stadium and the

congestion had all disappeared,      I casually showed my ticket to a

policeman who directed me to a turnstile which was appropriate to

my ticket#    It was now approximately 3*03 P«m *     ^ went through this

tuynstile and handed my ticket in and walked over a concrete forecourt

to gain access to the•terracing through the tunnel access in the centre

of the terracing.    The media reported that there were several people

injured and even fatal injuries occurred in this particular tunnel.

In my view there were no injuries or fatalities in that centre tunnel

area at all at that time 3.0^ p.m.         It was completely clear.   Immediately

as I viewed the football pitch inside the Stadium the referee stopped play

and suspended the game.


Within a short period I returned back down the centre tunnel to visit

the toilets which were located out on the forecourt itself.           I saw people

being dragged from the terracing along the centre tunnel and being laid-

out on the    forecourt   area adjacent to the tunnel.    This lasted a few

minutes.     Police, St. John*s Ambulance personnel and fans were attending

to people who were in need of medical care and attention.         These facts

are contrary to what I have read or seen in the reporte from the media which

suggest that fatalities or injuries were caused by the rush to and through

the tunnel.     Because people were carried out back through the tunnel the

impression was probably given that this was the area were the injuries were

sustained, i.e. in the forecourt and the tunnel.         The entrance to the tunnel

was pinpointed as one of the principle areas were people were actually

crushed.     This is clearly incorrect.      Nobody in the tunnel itself,when I

entered at 3.04 p.m.,was injured or appeared in distress in this location.
                                    - 3 -


I stayed around the forecourt and by the time I left at approximately    .30 p.m.

there were at least 20 people being attended to in the forecourt area,   Many

appeared to be dead.




Dated l8 th day of April. 1989
              DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT   HILLSBOROUGH TF.STTMONV


I    Your name?



I    Your address?




I    Are you employed?

     Yes. I work at the Royal Liverpool Hospital in the
Accident and Emergency Department.

I    Did you have a ticket for the match?

     I did.

I    Where was this for?

     It was for the B enclosure in the Leppings     Lane end.

I    How did you go down to Sheffield?

     One of   my friends drove down. There was four of us in the
car, one of   them was a Notts. Forest supporter and we all had
tickets.One   of my friends had a ticket for Leppings Lane and
another had   a ticket for the North Stand.

I    What time did you leave Liverpool?

     We left Liverpool at quarter past eleven.

I    What route did you take?

   I We went down the M62 to Manchester and then got onto the
Snake Pass which took us straight to the ground, more or less.
I don't know the A roads.

I    Why had they decided on that route? Had there been any
discussion before?

     Well, I've been to Sheffield Wednesday Ground quite a
couple of times and that's the route we've always taken either
when I've gone by coach or by car.

I   What sort of journey did you have?
     Pretty uneventful. Road works on the M62 as usual, a
pretty uneventful journey. We found a parking space quite
easily, nothing to report really, just having a good time.

I   Did you stop at all on the way?

    We stopped once to go to the toilet and that was it.

I   How long for?

     Two minutes at a pub. We went straight in thepub      and came
straight back out again.

I    Apart from the road works,    you weren't delayed   in any
other way?

     Not really. No, no   we weren't.


I    Where in Sheffield did your journey end?

     I wouldn't have a clue where abouts in Sheffield but all I
knew was it's 'Football'  'Liverpool supporters'. Once you got
near to Sheffield, the ground, there were signs for
Hillsborough and Liverpool End, so we just followed those
directions and eventually found a car parking space.

I    What time did you actually park?

     It must have been about half past one, with the traffic
and what have you coming near to the ground. But other than
that there were no bad delays or anything like that.

I    How far from the ground was it?

     We were quite lucky. We must have been, oh, half a mile
trom the ground, five or ten minute walking. So  we were lucky
in that respect because we got there that little bit earlier.

I   Did you go straight to the ground?

     We stopped off to get some chips and then we met some
people there. To my knowledge there was no pubs open to go to
so the only places open were chip shops. We had some chips, met
some lads and we were talking for about half-an-hour, three-
quarters of an hour and then made our way to the ground.

I    The other people you were talking to, were they football
supporters?

     Yes.

     Were they Liverpool blokes.




                           1
     Well, as I say, one of the people in our car was a Notts.
Forest fan. Previously, I'd been to Blackpool on a scheme with
the Union and he was from Nottingham, and he had a ticket for
the Nottingham Forest end but he came with us.

I    What was the atmosphere like at that time?

     It was like a carnival atmosphere, all looking forward to
the game, willing our team to go to Wembley, more or less
prematurely saying that we would be going to Wembley, and
having a really good time.

I    Other supporters around, did you notice them?

     Yes, the supporters around where we were, I knew a couple
of them and we started talking. They were, well everyone, was
in a happy mood. No trouble or anything like that, just having
a good time.

I    Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground
or when you were standing talking?

     There was quite a big police presence as soon as you got
off the Snake Pass, diverting traffic, I presume. Also, about
two miles before we hit the ground there was like an army of
police who were stopping coaches, looking for alcohol I presume
- well, I know they would be because I've been on coaches the
previous time. But they didn't stop us, they just let us go
straight through, we just overtook the coaches and carried on
towards our destination.

I   When you were standing talking, before you actually
started to make your way towards the ground, were there any
police officers around then?

     Yes,  but as I say, going to football matches you get
totally oblivious about seeing police. They must have been
around but I they didn't make any kind of trouble or anything
at that point, anyway.

I    Were you able easily to find the entrance to that part of
the ground that you had a ticket for?

     I'd been to Leppings Lane before, I knew the way it works
and I found it quite easily. Most of the Liverpool fans were
going towards the ground by that time anyway.

I   So they'd moved off together?

     Well, not so much together. People drifted slowly towards
the ground.

I   What time did you arrive at the ground?
     At the ground. We were about two minutes away from the
ground at the chip shop. We must have, I'd say, got to the
ground about twenty past two.

I    What was happening when you got there? What was the
situation like then?

     The situation was three turnstiles with B section on them
for Liverpool supporters. When you go down towards it,
Hillsborough's like in a valley, so you're walking down a hill
and you can see the Liverpool supporters queuing up to get in.
There was no kind of organised line to get into the turnstiles,
it was just like a big mass, there was no organisation as such.
You just had to push, well, you got in and you were being
pushed towards the turnstile. Nearer to when you got to the
turnstile they actually made some kind of queue, nothing much,
only because the gate was so narrow. I mean, I missed the
actual once, trying to get my way back into the crowd to get
back into the turnstile.

I   How do you mean?

     The queue was so great and there was no organised lines,
people were pushing either way. The turnstile is only about one
man s width, with the push I just got pushed to one side and
then you couldn't get back in.

I    How many police officers did you see around the
turnstiles?

     I saw two and they were standing between three turnstiles.
There was one mounted policeman who said he came from Liverpool
because people were saying to him, "What's going on here?" and
they were calling him a woollyback or something, nothing
outrageous or anything like that. And he said,   Eh, I m from
Liverpool." So I felt a bit strange to start off with, whether
he was or not I don't know but he wasthe only policeman   on
horseback at that time.

I    The other police officers, man or woman?

     Two men, two male. There were three entrances and two bits
of the wall and they were just there. Because I actually got
pushed on to one of the policemen who just like, roughly pushed
me back towards the crowd.

I    Did he speak to you?

     He just said get back into the queue.

I    Did you notice if either    of them carried   radios?

     No I didn't notice if they carried radios.



                         4   -
I       Were you still with your friends at this point?

     One of my friends had a ticket for the North Stand so he
just walked in, well I presume he walked in because we were
early as such. We left him as we were going down towards our
turnstiles. My friend         turnstiles were to the side so he
walked into his turnstile there was no queue at that time, and
we just started to queue up then in a big mass,

I    Did you become separated from them at any time while at
that time outside or were you more or less, always together.

        Me and my friend       were more or less together at that
time.

I       What were your feelings at that time.

     My feelings were, as I've always said,  that it's
ridiculous that there s only three turnstiles and say, ten or
eleven thousand supporters supposed to get into this end. It
was the usual, you mumble and complain about getting into the
ground, I think it's more the excitement of getting into the
ground to have a little mumble and a complain before you
actually get in. It was just like a normal away match at that
time, really, maybe because I got there a bit early. The only
thing I didn t understand was just so few turnstiles to actuall
get into the ground and the police presence, there was hardly
any. That was just, like, at the back of my mind, you didn't
really think about that.

I    Was it clear from the outset where the entrance to that
part of the ground you had a ticket for was?

        Again, I wouldn't know because I knew where I was going.

I   What was the atmosphere like then?

     Jovial, happy, everyone getting, cracking jokes, some of
them trying to eat their pies and that and getting squashed and
that. Just normal football banter.

I   What were the police doing at that time?

     They were just standing there. The policeman on the horse
was occasionally moving his horse in and out the crowd but
there wasn't any sort of organised queue until you got about
six yards away from the turnstile, because then you had to.

I       How many people were there?

        When I got there, one-and-a- half to two thousand maybe.

I       How long were you there before you entered the ground?
<1




          With all the pushing and shoving and everything, about
     half-an-hour to forty minutes.

     I      Would that be normal? Would expect that?

            Yes, I would expect that.

     I      How did you get in?

     ZZ     I got in through the turnstiles.

     I      Which one?

            The one on the right; the furthest right one I got in to.

     I      This would be then about quarter-to-three?

             About quarter-to-three, yes.

     I      Were all the turnstiles open at that time.

            Yes, to my knowledge they were, yes.

     I      Were you searched?

          | No.

     I      Was your ticket taken?

          It was ripped, but I expected that. I think that's what
     you mean?

     I   Yes. Were there any police      inside the ground when you got
     in?

          Yes, there was about two on each turnstile when we
     actually got in plus a couple of steward hanging around, you
     know. That was about it.

     I      Did any of them speak to you?

     ZZ     No.

     I      Did you hear them speak to   anyone else?

            No.

     I       How were you directed to the section you were in?

        | We weren't. There was no signpost. As you walked in
     - all I can say is - there's like a big pen and there's a
     tunnel straight opposite you, that's the tunnel you'll head for
     because you can't really see the other... As soon as you walk
     into the ground you can actually see the terracing and a bit of


                                     G
    the green of the grass so, automatically, you just head for th*
    “ ni??h?n e ; T h ?re ” as "obody telling d i ^ c t i o n i to go to J e f ^
    or right, you just went where you thought.

    I          What was happening inside the ground when you got       there?




    £    mT   L   t   K“                                     S T K t S. “
    I ? ? h a t tine, a v y ^ l y 1
                                  . Slnglng away- The « —   P h « e was great.

    I     Did you go directly to the section.


                           and^then ^ b ^ ^ o S ^ i T *         " a U e d f°r “
    I     Where exactly were you standing?

    _H    We were standing in just left of the goal. When we eot to
 really°Uit
 really, it wasn^t          ^ W3S
            wasn t that bad so     ^USt 'Like
                               you could  push a and
                                                  normal
                                                     move home game
                                                           where von
 wanted, to get a good spec. We moved nearer to the front and
 then we decided to move a little bit to the side because if
 Xdp of°^    there d be a big crush. So we moved to the left
 side of the goal post.                                      eLL

 I            What time would you     estimate that you reached theDiace
 that         you ended up in at the beginning of the match?

^        Ten-to, five-to, just before the teams came out.

I        You were still with your friend at that time?
         Yes.

     How
1 ition?did y °U feel at that time " When you had taken UP your
position?

—    ijEJC ^ ei”en! and booking forward to the game. Touch wood it-
          V     S°°       of £ootball- Just generally bantering    '
talking to people around, offering sweets,            cigaiettes
                                                            Jhl’
usual. But I started getting a little bit c o n t w n e d      list
                                                              before
the teams started to come out. It was gettting much fuller and
there was, like, a surge when a few lads come in, it s u « e d ?o
?hai-S:LR e*-01^^forward or what-have-you. It was getting a bit of
bothered at that time? “ P ’ y°U 6XpeCt that S0 1 wasI,,t that

itself?re y°U a” are ° £ a" y P°llce officers in the ground
     The only police I saw were patrolling the perimeter of the
pitch.

I    When the teams came out then, you're saying that the area
around you was full but not to the extent that..?

     When the actual teams came out there was a massive surge
and people moving around but, as I say, I expected that from a
football game, everyone wants to have a look at the team and
that. I didn't think anything 'unordinary' about that.

I    At the kick-off what was happening?

      The kick-off was a totally different kettle of fish. First
^>r all kick-off came and suddenly we got more and more crushed
 and my friend, 1    1 he was by a barrier and he was trying to
 move himself off using his hands against the barrier. I stood
 back, I had a fellow standing in front of me, I was standing
 back a little bit. Just after the kick-off, that's when it all
 spilled over. At first, I saw a couple of lads down the front
 climbing over. At first, people didn't know what was going on,
 they were confused, people were saying "Get off, I can't see."
 And then, suddenly, it dawned on me that it was something much
 more serious than that. And, at the same time, we were getting
 pushed sideways to railings about six foot, just a little bit
 taller than me, plus with spikes on. And I was getting more and
 more close to these railings, which means that I was like,
 trapped, I couldn't move. Luckily, when that surge came, I got
 pushed onto the side, if I went forward, I don't think I would
 be here today.

I    In   the beginning,   what did you think was happening?

     I knew for a fact  that it wasn't any kind of football
trouble because normally at football,if there's going to   be
trouble, the chants start before actual fists fly I suppose.
So, I knew it wasn't that, I just thought these people were
getting out because some must have fainted or it was getting
hot. I knew for a fact that it wasn't a pitch invasion or a
hooligan element or anything like that. I just knew... because
you get that at the Kop, people get carried out.

I    How soon before you realised that something was really
wrong?

     As soon as I saw two or three lads go over at the same
time and literally get onto the pitch on the sidline, I knew
something was wrong because the police started getting hold of
them, dragging them, I presume to drag them out of the ground
or to throw them back in, I just don't know. But the police
quickly came over to these three or four lads who got out first
but that was before the whole thing really took off.

I    What did you feel at that time?

                              •3
0




          At that time, I was more concerned with watching the
     match, really. I saw a few lads go over and it was getting more
     and more crushed and I was constantly thinking, 'I'm getting
     nearer and nearer this railing, I'm going to have to somehow
     wait until the crowd dies down and...' because that's what you
     expect, to wait for the crowd to, like, settle and then move
     your way around. But it wasn t to be, I was just getting more
     and more squashed.                                     6

     I      What were the people around you doing?

     . I. ^       t take much notice of what people were doing, I was
     trying to watch the match. But I c o u l d n H see anything Inyway
     because these lads were climbing over and as soon as the last
     few dropped, then I realised that something was terrible, was
     totally wrong.                                               ’

     I     What happened next?

          I
          T got 1I more  J4 and T-rmore crushed up against
                                                     I"Owo .u the
                                                              HIC barrier.     And
          T        i♦o a /              J 1_                      UHL L IttL . HIlU
                                                                                * ‘ ,v*
     then I realised... I could hear screams, there was no chanting
     like you re used to, it was more screams, people swearing and
     saying.  How are we going to get out of here?T I was crushed up
     against the barrier...                                                             p

     I     A barrier in front of you?

     ZZI    No, no to the side, the railings, I should say, the
      railings. I was trapped up against one of those but still... I
     was squashed but I had full sense of what I was doing. There
     was a couple of lads who, somehow got over these railings
      first, there was no way I could have got   out without those lads
     help. God knows how they got over... or    they might have got
     over the other side of the railings.    Because
     there was these two railings and then there was like a
     passageway where there was a gate, and then there were other
     railings again, all in the same terraces. These lads got into
     the middle bit and were trying to help people up by closing
     their hands and sticking    them through the railings so you
     could get a leg up over them, because they were slippery. At
     that time there was pandemonium, people screaming, clambering
     over to try to get out. There was no way you could get out at
     the front and there was no way you could get out at the back,
     the side was really the only alternative. The more people were
    coming, the more crushed it was getting. I saw an old man, oh.,
    he must have been about seventy, flat cap, all I can remember
    was the look in his eyes, it was horrible, all welling up , he
    just looked dazed, he was glazed, the whole of his body was
    sagging and I honestly think that he just wanted to stay there
         ^     8et and just like get carried away, he wasn't bothered
    with the pandemonium. We managed to grab hold of him and
    literally throw him, about six or seven of us, throw him out
    into the gangway. Then there were lads, eleven, twelve, you
    were trying to grab hold of those and then you realised that


                                      Ci
somehow you had to get yourself out. My friend,       1 went
first and got over and fell. I got pushed up., the lad said,
'Put your foot..' into his hands to give me a lift up. He
lifted up, I got to the top and I looked over towards were the
people were by the stand and all you could see was like a
massive big crush. You just saw heads, bodies, bodies moving
and swaying and not going anywheire just staying. And then the
fella said, 'Just jump. Fall. I'll catch you.' which he did,
those lads were real martyrs, they saved my life. You could see
they were still trying. Again, I was trying to help others but
there was so many people lined up there, you just couldn't. You
wish you could do more but you just couldn't. And then there
was just one policeman, by the gate, who was just casually...
I'll never forget, he was just like casually opening it, like
'Oh another one.' go past. And then we got onto the pitch and
that's when...

     Out of the gate? Which gate was this?

     This was the gate inbetween two railings. The side
railings. If you got over there's a passageway where there's a
gate and then there's other railings. So, to get to any kind of
gate, you had to climb over these railings.

I.   And the gate led onto the pitch?

     The gate led onto the pitch. There was one police officer
at that time, there. I dashed on the pitch not thinking
anything... I just thought it was a mad crush, I couldn;t
believe that anyone would have died. I ran on the pitch and all
you could see was people lying there. At first, you think, 'Oh,
what are they doing? Maybe they're trying to... maybe I'm
wrong, maybe this isn't bad. And then I realised, I saw some
fella s leg and he must have broken his tib. and fib., just
hanging loosely. And then, you saw people giving mouth to mouth
resuscitations tp people but also you just saw people lying
there, blue in the face. I'll never forget... a kid, he seemed
to me to be about seven or eight just lying there and he had a
pullover accross his head and then I realised the full extent
of the carnage. And there was just mayhem going on. The
police.. I didn't see any police... the police were like
running around at the half-way line, they were more concerned
about Liverpool fans going to have a go at the Notts. Forest
fans. Me and my friend,      just looked around in total
disbelief, there was just carnage going on. I also saw a person
of the press taking pictures of this body, one of those things
that I find totally obscene and how could anyone do., take
pictures of people who are dead, bodies, especially soon after.
It was just disgusting. I., we were all shaken up, we ran back
towards the terracing again where we saw a fella trying to be
arrested by a policeman for ripping down the advertising
hoardings to make into stretchers. We stood there by the
terracing just looking over the terracing. The North Stand,
where my friend was, we were looking there, naturally we were


                         to
l5=lli                                I

                                                      thl                               so




^v^«SS?aK^'SLj-
SacSas5%-“?K ^ ^ r i r a
ss'STt-.Sjir^Hii^nWfSrr^
r       ^     &       g    -      s       S       S     S   -   S   s    f   x      ^        r


is#fn^-’issi*^j np
They M IoDle0dvingn °?h"St newspaper reports that I've seen the
last f e w d a y s ^ just make me w L to^sick ^ w - n ^ n e   ^
stuff like thatJ I ” a ® °n |hing like that. All there was, was
minutes and I didn t see ny     g   Jo n «t think anyone could




m*v>at later
        s     m
             that   B
                  their    &
                        training ginvolves
                                        &     s first
                                           basic   g a                                  ^        y
            'i- fhpv do it7 They were more concerned to stop crowd

g S               ®       2 £ 2   K                   d " y L s!rh e T o S .fre ^                    of
    crowd trouble at all*
    I       You say a couple of the police were quite helpful?

         nr.1v the ones who were on the scene straight away. I think
       -w •f i-Viov had orders they could have been brought back.
    mayb» c o u D le eive mourt to mouth rescusitation - very few. But
    therl S        Safe Seen over two or three hundred police there.


                                              u
I    The policeman who was trying to arrest the bloke who was
trying to take down hoardings, what actually happened in that
incident?

      Well, we had just got out and we hadn't seen any kind of
bodies at that stage. All we saw was people being dragged out,
a lot of screaming, a lot of shouting, that's all I can think
about, the shouting and everything going on at once, it was too
much for my brain to really cope with. I saw this lad run over
to the advertising boards and just literally got his hands and
ripped it from there. A policeman ran over, grabbed hold of him
and then the fella shrugged away and said something, there was
so much shouting going on and everything and next thing, the
policeman ran off in a towards the front of the goal, the
conversation must have gone on for about for about fifteen to
twenty seconds. The policeman grabbed hold of the fella and the
fella came as to say, he like pulled his shoulders back to ,
like, say'What are you doing? when                he grabbed hold of him and
then the conversation stopped. The policeman, I think, did have
his hand on him as they were speaking and the policeman dashed
off, like    semi-jogged towards behind the goal. The fella
proceeded    to, and a few other people came along and helped him
with the hoardings to make as stretchers. It was such
pandemonium, we got back onto the terracing and we knew we had
to stay put. All we wanted to do was get out of the ground and
wish it had never happened, like this nightmare would end. But
                                              3 I
we knew we ihad
              _ i           ___ _____ C — l -
                  to wait £for    my friend            I  .,U ^
                                                       |, who   was up« in
                                                                        A
                                                                           the
stand. We were just sitting there watching it. I mean, I
couldn't watch any more, I just sat down on the terraces. Where
we were when we came off the pitch, there was so much room, we
could sit down and you could look at the sky. you could see the
sky and you had loads of room around you. It was just like
sitting in the pub or like me and you are now, there was that
much.room in this bit. We'd sit there, occasionally you'd look
up and then, all of a sudden, we saw...somehow, my friend
Craig had got down from the stands and was looking on the pitch
for us and then looking on the terraces. We managed to catch
his attention and he then climbed over the actual fence to get
with us. It was quite emotional actually, he broke down because
he thought he'd seen me brought out on a stretcher, someone
with the same jeans and trainees as I had on. All we then
decided to do was walk out the ground. This was... I know it
was past half-time, this must have been about four o'clock, we
left the ground. I know there was no police on the gates or
anything, the gates that were supposedly opened were open and
we walked through there. There was streams of Liverpool
supporters walking out, crying, just looking down, shoulders
slumped. The police were just looking. A lot of Liverpool fans
vented their anger out at the police. When we got outside the
ground there was about two or three policemen and one lad said,
 *What are you doing out here? You should be back in there
saving lives, or words to— that effect. These policemen were
just looked at him and said, 'Listen, we'll decide our job,
we're staying here.' As we were walking back to the car, I must
0




    say this, a fella was shouting at a policeman saying,  How
    would you like it if your eight year old kid was in there now
    and you're standing out here? What are you doing? You re not
    doing any purpose. Just look at us, we're all distraught.  The
    policeman then threatened to arrest him if he didn t shut up. I
    saw that with my own eyes because I had to drag the person away
    because I really thought he'd be arrested. This policeman, he
    was just like arrogant, I can describe him, the policeman, a
    black moustache and cold brown eyes, just looking at you. Maybe
    he was shook up, maybe he didn't know what to do, but there^was
    no need to put someone under arrest. The fella was saying,   Go
    on hten, arrest me if it solves anything.'

    I.   The man himself was upset?

          He was distraught, the fella. I mean, the policemen must
    ^ee this every day so why pick on someone who's distraught?
    Maybe they should just say, 'Get on your way.' there was no
    need to threaten to arrest him, he was upset. His friends were
    there and I came over and just tried to... you know,   Just walk
    away. They're not worth it. I said that, I said, They re not ^
    worth it. We can get them some other way but not now. Come on.
    We got back to the car, we were absolutely distraught. There
    were people leaning on the car. Normally, you dsay, H e y , what
    you doing?' But they were upset and crying. I wasupset and
     then you were worried about people back home worrying about you
    and the people who'd lsot people and your friends. It was
    horrible. We got the car and we turned round and all the way
    along all you could see were people walking with their heads
     slumped to the pavement. People just sitting there on grass ^
    verges,   on people's lawns, the front lawns, you know, there s
     a pavement and then there's a lawn, just sitting there, just
    couldn't believe it. Everyone was... it was just numb. We got
    back, we realised we had to phone, I had to phone my mum. The
    phone boxes were either ripped out or the queues were
     absolutely unbelievable for telephone boxes. So we decided to
     get over the Pennines and get to some villages just before
    Manchester to use a pub or anything like that. We went into one
     pub, I think it's the Gamebird, that was just off the Snake
     Pass. We went into this pub to use the phone, we found out
     that the pub had closed at five o'clock because it was a
     children's pub or something and they weren't serving and they
     couldn't allow us to use the phone. So we walked out, pretty
     annoyed at that. We travelled on looking at pubs, almost all
     the pubs doors were shut, this was about five to five, all the
     pubs doors were shut, may have been waiting to open again, no
     all day drinking, I don't know. Eventually, we found a pub, we
     got in, we phoned back home but then it was hitting us hard
     then we were really upset and to make matters worse we broke
     down’at Manchester. But, I must say, that all the people we saw
     in Manchester and in this village, I couldn t even remember
     the village, they were really good and they were really
     sympathetic. And people from Sheffield as well, were calling
     out, 'Are you O.K.? Do you want to come in for a cup of tea?


                            13
G




    By   that time we were just distraught, all we wanted to do was
    get back home andhopefully wake up from the nightmare. But on
    the way back we broke down, what must have been 'Sod's Law '
    really, in Manchester. I got back home in Crosby at twenty-
    past- eleven to find out - all I heard was that there was
    seventy-four dead - to find out then that there was ninety-
    four, it was just too much for me. I just cried and cried.
    Nothing in this world could comprehend what I saw. Working in
    casualty department, just doesn t bear thinking about what I
    saw that die. I was mentally scarred, probably for the rest of
    my life. What doesn't help is seeing people not helping such as
    the police. Just standing there. All they were concerned about
    was, ' As long as there's no trouble and we do our job, keeping
    the fans apart, who cares?' That was the impresssion I got of
    the police there. And then when I found out, yesterday about
    the gutter press, the tabloids, saying stuff like urinating on
    policemen and pickpocketing and all that sort of stuff. What I
    saw was tota; and utter nonsense. The police were hardly there,
    in force anyway to do anything like that anyway. Literally,
    they just stood and watched.

    I    Did you see antone drunk, before, during or after the
    match or did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk?

         It's hard to define being drunk at a football match
    because people are singing and joking. They might have been for
    a few drinks, I don't know. I didn't see anyone totally and
    utterly legless, making a fool out of themselves. Anyone could
    have had a drink, I didn't really notice. The lads where we
    were had a couple of cans. We didn't take any drink with us,
    which I must admit is unusual, because we like a can in the
    car, we were just sharing out. They had about four cans and we
    were just taking sips out ot there cans. But to say about
    anyone being legless and not Knowing what they were doing, no.
    People were in very jovial spirits and happy.

    I   Apart from thos two incidents that you mentioned, when the
    police were threatening arrest, Did you actually see anybody
    being arrested by the police at any time during the day.

    . | I can't say I saw anyone get arrested. The police, with
    fans, people having goes at fans, I didn't see anyone. They
    were in close proximity to each other,   shouting at each
    other, but to actually see someone being dragged away, no, only
    those two isolated incidents.

    I   Did you, at any time after arriving at Sheffield, witness
    any violence; within groups of Liverpool supporters?

         No.

    I    Between groups of rival supporters?

    □    No.
I    Against any individuals of any sort?

     No.

I    Against police officers?

     No.

I    Against any members of the press or media?

     Is this before the game?

I    At any time during the day.

     I saw the pressman taking a picture of the dead body and I
saw a Liverpool fan run over and hit him. And then the police
intervened. The police didn't arrest him, they just intervened
and got the pressman out. That was the only isolated incident I
saw of any kind of violence. But I'm sorry, if I was there I
would I would have done the same thing.

I    Is there anything you wish to add to what you've said?

ZZ   Not really. What I saw at that game is with me for the
rest of my life. I just wish that I could have done, maybe a
bit more to help people. I just feel so sorry for the people
who died. After all this, I just thank God I'm still here.




End of Interview




                      i ?
                                                                                                                                                        c^A

                                   06AP- SvT y rnoAo^o
                                                           FHS a .                  ue^pO\           ^>sf\ ._w>W> ____________
AoTCM&n^                 c v r > ^ <^cio         Vo^toa              Vo         qjJE- o o & ~         ixvSG^i^                       jzxxaa^       $Q£Z
    V
    V Ugjg^t        \ \f^\xA
                        < ^ v > A v>
                                   w r&
                                     r &b
                                        L , ris___^Cr*_,..C^o5&
                                             ~Ao   ^ o-»   u \ o t &aM _V
                                                                        V>
                                                                         o._QogH
                                                                               d Kftg
                                                                                   po                             rCCffli^
                                                                                                                   rCCeJ*        S.t?oteft              X A e Zx L u x _ _
    A<>     ^VdjL                                     \A s ^ ^ r y                                         fs d t—      IfLcecc'e-X^               _SVom _\?o _^r&e2L._
coA o^
     -^i.-atoA^S ^ _ ^ £ j eA
                            p a ..._~____
                                          vjoe    cq>q         A^Dck_Ak. .~5q __ -y*>/>_                            a        _ri°—.o^j-     <xr>
          (A ^ r W r              f^\Q «^vcr>


               -Tcgjxx              S


G~rvrVoV-             c ^ q c a k o n


       - ^ ) L S ? ^ . _ ^ i s f i 3 £ J t o - _ J S ^ K ^ t $ _ _ _ _ ( | ? n _ V a v Q ^ p ^ .._?£- . _ _ ^ « « s £...A&_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _        _




                                                                                                                                                              _
        .. ....          0^                       e^rP r^jrAgVAA . tsAr __ ____________________ ___ __ ____                                                 __
                                ^Vp6i_i^                                         _rXVo^s-                                                          ?^cl.. .


      ( ^ v>Ar^ c^»               ~tlg            .     oevit; G jivo^                  rfU^             Ofdvtfc^- R ^od*5.. .,_“W ^ . o A w \pdk Ojv ^e/                      ....



    rvP "tVevjr           rvgy^r        roe_o^ o r v^vP              cVtrVx .~TV-»ei> cx^e                    cv©.tis^y _ . 0 8 ^ « W c < a A _ . < h k : ^ ^ f . . .
                     c*^& ~^r~flc        k^&xs&5 .            ^4- V> .Aw^.~*TS^.^0^ „o-JO-n.c^vwto._ W s L ' W .                                              _<Ti®\.vJ'»l^*^.
s»sf M r M K <0^-             v-c^o^rccJCP.....                                                                                  —                  .                 _ . ..


      C ^ i ^ v ^ Vjyae          <v»       £,*          rsewO              oact>.        ssSs&stedi. ..^...siCbyypkisc!!?. rv*>k.~
-4*§s\o           .o^J^ok>0:trvr._ ,. rT\e>-^ ._W»£                         CO-J& _ t<X\Cn                                    3T!*a?vl -^JrC<vri   WStff^. { cvxT._____
    cyj-*L>rw<
    cyj--*€XlCVr<??f
                   rA-
                    ft- W<a
                        OJN^      ^O-rft^p -^o^e>NTliNti
                                  Jo-ttyy^       c\rrty\t3            ,.    ~ \W a Vtux Kufi)               Pi>C0                    _.. "^Vsl      1Ko4^0Cyw>'v'>7__ :..
                         Ov^S^rv^W            ^pqvA&'a        V>^E          o    fr o a v \       ^oNtainv . .\VS/>._. oW.vDfw^i ,(\<xVvv^ «?ct-.
                                      ^suSOCl-.'^Oj-                                          ... ___ __ ____ ___ __ _.....--                                         _-

                    ...uitxA (>>o acktiiN„5raSrvsyv                                 'IV? ..                     f^vorc^OJ'A^' .vivty^eA u\i=3 V<irdd oi^pcofesa^
-f^S__SVre               \f\?.Sr.. Cxs(^..f^J .                                               -......................                                                        - ...

                                                              . V ? o ...           " t W ..AjAjo.                                                   o r.   v.^o5Wivt
-      .^OkfT'CP       Cf\^re VxAi(A^                        „^CV«_ O j ^ f v ^ .....S^^^P1^


        ....... Gajnk\6qt^                             v^ W o o ^ 1                                                           Ocmo^          ^or    e*€«sukL'^lM
        .     fc>r(:>A - ~yy^.                         $sc£x&                       rv*>^           Vo^
      .j Po \\Cxj4V^


                                             f\o         .VrvrTveAn                         rrcffiivM^ji(..Pt/H O .^t\g Xnrre <^aistO\r>_______ LQi&L)




                                                                                                   _
_/^ _ S > ^ 2 > ._ _ ^ _ S i/\..          o d cA         cmsV      V W W i&         a ^        f l .i r A f l - f o o a p aJsA-________________________________
                                   ~^W ?          Po fvoj^                            or\       rcx^A           r\rA                             cQo£___.'ik€._r3^rnA^
1^_V^^_^<XA..                                     V=>     WrOP/l                    CO^^V         ^TO          Oc-AgJ^
      -vo^ \ o       Oor^jftfrNrs           c\D                    > W »^       cWit            1 & 5:                         r h t e ^ _,

                             v>a€^r .                                       -tVo J^\^Q         Q = r ^ U __ 'S.-V&Jtafei__ \>oj-_,____________________________

C^._\^Je»\                                        __ O ^ d AC^_Loyer^..,-Si?l--^OPiA v-^-(Cg___ SshWft-fc_
v^SV<av>ff PoaT^                               V^Ksj£Ba ‘\v<>                                      or^ ~^V. ^Asi-fv^___________________________
W v       . vv '*                            *\           -A—
                                         r^A- Vcv^q^ ~^\Q^:                         “Vfr           \ .A-i
                                                                                              srgwL'.~       _
                                                                                                             ^’^<j_C<£^-Osf\( .
                                                                                                      tV{>___!                  VtW^ ,^Q_Qo CQiktJ
^\«_Jt^rcQ.CEiD <afs._.'^s. oOs^.tcSlO^:__ ~ r^ w                                                              £?tQAjCuAfl)__ JVirv5' -------- -------- -----
      „Vis^        w ^ e _ . ^ r £ - __M>as^D^^2__^ f Q __^ ^s$ffjy.
I_si^.„\yKi,o.--^eJP — r^a__.A«swn                                       cmJ     ~^q            __r ^ c ^ 5 >_.o a ^_,._e>ofr^.oas^r£
      j^>V^_c^iA_ ^ 0 2 . _l\c^ve__ ^SlaQ^T=£i                                      ^61^___ L ^ o W s —                                 ..._.©cv-^k)^.----
                    d\*        pAyt'fr                                  V&ck. t/A<> Cs~o^jA              o ^v>^VcvA                                 fsi\3r              ■$?
     CV        vr^o^eyiy                 _____ _____________________________________________ _________
                      ,'^V ,0*<* ...f'5&                  ^c-«4r^<orvaA                   VSrrXA 1 V &J kS>6                       a

    U. ,i


2).       wVv^.      w oe • %               erooji            Ofl4»x^        ct>w<UQJ>        C^uAr^Sr^                        _r. f>ooNVi^             ~yS^s$).__ foci's.icrrad
      .VrPS^s.        v t S ^ M ^ S      <sJ\s^    o < j i ^ s b o .                "y                 C V ^    ' S   X ^ j * ^ ~            v^-j- . f ' ^ S ' C   x^£f~. „ . l Q ^ i ^ . ____

Q o^cctsS^o .....                           ._          ...___                                                                     _         .                         .      ._          ...
L>^^_0~L._9^?c> ^                         ^covatAa                o^re__ Ojt         W 4 j ) A ______ t_e>iidr._                         ^
    .o .— ^ J*sr<r\?'tO


)     P(2£g>       «t-      CXg-PbgsrvMT^


       v>jc>^ S'Vy wow?!' o>                       \~\C^ rv^\g)                ^VA_£^S?^rS....<2'5-*i^                 "f^USi. *!^> ,^j0^3u                    VoA-_VC!6A. _VlS-VcQr'
A^»JrvV^ CjLvoP |X=e\                                                                                                          .       W o i Ocivjid                           __\jA_0__
__jdr?Ct».... fto                      o^                 . _           ______ ________                _ ...           _       .           ........... ......... ...
)."51e.. £ f \ ...                       W>oV cxK .-.-^W2_ ..                                                                            a^a^N<<r^ )
^). ?!^?. -(fc&f)             I                                  ~^Vq    VgsrActfN ^V<Pj>tA0                   S'VorxkCy-j- o ^                  '“Tck.frs^j -Af^_S>L^r2 ..
- o^sv-rcA..^w\                       .v>xv^':^-'<^                                                  ^ I w ). »a J                  fN>v^ ^\>o              ^vw\
                _fy>&A&.                 'o-tL^           &n.\yf]sz}>....V^aroa^ Vvn> '^vq ..^er^                                        Wo^^e') _                    'ArovO
S r o ^->c '\VqA;           ..' W         X.fNSJ^..^                        -4-t. .!^....W^.c^A _<§°r                          Uwe^xrA            .fbr^r.CV^..!^.^^
                                              _0c^.                             .                                                                           —      ..... .......
            ^ W .           v m e . . ,\CLPyj\ A-*. V W ^ . 0 ^ ^                             ..V^                                     1 oVo)rt^ on                 Sm^c^VW*^
                          CJOvAji ■Wt^olKa _
            ....k?) ..                ... Vvi^-oOJ-..                               ._._______________                                                               ____ — ...                  -
              Q P . Oc\XrVcj^/vr>A'^v _____                                                              .                 .                                .           ..         .. -
                                                                                                                                                                                0>



                                       \AiJCiO.                                     r                                  ^ c«aro    cArcvdr          C2/3Q ^Txeie cvjfe^?
                                                        i       ^fVJ ^ V>oO-ji iAcX f^twyjg                                "I^Voo 3630.            Vr \&M r^Ar-ft'-p
 i>c? d r D'
ik._Mo?0—                                         — Qocy^.___ C^aj\vS ..._______                          (QV-        JLliLc*.     ^.AgA >K x ^       \*> W\^l




                    J&                               aL_gcLa^,Rj^             ^     Qfe^r cx        d w\
                    ci -.f^owc.!^P---eosA^vTM^ .jMtack-0 yV° , ^ _ L c lC ^ . ' 3 ^ ^ _a/>A-...P*>V.
    -^S^SES^l
                   (3>


                                        -V.!!3^o q x . < S W J k                   S^ytik....                                        .. \3       / ...


4)          ---- £SsPS~.. — .(                                       —   irvT^c... i^xjpta^ift.                                                        ^rs£3\&> nrd
. ^ C S D ^ ..Q^.„..?CO<:&...As»_.cS^>lCJX^d                                      £><?0 joOis        TZ    I7ZQe>p3»______ ^h»jA>a. vAW r ® ^ o 4 ,~W>J\
                                                                              -




-?fey^. .\<^-«.. <\a_ <2^ C ^                           o^        r<>oWn^.                                       ..Ps ^>Voi,?r<<s^
.^t V_ -A_ _ v\ r«
    Stx^a            i   -A                             —-^ h jl     \)  .\k \ . «Jt-i ^                                                   .                   i
A _.V o6a-.\^iL . ^ 04^                                    .Nrvk.. . -NJOOO^.V....^O_ M^92. .                                                                       c>y.
      i&SX^C


^                            As*^             . V ... S W J < ^                                                                                                      C W * s < w J ) _ __
 _rT^.As>o..             oj-^-         cm ^                                                             _______            _____________________                      _______


------------------ ,\.tpi~i?. _vj^c^§ a ,„4r _.                                            _ .,?«^p ... G=m ~a>\ .. oX/ovS? ^ 9 _
                 ... t.\ Sp^oo                    ,...ooc>J»<3'*..;.erv 5V..^>£^A A sl/V                          a £W o    - W o^             r^i £co^ckx^\»^ tx*3w>
         — f&c— —<-Sc>t>r^ .-&(\^_e/>^«&A—                                                                                                     V.cnaK oA   .    ^      V s .___
ico^_.....I!^'C..0vk0 0 .^iiASy^G — 0 &"~-                                          -3k._^cv^_Oc^S                      .-;_                        ..?
     —   00 \ ^ . ....   CVc>Vr\$Jf_                                      o _r03 v<&S5jV*5S>                                       '^FSt                                        r\p^cV.~v^^&
                                                                                                                                                                            _
         o-»oO& k.        ^r\A.                                          Va'cVjS^ \&vt          .,. _     ....



                             ^                                       ca^5<S5.       csa\   .                     £V              CSkTv^r^O.           V V\     t>t^Af35
•—DSS'O? t^\ OJ>                 <=X        OOQ'-1^ t> ^         incwks       . \                    _vw^’^rNr~o. -V>> . Srr ..                     Vju^rN^^- ?/"_..
^fr: rCNO&rUSV                               _ ..                V       ._                _    .



- -                               V Wxwc oirvJACA.. ,'^W Ui>Je3 .^r>                                        ^                         ks&$p cvd
         'S&S’&MVy                .X p ^ e o .              ^     3t* _ &■ O-ViS^r^....


pp€*                                   1 -O>o^c^m^r\o-rW,
         . .-!^5?r^fS^_ ^ .._'t-W^<=' .C-Vo^ifO-^
            .   Jcv.‘M S '             J. .. vCoA. Wf>saJu
OoCq.            C^V^o/)                j   ,_2o»* Nk>i^M^a>\
*>%       . Pcii^rj                           _     '


                             .........
                                           -A                                  otU L, tNNf-S.              AaikL
                                                V»*vLaV* 'L*              ~^PQftV o C o ^ ■___________________

                                           J^S/3° ^ 3 -'_M —         C&j^AViP       0| tw^ Qy^NA-w\A              ^J)fvnp        ^    ________
4-0-^ ° ^ 3                  _
                                                                                              . j^__.<*jr.rs^v~^*^."^?                      (v^V-tof^e
    AS2_______            ___
        ->_5c^A^an>>AsA <Lj                                    } V-vxjO^aA U > _A.\A-------------- o sz t - '■VSf-Q         -    V.              a v ^ j_
                                                                                         A'OcL^         Y-.C^._Jdb^^P!»Sta^^
 cxNk.                   -Vt>Vt     y yO    .         V)__________________________________ '
                                            \ w<xAA      ..■              ^— 0Sij-- CjgsiW___ dd'Atar^Fr.                                tt^




        ^ -0 <;^ W , k>&0                  Sci v^r-^Sn     -    La\s5!c£^j_^       a            ._.^S'tAq . A £ \e^o..Kv?c ^j- vjc>WV-
                                                                                        n CT&xk??
           o o ^ k ■■«^AaA^._. > .Sjafroksfli n^e_                      o e ^      ■Kc^s- u % n__A SCsky^>j^ rc^j______________


    p s (5>         \ \ x v ^ ^ A . . . . ^ s Q ----- ^sM^..„.fer<i. 5 c W .                             W i       t .^o^W.ie_. /v*^_ U                 fl
v-lr     -^Q--^s_ \ ^ n — ^»£x^_j^roiA*m&_^                                                  ................ .......... ..
                        ^) .VoA._orv.vA«i^_                                    .. ... ....                                      ..


       — — .Gmmvu IsQ—          q   1\—            _cv* A^sc*^«r^_              ................ .                  ..      .....
                    ^     .C.Ot'f'S^JQ^              — H XC^itWvx,         ^ S v j h s ^ . s ^ 00 0>iSA_ V^VtC 4o C^-<? 4\n Ton A->
                    ^                 ..£#**&$-- NotO*^-.. . W ^ . . . ^ ^ . , Vec^. „ ^s>ii4__^-)r O C . W N O ^ . ^ P ^
              ''W f ic K          t_ _\^ttO |K xh..               s^,_. e c v ^ ^Joc    W ta o      ^         & » p-c»    li^ k u W              ls W
                            <^Hi.Ac&<3^^_.0r^_ ..Vo-'l                 Q.„ .oip^cOL._Ws>rf^                                 _____



5J             ^ Voj-?         (PtfVu?          VJ£MTV:k .J'VXoX       fcOAawi      tr,^      ok.       bk.        . o ^ ,VU\aWo^V *
         pi'                         cab; viV^-<K,„W<-e ...iyc                  V>ocv\ opersA             ^W.«.          W»rnM_/^opAQc) ^nr>
              u»'                                                          L-AaAT.^.„fc„JW...ftr^'^*                       GGC-         Vxj^re.     OpvfiA o^ U^.
         ^Trv            ^NQ- _ f ^ .o p d               -ScjiSV.. MwiWVvjeL..../4j-ifi-. A £ ^ 0^-Vvrr\e .               vW k         _o «\ n£fr\~*\Qr-ri
^                                 _c s j - < ^ e v ^ n c e .          W - ii    n o i . Va                    c*^& ,) .
 STATEMENT OF|
 RE: HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, APRIL 1989


 Our party of five (including myself and my father) had travelled
 to Sheffield on April 15th for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match between
 Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.    We had travelled by car leaving
 Liverpool about 10.30 a.m. and arrived in Sheffield about 12.30
 p.m. having been held up by fairly heavy traffic and some road
 works en route.

We parked the car a short way from the ground and walked past
one public house as it was fairly congested and continued onto
the   Sportsman  public house.    Here is was much quieter, though
it being a warm, sunny day most people were sitting in the car
park enjoying the day.      There was a great, friendly atmosphere
and everyone seemed to be relaxing.

We made our way to the ground arriving after a short walk at around
14.30 p.m.    The others had ground tickets and continued in, my
father and I had tickets for the West stand above and to the rear
of the Leppings Lane terrace behind the goal.

We entered the ground at the main set of turnstiles set in an
almost cul-de-sac area.     This area was fairly congested at this
point, the queues being large swarms at the entrances rather than
the usual lines.    There was a large police presence though there
seemed to be little organisation of orderly queues though     people
were gaining access fairly easily. We entered through the turnstiles
for the West stand. Here there were no queues which is ludicrous
really because on the other side it appears you can again mingle
with the fans gaining access to the Leppings Lane terraces.       We
stood in the courtyard area for 10 minutes or so before showing
our ticket stubs to stewards at the stairway leading to the -seated
area,

Inside we were directed to our seats and awaited the start of
the game.    There were many empty seats around us and they seemed
to be filling up slower than normal for a game where such a large
crowd was anticipated.
                                \
At approximately 14.45 p.m. I went to the toilets situated roughly
in the upper corner of the ground.

Due to the slatted type windows of the toilets, I could see out
and down into the courtyard area and onto the inside of the turnstiles.
                                                                Page 2

Amazingly, the courtyard was almost empty.      A few police officers
were at the rear of the turnstiles but there were no fans entering
through them at this time.      Several fans were climbing down from
the roof of the turnstiles and I recall them showing their tickets
to the police from the roof. The cul-de-sac area was now completely
full, back it appeared to the road.       I could see no evidence of
queues, just a mass of people. Obviously due to my angle of obser­
vation I could not see the situation directly at the entrances
to the turnstiles, though     in the short time I viewed the area
it was apparent to me no-one was entering through them. On returning
to my seat I commented to my father that it looked like chaos
outside.   Most of the empty seats had now been filled but some
remained empty until after the game kicked off.

I  was not aware of any incidents until a minute or two into the
game.   Previously I had seen people climbing the perimeter fences
at the front of the Leppings Lane terrace, mainly at the areas
behind the goal. Some people were also being led along the track
behind the goal to the corner of the Leppings Lane terrace where
it joins the South Stand.     I had stood there myself last season
in the corresponding fixture before moving at half-time to the
opposite corner, this being the raised wedge of terrace.     These
areas were far from full.

Almost instantly I could see a sudden increase in the number of
people going to the fence.      Some were gesticulating, some helped
out by     the police, some pushed back in and off the fences.     The
numbers swelled and the       area behind the goal    quickly filled.
A general moan seemed to rise from the crowd in the stands - they,
like most - did not realise what was occurring.         I said to my
father "They've got to get out, they're being crushed".        We all
thought     in a minute or so it would be under control.      Instead
the  numbers swelled, fans ran onto the     pitch,  the game stopped,
the  players were gone and chaos broke        out.  This had happened
in a matter of minutes.

There seemed to be total confusion and lack of organisation from
the police. Some continued to hinder attempts,       signalling fans
to get back or maybe it was to move back.     Others helped, sensing
the desperation of those on the terraces.      Others seemed not to
know what to do.     I watched as a man with beige trousers almost
undone/Was dragged onto the pitch.  Police and fans gathered around
him trying to revive him.      This scene was repeated, and later
fans used hoarding as stretchers while police and fans tried to
pull the mesh fencing off the fencing uprights where I could see
people being crushed against each other and the fence.        I kept
looking to the man with the beige trousers.       Eventually he was
left as his helpers went to the aid of    others.   He had a blanket
placed over his upper body and face.      He was dead.     I felt he
was dead the moment I saw him. He was not the last I was to see.
                                                             Page 3



We waited in disbelief, wishing in some way we could have helped
until some ten minutes or so after the announcement that the game
was abandoned (which we had already obviously presumed) had been
made, then made our.way back to the car. On leaving I again visited
the toilets and again on looking out of the toilets I could see
six or so bodies covered in the walkway parallel to the stream.

I have shortened this statement as most of it will be repetition
of what you will receive many times over, but should you require
further details I will be willing to provide some.
                    /
                  x V *        /%.
           v      V            w,'v



                                                                                        \ LoIud Io s u h l iTuaKu^Q ^asfc, cWcAA a feoiu on. a
                                                                                        ;mai^kdt:          s t a k e * 4 r ay\d   Ihz <$oa   ha^iUr          d d

 Jjl&ar                                                                                  rvcftKtAOj j-6 stzsp xid •                    ^

                              l u s t Q x id "fce> Canute to u o a                                                    % &    SuppanW s       u $ \c >   £00^
 C&r\QSDc<           0rv2    TolUdZ. boShcuj'ucAXX o a 0 ^ t u ^ i d o j U               doina a J^^aJcm S jA) J M fc> /u a a a c w M c
 at                >JK?UPp\    ,                                                        $m>X^,3nappu\Q                 M ^doaS .                    ^
                                                     and 4       oj^ j h      ^dfc/\g    ^<2                     T ^ s o d must m
  in ktu                  .sJcoAcl c o a b c K c n ^ * ^<2flp8 i § § ^ a s tfS.         A) (aJK o o r d a ^      U p d a t e u i a t k k t iZoiiz J W         i.
cwa»n' n a o p
^                u A p ^ o d , i^a'/ma         ^aaa      fADsh o f fcta p o p ^ S         W i\£A fchd C lU tstiC fl " Coil'S jlk Q < m fc J W           t W f ix2QA
aM ioj&iC oM Si2gA cdt #\Q, r4a)SOa T v • ,ana W                                         tojjLxa/^d    ?                                                 ■

c^hai^ sh^jios on. 'TV , J* o/A cunapd. £WJt no oa&            0)      toVnb IWsba /
 Aa& KvWC^ned Ur& daa's b d C c p m & c w k > ifta Qtbcfc p-s. <2^2 tim i m u s t Vcx/a b&x y w A u i \ o d o o C , we,
         canru oa                    q ^ a &a W £fc             staged U i o u r / $ e a k b U

t^ini^cUcop/C Q j u S o Q *0&xlLi2£d uJriojc 9 \oj 2\ ^ft/peA^
& M      a|^ter i
                '-*WV-
                    - Pafiia            ftorrwd
                                        V               a.. J&CUm\X- UU/UOO
                                          V i n V C L A tA           a^oss    3S?ul       (ou/~S   Irn i t e j L ________________________________________

KiflitoaM
       x t f iAWm aand
                    nd        m o   M       ftvd na llrwe na dA ny
                                            jk d                     d t o l , .4
                                                                               J
       fc & sd a t f iW i               qa# d o ^      h lh      W
Dear /Vf.                                                          17. 4. 1989.

                        My        Son    and     I    were        in    the    North        stand and

were     lucky to escape                injury,       over        15    minutes       before         the

main     disaster. Therefore                    we    were        able    to     see        that the

major cause of the tragedy was a combination of two factors.

1...There were insufficient turnstiles open which meant

       that people could not gain access to the ground quickly

       enough.       This led to a build-up of supporters thus

       causing a bottleneck around the entrances.

2...There         was    a    total       lack       of     organised          crowd       control    by

       the Police, which made matters worse.

                         At       my     turnstile          there        was     only       only     one

frail Policewoman no more than twenty years old, who despite

being       terrified          herself         stood        her        ground,       and    tried     in

vain to assist us.

                         There          were         no     mounted           police        near     the

turnstiles, and as far as I could see less than one Policeman

per    turnstile.             I    saw only two mounted                   Policemen who were

on    the    main       road      over     50    yards        away,       for    what       purpose    I

don't       know.       Despite          our     screams          of    terror,       neither       they

nor other available police made a serious attempt to relieve

the tremendous pressure, until it was far too late.

                         I     utterly         refute        the        claims       that    many     of

those       who     were       eventually            allowed           into    the     ground       were

ticketless.             Hardly          anyone       was    asking        for    "spares"         which

was    an    indication            to     me    that        few    had    gone       to     the   match

without tickets.

                         The       obvious           solution           would     have       been     to

delay       the     Kick-off.             Will        the     authorities            ever     consult

the fans i~hpmsr 1                                                        r
        ^
             /V * "



M r . Keva Coombes,                                                           17. 4. 1989,

Chairman, Liverpool City Council,

Municipal Buildings, Dale Street,

Liverpool L2.                                                                          1 9 APR 1989




Dear Mr. Coombes,

                         Bill Shankly once said

             "FOOTBALL IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN LIFE OR DEATH."

Those    strangely prophetic words                             are the banner under which

Liverpool         F.C.,        its       supporters             and     football         in     general

must continue.

                         The    most          important             thing   to     those      who    gave

their       lives     was      LIVERPOOL                F.C.        Bill    Shankly        knew      that

Football       gave      them        a    release         from        the   everyday          struggles

that for many are part of life in Liverpool.

                         Although             it    may        be    hard     those      of     us   who

remain,      supporters         and playing                staff alike,            must heed Bill

Shankly's         words     and          do    our      utmost        to    pick    up     the      reins

and keep Liverpool at the top.                             This is the lasting Tribute

that those who have died would have wanted.

                         Next     years            Charity           Sheild      game      should      be

played      for     by    Liverpool            and       Everton       with      all    proceeds       to

help    their       relatives            and       to    create       a monument         at    Anfield

to those who died.

                         Yours in sadnes
 77th April,        1989.




Vear SJuiS,

I i<L<Ll J must p u t pen t o papex t o teJUL you w hat I saw a t HJJULibon.ou.gh
on Saturday 15th kpnJJL, 1989.

I a rr iv e d a t 'S ' entrance., OJcst Stand a t a p p ro xim a te ly 2.40 pm. The.
w rought ijio n gateA t o 'B ' entrance, were. lo c k e d and a crowd o£ 3-4,000
were. b u ilx tin g up -in Leppings Lane..

A t a p p ro x im a te ly 2.50 pm the. w rought JLron g a te * we/ie. opened and a ls o
a s id e 6 t id in g e x i t do on. was opened to a d m it people. s t r a ig h t in t o
the. ground. No Stewards were. a t the. exiX gate, to chejck t ic k e t s
on t o usher. people, to the. sta n d s. I was caught up w ith a l t the. people,
w ith and w ith o u t t i c k e t * g o in g in t o the. c e n tr a l area o£ the. Lappings
Lane, sta n d . A t no tim e, d id anybody challenge, anyone, about t ic k e t s .

That was the. ^ i f i s t tim e. I had v is it e d H ills b o ro u g h and d id n o t know
where. to go, th e re . w<me, no Stewards o r P olice, to a d vise me. so 7
fa llo w e d t h i s crowd.

Vau/tA In i th h i t P u
                                                                                                                                                                                                 lo-sr-^

                                                  St      b t e     H fc o £ _ m E                                        UUS ^ q J^_q            u    Ct                Pt-STIfe. ft.
1> e . o x _ S . cL/C-
                                          A                                                                                 -2>&q J L _ c J               c        S    o      p        t/y> _Ak«_.

A O X tUAx-CI^                    Q>—                 O J C u L r dCLL^ _V_SUbcv                                                                                                        fo Y-oVV-a f



    Vxa^C§±^_^<X— -XfVxt^Se 5 ^                                                 yVV^ __0_^vi VN o qJL7 £XrY\\                                               C X V ^ -UN ^ c \ cA:                    H- 3 , O

A   ^ C   \ ^ V   n   —   C   a A ^           C ^ o V ;       V o   V \ . ¥ \ 0 0 C * -------- 0 - U   . C     C O    O     - ^      O U ^ T O   C M   r v < \ .   \ _____ ^   V /V y o J ) & ^              I L   v   \     \



^ o                                           X"o         ^                , XXvr\cK—                         cxilV ceA.              Vo         A \^ „ _ c y - ^ VJLVXC^                   .___________ _ _

          ------------ ui«-.>^c— Vo— Wsa_                                               ^CQU.VN(\                     OUSCh^V-oukXojO'Cvfl-^v                            1/w           <~\ Vp^y-c. W

                                                                                                             — v-uv .                            oy>Xo.            y\vjz_ \jz _ r c a - d e . S
S < x)c— krvs,— P - e - w - lV - /- b .£ .V u A .( ^ _ ^ x * — o ^ o o -S l * 2 ij ^ o o u u - S ^                                                                                 o . r r o o « . ^ ...S.D..

- 0 -''£a^J^cv.£,v<£_                         K~k± Q J * —o<\SL^                     aJbrou^:__ lo - v3l_okW e_r. ^cc*_v\ s oALv^caA^ „Wv.__
                                              .....

                                          UA«— s k o » ^ e \                           tou.1                                           „Y4_                                            cx_v\cX          C&JLrCiuJfo:
                                              3v ^                                                               a,
I -3 a - ^ ^ M - ^ _ ^ k ^ b L t ^ a C s L a _ ^                                                                                                 u                     -CUOULcJft3L^ ..Ck V
I - U_<- - ^ . <C <T U                                                                      U~ .     . .. r^     \_ •                                           A    D       A        rx
^-—-^lSI   3- r .t> ti t fcVvfiJK                                     uCjC<Jt>              tTcCiO - V2_cx3SL<-^    \ (^                                      C~ Vu^S^ULO , ^U L O f^ S ig

                  CXJC:D-U-V\^— W . l m c ^ - -C,.Vo^-S^xC-.^                                                        .^t>         ^ J 1 _o JsA    n.   •....                                ..           . ______

                                      M   aa        j^Y-o^-e.r                     c x w ^                                    c\ g    \s    o    _ajl3 ^ v c _ \          cx ^     >    o   _ca    4roW\               .._
                                                                                                                                                                                             ^      A
va_ Qwwc^ \ j ^ \ m o £ J L u                                         e.Y\ \ e ^ _ u L p                        o J b - c 5\ a 3 t           S' ■           .. < x ^ c x ^

J2jr\eJLc>_ c O c A v > ^ J | r o v \ X - A^^vJL2-A\\JL.Ve_, \                                                                      oCi.cx^            h>«_V/vxQ^              po^s

    V(X z.— 1jg>— s AA * , , -$o                                               ^ \ a3c _ '-CsJ2_a--vv\<i^.
                                                                                          -Cu 2_q _-vv\<   . a^c^a_/D A                                                                           S> cx^A

0 0^0-iA»_-OOr\ ck ^ O ^ W \                                                              \c»V\,e<X V© OsiOvV. VVvM^ ^jC i Cx- A- ^ V^OlcAk .V o
^ W x -^ V o A " d o » -iJ lc ^ xvAr                                      W eouu^xa.                                        o^SLSt A ifv a _ ^ V < L S S u .K _ ooLX
v.VO\JOf\CX                    XV\j£_ .


                                          ^        W n cx V\ <x <^<2 cK                     Vo                  O vV^ Vvvx_*^
                                                                                                                       Vvu_i^-                        —        c'—‘-A V®                          V c^_SL_
>^^K<2-V«.                VVnj^H2_ ^ o O n c U ^                                                                      <^> (XC-SL-. lo                \TooLH3_. UO>^n_vJLa_ v\vfl_v^_)

L oo ^<^-&-a_
l      S iS l         i m         tWa_              C_VCiOCi\                 ^ o Q - V L                ^>cxJ^^>vyw.o^                                                o O ^ , r            X^O Wvs2_
> v c\    jj_^.
                        -H^S           x Sl^ . c x v \<\                        1-^x.r^ocA.                  ^cx_y\ .^ o ^ S S e A

 V> 0<Kx_C^O             °.CKjr                Vo—Vka         ^cA\.<^_a_ o VV                   0^fV5_r.         SA C r ^                  VW. ^g.t\C i/A
                 p-Q-S^-eA                           b o < W A - a x ^ s s . t.A W ^ a ^ k ^ O A _ a L u > ^ ^ ^                                                  __
  otWcLJoo^r                         weJw          cW j a ^ A . . ______________________ __________________

                     —LUUL,...bV\lS - i ^ ^ V W J L ^ A W \ ^ .                                     _O^JZAV—^t~>r Wv-A.^..._Xms^C\AC_
                                     . 1 0 > ^ V X \ ^V/v\CxAJUa S c u ^ i ^rv«_Wvt \ ..s V x ^ t : \ ^ ^ _ < L ^ ^

jpua.o<^fl.,/a W                cxe\^._ bex.C-V. '-UvxV^                                                                  C V . L ^ \ t /^ ^ . i A Q /t\

 V\ O^^LG^i/v\c^ . \ ^o\c cy^Aj—:fV2_cxjC_O^OO_uAcT—a}_^C-*—cx^i.CX-^ ^VoVvs. N^rvp,yv\. , \                                                                  0^0,1—
t$ L j- x *   s V v q A — cxv^cx-^             ex. c^cxj_/«.— cxyv^<^ -\i cxciV;_A'o \^no— ^^^cljUv-v c^

« \o ^ W - i^ X iL V ^ \                     §_g3&    QCr^X        PJV>A, ^ X Q U o W V          Vb     W v^a3L ^               A W iV       \   ^;\r»rx

C^OA^X^J3                       A    a-C     ^ t ^ o A L ^ L L , _ Q A N A . n                  •fio.O(^ Q           I t\p Vg        U>A>s,,\o                CV'A

vjX    ^o ^ W      vacv ^                    O O ^.V _             ."TV s o ^ S V \ o

C ^ X — ^CO-S                                   \_v-O^CCO J f l ^ ^ y x c ^ O V \ -                    UL.V'V^-V^- *A>^,C ^>0-0^-—^

                     —S va_^ o s <s»x\. Vva— vjoOi cx_^>                    c\ o <-i A ,_______ ________________ __________________
                            1       -AJk-

                                            \o \ W      Si^M—          o^o^cx.u^v, / - o i ^ a H _ 5                 vy\our\cjLc^Q A,                Vo      o^-o\~

                                      \ ^ c x c W . --------------- --------                ----------- ------------------------ ------

              -------- X A ^ a J I j L          AVv£2.V<_ \        Sq_vA                   ow^kuj             oui^            l/vv yV^tt- 'Cv^._^ A l             \

  -CyuOJl^£^ _ (^LV.sV^*X—VV^-<^ y-^v^ CX<<-^                               (XoVc X^_\^Ajyyy^C^^QLLA^                           O lA A ^     .^V^t iVp A,

                                                [~T\\b ^       \     c;„..\ WvftA*          ^            ^       •/v^g-<i„ \\ x a v \ t-.tA' l^N

                 ^-^VeA.             ^(1/3 Vm2_CxA , CXrvx <\ \             v\ oVvCSL^,. - W ^ A c v i                                                     ^_QUa ^

   U ^ sC          S ^ ^ L y e c V lo           q^ V   W . c a v v ^ A A « . v v \a .iA C t ^ t ^ , \ o M ^ o                    x~\k _   o u L r a j io u ^ ^

 bcxo)(^_fe              \ W           t>c^e£ c ^          \ W . ksut-yc^Qj^ v                                                -^Wve          u ^ h         4 .. . y ,

lo \_xSL<k—<^o _\icxoV: \r^'rt>u.c^W YVml.\:v>uA.ruL^ Vo S cx^<2,VL^ . •                                                      _____        ________________

     O.Ll): S tcK^L VVjl, tu_rir\St<J)j^ V Se«A.V                                                                             o s>e_r^to W r PA■.>£>_
-




tr\< e.c^A c^c4Jt _Vva3_^>                     r Y \v S ^> cxuyv ^> Vjo W         s     c V v e s k l- c x v \< ^ _ s V o w \c x .c ^ f\.
I d ^> V \,o.vva- \n o < v y a - l-o S c u ^ ^ - < a _                    va^~^V<L. cx .3UL         cx 5Lc \> Q _        c x v \^ .O k c u ^              ...... _____
          --------U ^ ? v ^ i U _ _________________                                  VQ.c^uvxOjW                     ^    .    l.S t a c u ^ i c K   olAv^Vn___
K w i r \ — _Osjk L-\V^ o i i A                 Vvxa_      o'cVvs^r                              ^o^>r\/^ t ^             <Xi OJ*       S^jCcV\A\^v\o^ __

ItWjlV^—_c\-o w \                           (\ o tV\ wv Cy         o    \ V\eJL^>ec l o u lc .
                      (\            r^atx        cxsk^cX        h a a , \'o     ^ .ooV oJ^CLc W > o                   .oo >t\ ,                      Jr\a_____
                                u           cy^Y     Sovx-VJL               ,    \      5'Co.\\iA             \3A3Rwx^                \a.{ V o            iyMi.^0,

^CXc^«—oJ^rxs-vj3r                                         oJLSL, \va_                       V^ cxilJlA^ sVncOk w \ c^..... <x                               .So
 I        C L < ^ 4> \          C^.         ^ c A v e jL .w \c ^ n      ^or      V\ ^S          Coo^C.           \            v^C i j c      cx.vovjuvx A .
VWfl—                   cxv\<^—                          \ _V x A V w^c\^ ac^cx.uvx \ o              \ < e , e - \^~vvv        c o < v \ y a ^ ., .
            L- „ A \~ .'.            \ ’.                       t     „   • N •X        .                                      ^ D             <j
       cx s k ^ e c L A \ \,v   w   A n .v S                   ,Axii_ S.aJ\ 6, O c - C N i SX/i                       - ,. CU¥\ V   i a
  e x v.        A ^ v - A c . , . o A i o x A l A W . U^-^Lc ^ V ^ —              .   Q ^ C L C — xpAygri-tA         3 -0    S5&:Cav\<Ao.

Vnju                ^_qA —S W A            sa ^       ^ - A A cWcujl^
V C-cx^AuiA~c\A. J j ^ ^                              ^ U ^ v A ^ iL J A ^ A o        r . ..Qy\A,^.—^fX&_..\q       gt _^d.

ia - \TAjj_Wc^c.W . T k *                        cA ocA o C—S-cx_v A > i rv\            S jclT X i L ^    S.aJr^ _ivk .S        ^ u lS ^ A v s A
A « A — A \.« .A •\ xv>—yvv^ ... ooc^cvS                        >A—               ’S>\c.\c .             ________________

                    Lcv AV\vS— t A . v > o ^ _ m ^ j Q : t o A 5 v e . c A v c ^ V _ ^ Q J c s ^ c ^ ^ _ W
                                    (XAT b U ^         j OV

        _UiLiAW                      \o    ^O_jo

                  Ej p j c   1a A    cl _\Ao     UJ

                                                                                                                                    c_. nos p-dol
kjYV

                JAiS— \ A v e w ~ Aeov>42— WoyyNvj!L,__o^y\^                                             rOc      V a w\            ±X.Y\

rs—      \j \sl. J c A Stcxu^wvq               ucv^-sjAs.     L_u^e.
           \      v\                I <J                I\
■vv^ -jcux. ex_csw y>^ J t W — <^cx^>e-_'fyv2—                         Sjojc^ss                                          _________________

                                                              ja^v w   ^   _ x O c — o-Sl^l. .—                ___ \_c i o l -wA :           i^.
Saturday morning 15th of April, I awoke at 4.30 a.m. excited and happy at
the prospect of another victorious day, thoughts of beating Notts Forest in
the semi-finals leading to glory at Wembley.


Half dozing, but not really sleeping, time ticked away until it was 8.00 a.m.
Jumping out of bed and pulling back the curtains I saw clear blue skies, up­
stairs to have a shower, never felt so good.     On the way past          room, gave
him a shake saying "this is it        90 minutes away from Wembley'!


As     and I donned our Liverpool T-shirts we discussed football tactics,
wondering who Kenny would play.     "You make the sandwiches and I will fetch
the lucozade and papers".     No need to make the sandwiches, Mum and          were
up to cheer us off, they were already preparing a packed lunch and busying
themselves, so they could be ready to listen on the radio to the commentary.


As we waited for        pal           who was due to arrive at nine thirty we
were wondering if Cloughie would play young Carr; a player we were all worried
about as we all admired his skills.


Nine thirty five the bell rings and sure enough it's               grinning from ear
to ear.   Within minutes Mum,                       and I were laughing and saying
lets all hope were all smiling tonight.


Ten o'clock we were on our way,          drove us to PriopjRoad where Barnes
Travel said the Executive coach would leave from at eleven prompt.       The fans
had started to gather from both Liverpool and Everton, the atmosphere was one
of great excitement and anticipation of yet another all merseyside final.
Almost all of the Everton fans had departed by about ten thirty without delay,
the Liverpool fans were not quite so lucky, the next thing we knew police
started to arrive by the van load.     The police were confiscating alcholic
drinks.   Some of the police had walkie talkie type radio's and as they passed
us we could hear them asking for our coaches to be delayed and staggered.        By
eleven fifteen the fans were beginning to become concerned that the police
were holding up our departure from Liverpool.     The coach eventually arrived
and we left Priory Road at twenty minutes to twelve, only after being
thoroughly searched and proving that every person on the coach held a valid
 ticket, not only for the journey, but for the match also.    The Police were

very thorough in their search.

Naturally, we suffered some delays on the M62, I think in all about half
 an hour, then just on the outskirts of Sheffield, in a lay-by just ahead
with about ten Police flagged down our driver, so he pulled over, once again
 we were subjected to having our bags searched for alcholic drinks and once
again our match tickets were scrutinised and once again everything was in

order!


As the coach approached the ground at about two-thirty           j i t   excitement turned
to anxiousness as a police van told our coach driver to turn around and
drive back for about half a mile to park.            At this point, some people asked
the driver if they could alight the coach and take their chances finding
were he h a d p a r k e d after the match, he replied. "We leave half an hour after
the final wistle".        On this, about two thirds got off the coach including
                  and myself.    We joined a stream of happy singing fans of all
ages and both sexes walking towards Leppings Lane entrance to Hillsborough.
People were buying sweets from a local shop and I seem to be able to smell
chips, but do not recall seeing a chip shop.           The only police we saw were
just ahead, two of them on horseback.


We got to about twenty feet from the turnstiles when the crowd movement
in front came to a stop, there were no queues just a lot of happy people
standing        or shuffling towards the gates.      At this point we heard a shout
from the policeman behind us, he was shouting form a queue, but no one could
move either side to side or forward or back.            At this, he and his horse
trotted through the crowds with no regard for anyone who might be in its
path.     As the horse forced its way through,                became separated from

       and I.     The horse was at my side, the Policeman's foot hold was digging
in my side, but I could not move out of the way.            People in front going
through the turnstiles seemed slower than normal.                and I managed to
get through gasping and panting.          On the other side, as we came through the
turnstiles I saw about four policemen and one policewoman, standing with
their hands behind there back, as if in the at eas£ stance, they were about
six feet from the turnstiles looking the fans up and down as they passed.


       knd I were looking back through the turnstiles to see if we could see
            it was a further five minutes easily before                   came through,

he asked me, "have I got time to buy a programme ? I replied               yes, the man
 is just there".        the programme seller was just to our left.            and I stood
 at the entrance to tunnel (B) as that was the entrance on our tickets, as
we waited for                to buy his programme we looked through and could just

 see the top of the goal.

 All three of us        walked through the tunnel, it was busy            but notpacked until
 we came through        on the other side, there was just awall of people.        I said
 that there was a space         in the middle, so holding on to the two lads
 and             y we   slowly managed to squeeze through.    On viewing the ground

                                            -   2-
for the very first t i m e , s a i d ,    "god it’s the pits - what a dump". We
all agreed, comparing Anfield.      As we stood in the middle f      said, "Lets
stand here, this will do".      I strongly disagreed, complaining about the
view and suggested we all stand at the front.


We stood directly behind the goal, slightly to the right where the bars
ran from front to back meeting the cage at the front, it was the only place
left with some space for about another fifteen to twenty fans.          I had the
cage to my front and bars to my right, some people were beginning to get
on my nerves as they were climbing over the bar at the front using the cage
for balance as they were climbing over to get out of the middle section,
they kept knocking my shoulder.


I estimate we got into the ground for about 2.45 p.m.         At 2.55            said
to me "five to three, just a couple of minutes to go".         I laughed and said,
"no         H if its five to three, there are five minutes to go".        The players
were on the pitch, all you could see were happy faces, people were singing
and there was a great air of excitement, then all of a sudden I looked back
over my left shoulder and got the most terrible weird feeling that something
was dreadfully wrong, as I turned around to the front I saw the Ref blowing
his wistle for the start of the game.         Something told me get the hell out
of here fast.    I put my right foot against the wall and g r a b b e d p u l l i n g
him between my legs, placing my left foot against the wall, at the same time
holding on to the cage in front with both hands.         The pressure behind me
became unusually strong, until I could take it no more. I started to claw
my way up the cage, then         started to scream that my knees were crushing
his ribs, but I could do nothing, my legs were trapped.         Then I lost my
footing, the crush became worse.         Somehow one of my legs became free, it
was my left one all of a sudden I realised I was treading on someones head.
It was terrible, but there was nothing else I could do.         People were screaming
and crying for help, the next thing I new, somehow, I don't know how, I
was standing on the bars which      ran from front to back.     I was bending over
with my left arm under           left arm.     I heard this guy behind me scream,
shouting pull that girl out, pull her out, she's dying.         I looked down to
see a mass of faces looking up all gasping for a breath.             was holding
on to the cage at the front, so I put out my left hand, but she had gone
disappeared, faces in the crowd were turning blue, lips almost purple.           My
attention turned to          I put my left arm around him once again and tried
with all my strength to haul him up, but his legs from the knee down were
crushed against the cage.     The screams for help became louder including
my own.   A Policeman was standing no further away on the opposite side of
the cage than two feet,     I screamed and begged him for help, shouting that
people were dying in here, he looked straight at me and turned away.            I
looked to my left and saw an old man with white hair banging on the cage
with his walking stick, shouting for the gate to be opened,again with a

negative response from the Policeman at the gate.


The man whose chest that was pressed against              legs moved enough for
      Ho    lift his legs free, with that the man was completely crushed in the
corner with no hope of escape.         Even though I tried with all my might to
liftclear            he had no option but to stand on people’s faces and heads,
an act which now haunts him severely and something that will live with him

for the rest of his life.

As soon as I realised his legs were free. I pulled myself over the spikes
 sitting on top of the fence .1th Lee at my side, I Jumped down and turned
 to    e t c h   □shouting   jump Jump, as he did the back of his shirt caught
 on the spikes, he was dangling, he managed to wriggle free and drop do»n

 onto the safety of the ground.

                                                Where s             I heard myself
 Worse was yet to come, where s
 scream, then to my horror we saw him, just his head high enough to be seen,
 his fingers poking through the cage, the pressure on him must have been
 en o rm o u s;   it took me aback how much strength was needed to force his fingers

 back through the cage.         I shouted, "keep you hands flat’’.            was cryinS ’
 "help me, help me".         The look in his eyes frightened me, it was as if he
 new he was going to die if he couldn’t get out, for a few seconds I panicked,
  I ran to the left, then to the right.        I grabbed the cage with my bare hands
  and tried to pull the cage from the wall.        I remember seeing all the faces
  looking at me;        some with not enough breath in their bodies to call for
  help, some crying, some screaming look at me, I was frightened.           Then, I
  saw the Policeman standing with the gate open, he wasn’t doing anything
  at first, so I ran across and elbowed his knees to one side.           Even though
  the gate'was open people could not escape, they were jammed solid.           I started
  pulling at anything I could get my hands on, a person fell out, I was so
  frantic, I cannot say what age about or even what sex.           Somehow, I managed
  to lean in and left of the door people were grabbing at me pulling them
                                                                   arm.
  selves
  JjClVCO
          free. By a miracle, I managed to get a hold of
  shouted and screamed at him PULL, PULL, PULL, he was In agony, screaming
   I can't move, I Just kept pulling until his upper body was free, he «as
   double bent around the outside of the gate with his hip and legs trapped.
      Suddenly, he seemed to slide free all at once.      I kept hold of hi. and dragged
      him along the ground until »e reached safety behind the goal.        I fell to
                              _                           I.   I recall Bruce Grobbelaar
      my knees wrapping my arms around
looking round at us, he looked really confused as to what was going on.
Then I think he realised, as      it was at this point people tried to stop
the game.     I shepherded^                 ^ towards the corner of the field
out of the way.     By this time, their were a number of people spilling onto
the pitch.     It was obvious that people were in agony and frightened, some
were even dead.     But as we walked, dazed and shocked to the corner of the
field, a Policeman got hold of|            arm and said "get of the pitch and
get back in there!" looking towards the cage,          ^ j e r k e d back his arm and
started shouting "you must be mad if you think I ’m going back in there",
                                             told him to F       off saying that
the Policeman insisted we return.
people were dying in there.      Q w a s    obviously very upset and disturbed
 at suggestions to return to a place he had just escaped from with his life.
     shouted "why are you standing there? you should be helping them, people
 are dying in there” .    The policeman gave a snide grin and walked back away
                              and I could not believe what we had just
 from the cage.
 witnessed, the three ol us held onto each other and walked towards the
 Liverpool side stand.     We stood for a while, then In the corner I noticed
 quite a lot of space, It meant going behind another cage, but at least there
 was a lot of room.      We stood silent, then sat, then stood, not knowing what
 to do.     We could see bodies on the pitch with pieces of clothing covering
 their faces.      I was numb with shock, news kept filtering through, five dead
  then twenty, we could not believe It was happening, it was a living night­
 mare       Our thoughts turned to home knowing they would be frantic with worry.
  I kept repeating myself saying t o Q          "your „u. a n d ^ w l l l   be demented
  with worry".     All I could see were fans tearing up boards to make stretchers,
  they were running backwards and forwards carrying people to safety.            Some
  were carrying bodies, it was horrific, It was endless.          The Police were
  offering very little In the way of help, they seemed more concerned with
  forming an unnecessary double line across the centre of the pitch.            The
  only service which seemed to know what it was doing was the Fire Service,
  they had a man up on a platform in the corner of Leppings Lane end and the
  main stand, he was giving orders via radio and pointing directions.            I was
  too frightened to go back and help, then an announcement came over the tannoy
  asking everyone to leave In an orderly fashion.          We waited until a lot of
  people had left Incase we got squashed on the way out, even if there were
   three or four people near me I couldn't stand It.         It made me feel creepy
   and shivery-     As we walked back to our coach, the streets were almost silent.
   Even though there were thousands of people, the only real sound were people
   crying and then the soreach and wall of ambulance sirens flying passed.
   Our thoughts concentrated on telephoning home but the queues for a phone
   ,ere tremendous.     We kept walking like robots on automatic pilot.        As we
                                            - 5 -
approached a hill where the coaches were parked, I looked at this house
and it felt warm and friendly, so I rang the bell and asked, "could I use
your phone? I will pay for the call".     Yes was the reply and no you do not

need to pay, it was    \                                                         |
She was fantastic, offering                       lemonade while I tr od to ring
home, the lines were all engaged.             assured me she would keep trying
until she got through, she was a woman of her word.        At 5.15 p.m. she got
through saying "we were all well". The family back home were devastated
until the news reached them we were all O.K.        Then they all had a good cry,
but were not as relieved as they might have been because of their concern

for everyone else at the ground.

We found our coach, on boarding it everyoune was silent.        After a while the
Driver who did not attend the match broke the silence by saying the seven
people had not returned and asked the passengers, "should we wait or leave"
almost in unison everyone said "wait"!        A further half hour past with only
two seats to fill, again the driver asked shall we leave? the reply was
 Uyes »*.

 As I was sitting near the front of the coach, I could hear the driver talking
 to an anxious boy who had been waiting for his friend to return.       The driver
 was saying he suspected something was seriously wrong at the start of the
 match as he saw coaches and van loads of police being drafted to the ground

 at speed.

 This was still happening as we left Sheffield, Police arriving to the scene,
 in our minds they were too bloody late and should they have been there earlier
 (1)   You might say this catastrophe may never have happened if the Police
       were better organised.

 OR
 (2)    If they were better organised and already been at the scene it still
       would have happened because of the way the Police acted, or should I say

        did not act.

 In my opinion, a combination of factors contributed to this disaster no
 more so than the total lack of organisation prior to the game and unpro­
 fessional lack of communication between F .A . Officials, Police and Stewards.
 FIRSTLY, Liverpool fans were subjected to severe delays from leaving Liverpool
  (Priory Road) by Police searchers and checks being made on tickets.      Also by
 being subjected to the same treatment in a lay-by en route to the Hillsborough

  ground•




                                        -6-
   A_________________________

SECONDLY, Lack of organisation outside the ground and lack of communication

in directions to the crowds.

THIRDLY, On entering the turnstiles fans new to the ground could not possibly
have known when they entered the ground through the tunr.31, directly behind
the goal, that it was impossible to fan-out left and right due to railings
running from front to back.     So surely, Police, F .A . Officials, Stewards,
someone in authority should have had the forsight to position about ten
or so Police/Stewards in front of the entrance to the tunnel (B), blocking
it off to prevent overcrowding.     They could then have directed the Liverpool
fans left and right to fill the half empty sections on the other side of

the goal.

FOURTHLY, When it was obvious, just one minute into the game that the people
were struggling for their lives, the Police were unbelievably slow to react.
Even when they must have seen with their own eyes what was happening and
heard pleas for help, which were ignored until for some, it was too late.




                                          (7)
                                                                U \ uW S '^ o Q .o -o C->VA                                                                            \ ' . 5 • ^ C1



                                                 tA'oVv.ce             O^ ^          C    W    a^      \n      "^Ve-      Os.ooA             VrcA^te-                      0 s?

 ~\V\.Vs»                          ^^^©roNjo^rv                            U   ck&       ^Ve_        VbVvOe-      C-avie-          "To       "^Ve,                            "\WcV

                         ^fv. jO W \            \vA.               o o A          X ^ 5                     ^ o V A                     \- v .c e o v S < ^ L -        -T o       S4o^>

§te^\j€'.^(                    \W P r                                 ^l>\> 'W'^'OOa ^,             l.WO.      Vb^-YeA              Q o W A ^ ,               V/CKs

VCCW^^'CV                                                                      t$os\      % \ W         " ^ W e . \           'Q.ecxcVe.A ^ W                          ^o -^o o a d

\V       ^cc->V               Ov.SO.                   ^ s         \     ^ ^ ^ o c ^ W ' " V W ,                       V nA ^ \    a .^    V u ^£_.          'V^O'KA-

N)(X^i>£^                  \ a^3-W<2-                  V        VX^V           QjOi\.^\x«rAv^          SA©^<»^                                               U   o o   W   vaq        ^o T

                   ’C i c V q ^.s .                    ^ V e so-         ^^-oA<t,                      Vv)e.\\         ^V/Oc*             'V^rO'M. ”^ C w ,                ^CorwsV*\<
                   5. ^                                  ^ -              ^ \ v v v                                                 0
               Efesr Q'htL                              "XW,

                   V ^ W      a            \      S^ecKcW^                                "CvoVvSvS^e, W ^              cv    *^V«rc- V W                    ^     Vcvro,e-

jT   O O i^. . ^ \ S                   \        Q ^ o ^ G a \ Y ^                V a ^ A jCC^.                ^/3tw^      ^GxA5r<^.S                              ^owsXt-Ws

     K s \ s£ ^             CV T o W                            C ^ ic s ^ r         O   a     ^ se -W o y i                        V oV                         W lO K . G ^
;x?t3$C, NXvS                  ^ e s ^ o A s e - VjCks                         L<^V\r\r                                                          Qjqj^             KiO'i^cS'e-^

\     ^Wv\. S a l A                              ^XsvK C \VC                                     Scr                  "IoO         W<l,      &<e)^v(vcA. ^cx<A

o r <'^ L y v o ^ O o v V s s r ^ V W o e . lK \A , * ^ o %<£, \< a, " C Y o r ^ . W e , " ^ W a <S s c ! o ^V O V cA
       \                         "^o       .    \ S a i A L 'O'be- M & O K Q csA\.0<. '^Cbx-^'M.Or1^ G r o V
                   H a \c V                    Q v jV                      V a s V U W V ^ "C W O ^ c e r                                        ^    po W         V k\ d Y t ^
nc^ no,            \      Co/^KvOe^, ' ^ xosp ^'S                                            “"CotvKS.V'Xe/ s \^&V                               c fe o a ^
                   V3w<\           \ V w                     \A "^VtL- C x O vg A OvXsc^e, '^W-'^or^vVlW:*                                               V       C©o\A

« je \     “C w ^            C jtosXv                  O    a, v
                                                               H <^                      t \    Sauj              < o V '^                             O     a                    c   £

!W        'X o r A . s V ^ ^ s                     ?    o   V   va^      ^        H ^ O / ^ V^.<^                     O oV                " tW          Q jr o ^ V v . k I
^A\        - <w              ^resssov©-                               Q^-       ^SovC^C ^^eXcxv:              V Wxke^              ' ^ o 'H.^                Us?V

kxW)           ^        ‘S'jrCN^                C^T         ^ i o ^ w          (lx)vA^ " t W o O ^ \            < W          ^<-v-V          QixW,,               ^ CcvA\v^.Oe\

                                                              V\<^           ’
                                                                             OWci-e.           'K     S^aevOc^A. O           nk.             0\sWr

^c? ^ ) ”Cv0 vlS:                                 '^ O          '^W ,-       '^Co.'W^^X, V <3xsl\,^-              \^ o V/^txu^ ^ ct^ 2-                                 \ ^ X vv
,e P c         ^       jgS o KL-       N \e                              CrToN^ H e i                       \ ^\\<2^X'v.o^. \0cts,               '"^o Ge-"V ^ V o
W        <d W c ^ >                                         O V       "T^j^ixC.e^              ^ecao^^          '^oo G x w              ^><2^         " ^ W            Q j a ^ e fe^e

>A         \           ^ /\h e b           0 ^>                   ^O te,\ 0 ^t^V ^\asjv<^.                  "^W         Grotvoe- 'w b ^                      '^Xroc>.^


               ^\v^,                   D ^ L a -o a               < V           ^ o V c < 2 ^ C o ,- n ^ 'N > o V ^ < 0             C ^ o \o A             O jX s t^ e .
x-^                                                         C \ o ^ v ^ ’^C\<s> Xvd\>            ^>0 V e c ^ €        V i e ^ V XboOA                vK;\\

A^\eoA                  O ? - V\ix\Cv..\c^ '^t\ri
                                                iy ^                           QjOa.                          ^V-^,      V\*^                                Va)V«t^
.o c k ^      W e- \W A
^bo\<\        Uaoe^                       Be^Wr          ^v>:^\c^eA.          A^0*N(\V                    Gk~O O a A , X V e ,              CosCy^X-^ g^y\

        ~CW        "Cji“w s V «X\^s „V*)c&                                             <V^v^ ~^Vq_^ ^Ctc V g V               £\\V Q C c\A<-c m - i r v A

oV       X)s.v.\0^ "VVq^,              O ^ W r "Tv^vVsksVwes.                  \t ir    E ^ fftxijvCO,         ^Q       "'tVa^ \ 0 o A \v          SrW \<k
               \                          "'^Ve, .\)<ac\sVov/v ^ o Q ^\. /"Vo €tx\g^s.                                           g> QpV~teeV, ^>v)V
?oV c^           WA         ^V^vCc-rAs                 SV rioV A      VX&oe-                      \a      9 U ,( .\\o a ,                   ^ X sp cA     "^W
JTDoJcX              ’^ > ^ c s r A t S                     ^x^\<C     Q S ~ ~~C<a.v^o^c.<s5^>            V-i^Wre^ " £ o _H              jqqV

                                      ^00         \\ciO<^       < 0 . & 0 . ,.0^> - C v O O            V V i r.avctSa
                                                                                                               AAs           O^T        S ^tUS

iooV^T\^XiO^                    ‘S Y o o o e A         ~ C W       ^ 0t ^ T      * ^                                                        Wge,        VVe c A t A
^ov,ot>xA<.                      'X o ^       w   -<<_\ . <?B a c a o ^ c _     y W ^ ^ H a o „ _ . . Q j o ^ __

    X j e o ^ o e . Qscuvve^. .' ' ^ V ' c ^ . I l X ^ A O b ^                                                                  __ ^)o jfOrfV

>Y<u/v        ^ W .                       _ TTev^o.dvvvjy,.                                                                                     ____________

               \vA                  C^*Vw*.iiCVS»...._ ^ - g ^ ^ s V K . „ ^ o A y C e __ C ^ J L C ^ lS T ^        S e g ^A^gA          "^C?


^STV/oW     zW     .   qA   -                 £flsAA.Jts^-£Q^                                             U>jJie.       O ^      ^fAlCfc-        ^V<LSX)9S

C W . . (Le*aM ^ -              -         C        j        v     r      c       \      .     e          K)cNr      O   mA    ^ s-s W   a   A . ~~tW SoyjioA-^

5e.0 M . e A       “”C b    ■^CoC\<je—         ^G?A\t:o\           ^wsA       ^ L v \, ""CVq,                   t_\, \.0tKi\c\           \ftr\so   Vv\V.<a_

O     J c * c ^ r e & s - A_^STStQ.\!vjJve\                     ^l-viS^o^        .          ComV                        ~~^Nqg_

< 2X?            X ) v y v , . A ^ . ___\<*s L«3£x A   __




                                                                                \
& ■( ? «     \ iC   T   OF        - f iu a t


           <Sef ftWVTE            J ^ u oQ     lu e j )




  2 ) -       ^IfS-          I.        ‘S e f T o ^ f
  \      I      GEOFFREY     PHILLIP      BRIDSON      bom     30th   June,1950    of    ________
                                          will say as follows


         I accompanied David George Rimmer of                                                to the
         F.A.Cup Semi-Final football fixture between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest
         F.C. at Hillsborough,Sheffield on Saturday 15th April,1989.


         I had gone to the same fixture at Hillsborough with David and other friends the
         year before.


         Both David and I were Kop Season ticket holders and as such we were entitled to
         tickets   for this    fixture.     A    friend of ours,                  who   lives at I I
         ^                         collected the tickets from Anfield.


         The tickets were for the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough, terracing turnstile B.


         David and I travelled in my car.           We had arranged to meet some friends at Birch
         Services on the M62 motorway.          However they were not there, we waited an hour then
         left the service station at 11.55am.


         The year before we had used the car park at Bass Brewery near Hillsborough and
         accordingly we decided to use that car park on this occasion. It was about a 10/15
         minute walk from the Hillsborough ground.


         We arrived at that car park at about 1.15.pm.                                          -      *
•St .t
                                                                                                       •'^9



         After arriving at the car park we ate our sandwiches in the car park and we each had
         1 can of lager.


         This was the only alcohol that we drank that day.


         Wewere aware      that our friends      (whom we should have met at Birch Services) would
         also be using the Bass car park.           We were still in the car when they arrived at
         about 1.45pm.


         We started walking to the ground at about 2.15p*n.           There was myself,David,
         I                                              and an older man who was a friend of




         There were 6 of us in all.


         4of us had tickets for the Leppings Lane terrace and 2 had stand tickets for that
         end.
$U           us     W i      3 r o a n d " h c fC e fS
Wo-ati had the same turnstile frwrirat letter B.


We arrived at the ground at about 2.25pm., it was certainly before 2.30pm.


When we arrived we observed a seething mass of people in front of the turnstiles,
it was chaos.


There    were      literally thousands     of people trying          to   get   throughj 6 turnstiles.
Because of the limited number of turnstiles and the position of the approach to
those turnstiles/ there was a funnelling effect of those people approaching the
turnstiles.

                                                               re-
There was unfortunately very little -police preser^ outside the ground.
only one policeman on a horse and two policemen on foot (the latter                          w h s c standing-

by     the    turnstiles),who     were    attempting     to    supervise        the   fans    outside     the
turnstiles.


The police presence was completely inadequate.


Normally at such fixtures the Police would check that everyone approaching the
turnstiles had tickets,but the 3 policemen had no chance of doing this.


I recall the policeman on the horse was asking the fans to move back in order to
reduce       the   crush   that   was    occuring   near      to   the    turnstiles because of the
funnelling effect mentioned above.


However we could not move back because of the pressure from the back.


Accordingly the mounted policeman then moved into the crowd in order to create a
space, i.e. a break in the crowd             in order to relieve the pressure from the crowd                     |
as it approached the turnstiles.


The mounted policeman was in fact successful in creating a break in the crowd. The
gap was about 3 feet wide and went right across and the mounted policeman was able
to control this gap by moving his horse forwards the backwards.                        The gap was about
3 feet wide.

                                                                                                                 j


Despite the crush the fans werecertainly co-operating in this and that was why this !
 one     policeman was able to create this gap despite the pressure from the back.


When the gap was created I was on the turnstile side of this break.
David Rimmer, |                                           were on the other side of the horse.


By this time our other two friends had gone to the stands.


Then another mounted Policeman arrived but instead of patrolling this gap both
mounted Policemen then went into the crowd heading towards the turnstiles.


As a result within a few seconds the gap had disappeared.


The crush became worse as we approached the turnstiles and was particularly                               bad
within say 6 to 8 feet of the turnstiles.


However I would point out that although the crush outside the ground was bad, it
was no worse than at last year's match at Hillsborough.


Of the four of us I got through the turnstiles first.                             There was plenty of space
on the other side of the turnstiles^and I waited for the other three.

                   <*                             ln-sict-e-            ground
Inside there were «Mjwei?a»as Pol icemen/programme sellers and possibly stewards as
well as supporters.


Within a minute or two the others came in and we decided to find a place to stand.


                             attends       Sheffield University and                he attended Hillsborough
regularly. He informed us that we could go to either side of the terracing or in
the middle.        There were no signs to show the way to the side sections of the
ground,    we could only see the main tunnel that led to the middle section of the
ground.
However we decided to go into the middle part so that we could obtain the best
view.


We accordingly then proceeded to walk through the tunnel.                            There were no Policemen
and no stewards at any part of that tunnel.


As we got to the end of the tunnel we observed that there was a set of railings
that divided the middle section of the ground down the middle.                                We decided to go
into the left hand section.


We     just went   in a few yards took up a position near the back.                              it was about
2.40pm.and even at this time this part of the ground was quite full.


During the course of the next few minutes as more people came in it became even
mnro           arvr? tjo u a r a   rornsf-ant-! \r rrot-tHnrr rni«shoi^ anr? Hn'fr'fret*ew3
As a result within 10 minutes we were all separated and had lost contact with each
other.


David    had   been    standing   immediately in front of me.              I recall seeing David
being taken forward by the crush.          That was the last time that I saw him.


I thought that once the game started the crush would settle down.


I have been attending football matches for some 24 years.                  David had in fact been
attending matches for some 28 years.              I am nearly 6 foot tall, David was 6 foot
tall and weighed 13/14 stones.             We were both well used to coping with crowded
situations in matches.


At this point although the crush was bad,I consider that it was very like the
crush that occurred at Hillsborough the previous year.


I   would   wish      to   specifically   point   out   that   at   last   year's   fixture people
were being pulled out from the back of the terrace into the stands because of the
crush that was occuring then.


I recall seeing the teams come out onto the pitch at about 2.55.pm.                  At this stage
the crush was getting even worse.


I have a stop watch which            I always     take with me.       I always set it at about
2.55.pm. with a view to starting it when the match kicks off.


By 3.00pm.when the match started, the crush was so bad I could not get my arms up
in order to start my stop watch.              I was only able to start the stop watch same
seconds
            /< a P l c r            fttcfCoff.

The crush then became even worse and it was then that I started to get frightened.


We were all so restricted that I could not breathe because of the crush, it was
very frightening indeed.


I then recall seeing some supporters climbing over the barriers onto the pitch and

I saw a supporter go on to the field and approach Bruce Grobbelar.


By this time I had been moved forward and across to the left, and accordingly I was
a very long way from where I had started off.


The crush continued to get worse and worse and it was impossible to breathe.
There were people screaming and shouting for help.


I recall that I could feel that someone was on the floor but I could not see them,
we tried to make space to get that person up but it was impossible to do so and I
and many others were pushed over them by the sheer weight of the crush.


I nearly blacked out.            I recall realising that if I did not calm myself down and
concentrate on trying to breathe I was going to die.


In 24 years of attending football matches I have never experienced anything like
it.


Suddenly     there    was    a    reduction       in    the    pressure   and    I    noticed   people   were
clambering     over    the    railings      that separated the middle                section and the     left
section of the ground.           They did this by climbing onto the second barrier from the
front then climbing over the side railings.


I helped to get a girl who passed out over the railings.                        wi-Hv
F ear           w as        p ro b a b ly   4   tLaul
I then proceeded        to    climb on to the barrier and then over the railingsinto a
corridor which was           created by two sets of railings separating middle and left
sections of the ground.


I was then able to walk on to the pitch.


I had been pushed right across the left hand part ofthemiddlesection                             adistance
of about 20/30 yards.


I vaguely recall that there was one major crush that was more severe than the
others, but I do not know when this occurred.


I got on to the pitch at about 3.20pm.                    I saw a few people having heart massage.
I realised that two or three people had died.


I then went about trying to find my three                     friends.


I quickly found two of the others, there was no traceof David.                             Wewere    looking
for him in the ground until about 4.30pm.


It was then that I feared something very serious had happened to him.


I got back to the car at about 5.00pm.                  I rang my wife at 6.00pm.
Throughout the rest of the afternoon and the       evening we were trying to establish
what had happened to David.      As time went on we realised that it was all the more
likely that David had died.


Just after 1.00am. we went to the mortuary and at about 1.30am. we were told that
David's body had been identified.,


I consider that the major cause of this tragedy was the lack of adequate policing
outside the ground.   At Anfield as soon as supporters arrive they are shepherded
into queues by the Police and these queues are patrolled by the Police continually
until the turnstiles are shut.


This did not   happen at Hillsborough/    it    did not happen theyear before.    The
Police presence outside the ground was completely inadequate.




                                               Geoffrey Phillip Bridson
                                                                                                                                   0<

              ,3

                                                                               <3>




                                      CcAAoJp-^                        °                                              ^
                 l/-J>— o     V       IAO A .A/    «,                                                              3
                 L ^   c m ^ jaaJL     'VV v c x A ^ W      lS         j2 c u        / 0< sla/ -Mt \\S LXQDJ^ z       C?

                 Q > a£^C ^              c f\    V cQ ^d x         A jfW               £m 2v^                     i )
                                      o^oQo-u                                                                     C -




                 Qy^j^<zial                tlii     QJL                      S£jpsvsti2       4Xw g //^

              p ^ v           9lils


     „ p- A        O f\t"<9                                                                                       X
  77       *S £*F "To/\/o .

      * /itviyreje„                                                                                               X       .

 K.         Me££CTT*                            Sac.      fV/w,^T^                                                X
 ZT-        ^ £ 6 V W c o>e                     C 4-ufcf- 0 ^ * V               ..                                 X
 nr.         £   u s h    »                     £. c iT y      C   . S- s .                                       AC
 W     -      T/icjcs’orsf                      /}€S      .• C-HI&f-       Co t/vJ           _                    X

 £> • £ , <3).uck&rj-Fieu3>                                             %'UP15(L<A\                               x
j^ r L „           Ko u £ „                        C^Hief          %uP&£.)                                        x:
 U. £- O K L . Z y                                                                                                x
 7),        s^Tm££oc£;            _                                                                                x
J T £. T           £ A I T h o uoJ!€U)<

 S.         7 )A O es' .                                                                                           >c
 X            Mi1) T5 O/^J a                                                                                      X

C•                                                                                                                J>,
./A - j f     ?€tylB'E:RSToc4 =
              C

                                                                                                                  S.
~3~. A r         £ UulS.                                                                                          x
 f \ . F o s r e e - fis-H .                                                                                       X.
A - '/loC£€*\i-HwU_                             jCbs >&er>T^                                                                  °.

yA -             Iri)iUE£J                                                                                            X-
                                                  ]~i l T r J £ S   €   S   T A T   e H£ni T S «


                                                                                                                                  xr
?.     X                                                                                                                         X T

                                                                                                                                 X

yi.l,              -ku£-H€?0                                                                                                     X.

                                                                                                                                  >c.
I- K              ^j)£ 1/7 /\}£L o

g. ri o           h o o ^ a

CL. hofc-Art*.                                                                                                      c,       £

y.          /YA2- 4 £ u < -                                                                                          B / g,

Xr.             PW/H€sre^«,

 s.jrv. uEsrtf2-^                                                                                                           >c

     (\f.     f e ^ «                                                                                                  &

"■pT        K .       4 ^ / ^ - T o rt°                                                                                     >c

                                                                                                                    ■£; ft
                                                                                                                                  9
 JJ)_             HiKR      f -k_A /"(o.

3> , S .            fto o £ £ .                                                                                     A s=>


'Ts.                                                                                                                  K ~ ,


 fty .       fc&ss         .


A -C .             SHtTH*                                                                                                > c _

 J -                                  q                                                                                     > 0

 ^          -k.     Co^£KfoflJ)0                                                                                           > C

 f-                     £ trr;
                                                                                                              ■fe/
Ji-hh.                -ft^erc-ex

^7"               -Nfc^s.                                                                                     & >SP.

J>. T                 3 ^ Aics        o                                                                         C -

 T.                   KATTf*e«.S- •                                                                           £-y

 P.                                                                                                            A /

 S,         A     ll&   K®

 j), * .             4 C                  Asl>‘                                                                     > c



 3-^<                GCMW       o u u     $ 0                                                                        > c

      h- £.            4mc        .                                                                                 ~'><r



                                                                                                   P- T o ,
f. X     € C C L € S T o r f a           s>/ -fe ->
A -               iggcct0                £, s.
       k u £h i5 s_ ,                       ><.
  P-   JZVH^cy.                             >C -
J>. f-      L O H & ,

 &.    PAfC^tK-                          > C
 J>„     F o S ’TLfe T H u ) ^ ( r £ .
                                          p m x - .
           ^ c x * - ^ a u        C ^ U o ^ o -3>\ <-vSj   I^    "'fcsJ'-v "3d             ✓4
           l^ooo^t       ^ P o ^                                                          3
          l^^cjyuUL         '^VVioAz.Wl^) j 2 D U / U ^ 4-VoS         \AQ£k _as           C
       ^ ^ ^ V > o ^ a a . q ^ : <^\              ,A^£a         ^/0A^Jr                   =t^




                                                                                                 3>y e

                                                                                                3
                                                                                      3,

                                                                                              c /


          n\J<2Js                                                                              JD
                                                                                                    /


                                                                                       3 ,          £

                                                                                           3 c




                                                                                      2>



p 1.    ^0uy(\oV                                                                  A

(A fN ^ /v v A e i>                                                               e   :
                              Uvjv.czr^' & y *3 WvJ^La/\a<2j* v+"*=» t




                                                                 X

                                                             e   ,H ■
                                                             A, W

                                                             ■^ , V\,£.


                                                              A ,B,c,t

t U   C      l ^                                              E>.

                                                             •9.C.C.H

                                                              B .
                                                                 x
                                                              M . e . t f


                                                              -A I S . £    •



                                                                 >    <

                                                                     A ,B
 f s ) IAv   wvcum   Jl p I
l could see him because a gap had formed because th e fans in f r o n t of me were
s t i l l lying on th e ground. I c a l l e d to         who turned round and saw me
and ran towards me and out of t h e ground. I then s a w c l i l N n g                     over
tile fence and l then looKed f o r my other fri e n d
 1 saw him lying on top of o th er Tans witn hi s legs trapped underneath some fans.
I helped pull him o u t.

We then walked out of t h e ground         and in th e tunnel leading out I heard
an announcement over th e fannoy                asking f o r any Doctors in t h e grouna e t c .
I l a t e r found out t h a t t h i s announcement was made at 3.2b. When we got o u tsid e
th e ground we saw tfisfe— we s»w a number of pol icemerit standing around
a p parently not knowing what was going on.


1 su ffered bruising t o my ch est pecause of the cr ush, ine only protection
we had was xo hold o n e ' s arms in f r o n t of you to protect your r i b cage,
l received treatm ent a t                       Health Centre and was o f f work u n t i l th e 'dnd
May.
Ihe f i r s i 12 flays a f t e r th e d i s a s t e r l was unable t o sleep arldJso 1 went to
tn e Doctor t o r some sleeping t a b l e t s which 1 took f o r a couple of days.


After th e d i s a s t e r I went to the                       Drop Ii Centre and they
have b een out t o see me a couple of tim es.

wnen on th e t e r r a c e we*were    looking   from behind the goat t o th e r i g h t side
of th e g o a l . There was a g a t e in th e fencing immediately behind the goal
and before I s t a r t e d   Dlacking   out 1 noticed t h a t a Poliveman who was statione d
t h e r e opened the g a t e .    A couple of fens managed t o get out but i t was
then immediately closed again . I n o tic sa t h a t 4 p olice ofT icers went over
from th e north stand as soon as t h e gate was opened and when they ar rived
they then pushed i t shut


                             Signed
I am 20 years of age.                        Date of birth 18.6.68.                          I was born and educated in

Liverpool          and    1 left            school        at      the    age    of 16 years.                 I am at present unemployed

and     I    was       last     m     employment               some years            ago with Westminster Dredging                            Company,

and 1 have been unable to find employment since.




I     ar. single         and        reside        at     the      above        address       alone.           I   have    been       a   Liverpool

supporter          all     my        life,       and     I am       a    season        ticket      holder         at     the    Kop      End    and       I

get     my       tiOKet        as     a    result        of       the    allocation          on    my    season        ticket        seme      couple

of weeks before                the match.




Together with             o t h e r s , I went              6o*z. to Sheffield on Friday                          1-th April as we hires

e mini bus ar.d together there were about 9 or 10 cf us,                                                     which included mv brother




                                and        we    got        our    heads       down     on    the. snake          pass,        and    drove      int<

Sheffield at about                   9 o'clock on the Saturday morning.




We    had        parked       up     r.es        a     super m a r k e t ,      a    Gateway       Supermarket            and       we   bousht       a

football          in     the        shop     and       we      played      football          all    morning,           and     we    even      had    a

match with some Nottingham Forest supporters.




We    left       there    at        about       midday       and    the police           told us were             to park           the vehicle,

the    pubs       around        the        ground       were       all    shut and they            directed            us to a pub called

The    Fox,       which        is    about        2 miles          from        the    ground.           We    walked      there.         We    had    2

pints       of    lager        and    we        left     the      pub    at     about    2 o'clock            and walked back to the
t   2.




    ground,           and        3    arrived        outside          the         ground       at    about        1C- past,             quarter      past     2,


    wi th

    We    got         inside          the       grcunc        and    unlike           last     time,       when        there       had    been      stewards

    on duty,           to direct you were to go, and there were no stewards on duty.




    I went            through             the   tunnel        and    to      my       surprise       the     enclosure             was    already         full,

    and     there were people                      coring        in behind             us,   and         3 was pushed          oowt.      to the       front,

    and     1     was           about       1   foot      from       the      railings,             and    obviously           the       pressure         built

    up    and         people          were       becoming           distressed           and        people       started           to    try     and      climb

    out     of        the       enclosure          and    people          were        trying        to    kick      the      coor open,          and      1 saw

    a police officer spread eaglec across the door, holding people back in.




    There        was        a    big       surge     in   the       crowd         and    the        door burst          open,       and I could             feel

    ir.yself being                pushed         away     from       the      gate,      and    1 was        pulled over the                edge       of    the

    gate        with        one       hand,        and    I     pulled         myself        through,            and      I was         dragged      through

    to    the         next       enclosure         and     1 walked           along      the        enclosure          and    I could see            peoples

    faces pushed                 against        the railings and they were c.tviously in agony.




    1     was     screaming                to   the police          to       do something,               and they      just        pushed      me   away,

    I     went        through              to   the next        enclosure              and I    saw                                       approach          the

    players to try ar.d tell them to stop the game.




    1     walked        along the enclosure                     and      I        could see          people         were       dead,      everyone          was

    screa -     ± m         'or       help      and it     was       total        chaos and          as    Iwalked         towards        the       gate,

    I    s a;                                      on     his       back,         I    thought       he     was     dead,      and

    was trying to help puli me out.




    1 broke           down           in    tears    then       and       I walked         into       the     ground          and    3    could      not     see

    the     rest        of       my       friends.                  |hac      his hand up            in the sir,             he was       reaching          for

    me and        asking me for help,                         3 tried         to scramble up on the fence                            to try and drag
t




    him,    and         everyone          round him was                desd,     they       all       had       blue    faces.             He was gasping

    for breath,                  and    his    eyes     were rolling,                his hand started tc go down and he seemed

    to feint            ar.d the         police pulled             me away,           and       this was          the       last       time      I seen him,

    and    I     realise               that    my     brother      was     with        him,       and       I    could        see       the bodies          piled

    up    and       I    thought          he     must have been                one of the bodies,                      I was          walking round           the

    pitch        in     a        daze,    and        I went       to     the    main        stand       to      find        my    father to tell him'

    3 was alive but I could not find him.




         went       bark          and    saw                                   again    and       1    could         see         my    brother        and

                         and       I knew       that        they were          alive and          I did not know abou

    told       me       he       had     seen               going        down,       and     he    thought             he    was        definately          dead,

    and     we        all        broke        down     in    tears        and    we     tried          to    pull       ourselves              together       and

    we     sa*        peop le          getting        carried       on    stretchers,              and       I was          helping           together       with

    Jimmy        ar.d        Tony        Singleton          and    we    were        carrying          them       to    the           other    side     of    the

    pitch and the police were saying, get people that were alive,                                                                 leave.the dead.




    Inis       *er.t        or. for '- hour,            % hour.            I went          up     to the         hospital             tc find out           about

               snd       1       took     his        details       down        and    his       description                 and       things     like       that.

      ________________                  had been        taken       to    hospital           by    this         time,        and       I   was    trying       tc

      ind out .which hospital he had gone tc.




    At    t- o ’clock,             we walked           back       and went, to the                transport            and       eventually        we found

    George at the hospital and he discharged himse If and we came home tc Liverpool




    Since        the         incident,          obviously          I     have        been       haunted         by     the       memories        of    what     1

    s a * , an!         I have          not been        able      to sleep           or eat       and       I have          had       the most terrible

    experience               I    have        ever    had    in    my     life.         1       have     never         seen       a     dead body       in my

    life before this incident.
A.




The family doctor is ___________________________________________________

Liverpool   13.



In my opinion there was a total lack of organisation and nobody seemed to

know what to do.    There seemed to be no contingency plans to cope with

the disaster that occurred.    The only time there seemed to be any positive

action was when the firemen arrived.    Had they arrived earlier people would

have, been saved in my opinion.
                                                                                                                                                                          .YU*,:,
                                                                                                                                                                                v
                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                ;>
                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                 i,
                                                                                                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                     - .   <u-■' V-,-*M -    !■/•"-
                                                                  i*
                                                                   **
                                                                    ***1
                                                                     *-


                 P *»®»s
                                                                             TfPgjlTi^                           (/-J/LLS/Zo&oaCxbi) .

                                                                                                 //i 6 / ? £ d o r O h S t & n . c l > £ b                                               u/af

                                                                            cj.focut'            u-Ji£r\ X -.J cc & d . boc^cifcls b h ^
                                                                                                < 3    O    S

               M B                                   sssr^1
                                                          Use
                                                            r%s
                                                            ras             jL-e^pinc^S' JL-cxrt£. I£.:/ f’ d ^ ^ j _ ojh&f£-_ 3 ^ ftobiC&xL                                                                        .


                                                                            U^ZT-t             UJ£S&              01 f ^ * ^ / # > 1 £                            hihtncL                tki ,      ....

                                                                            ^cjoc*.I o n frfoJL b fa c K , . X_o/<ro ...5 ^ /1 ^ dfn*L .
                                                                                 ^     cJinnbir\cj O'Sjlf th jt f&ftCJL iSttuat& cl
                                                                                       i s



                                                                                  /fo n t o f          ^ f f iri3 f .irO ^A fi'U 'l t                                                                         ...


                                                                                                                   .JLHtLTjf & O t T } 4 -                                fdhCAwarx

                                                                                                                                                                                               Sjzjunc^
                                                                             P u s n i r l3                ■
                                                                                 Lh^fJl _                                   L                           _

                                                                             bhJi fjm c jt                       i h t f o h e - t b o cM ^d e t t , pfobabty                                                           m«kf
   *«:»?»   fJCwrvn*                                                             fjLCih&riy                     &\JL . S e S l O U Z W C C                                  o f       L^hat          U J<L?             k-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;:i


                                                                             J h a ^ p ^ n ^ j                  - .              -..... -- ........                   ............................................
     Wk^:'i                                                                                                        ( J l t h m ... a S o u t ^ ^ i n u i c ^ ^ ......
                                    Jlfi^Sll
                              ’c                                                                         b a u d b^-j           a b o u t, c^OD fa n s „2 / 1     „



                                                                                 an      M x £ ± t c h ^ _ _ g . n c l _ s£ '// m o t e _cJ, a n ? b e S i f m
                           *ae._iryfr,>?■‘Z.-~.-."t^vC-'-*%t
                                                  •*;-•
                                                            *rJ
                                                                .;''r-           oob            o f fhfjt                                                L^Cif\L>              .       ^    T h ^ l_Jn-.-
                                              - * g#yM®       ■*fs#
                                                                                 notiCiuL                       *-         f^^..                            .(^‘^                  cn-              ftkckj
                              sX'f-ix




                                        ^           ^ v“                         ? ‘                                                                                                                       ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                           M4v0*



                                                                                             i’V,^^ v•.^   e * , H»
                                                                                                                 *'1 .     ' 1 ;(- ^ 7^„ -          ’    ■* ’**’% w
                                                                                                                                             :*zy               ■%/,v&
                                                                                                                       _          1* “^
         h% .&■                                                                                        >• ''
                                                                                                                t^-v                     i-•'.
                                                                                                                            5f

                                                                                       '$&§&                                      7&>t




               sg                                                                                                                                                *■%;*»
                                                        SSSwyqr       ■r»?-:^.                                                   ftssysae
,
».
 »
 ,-,-•—*»“')*^wii.;C*(,>«!.™-.-
                                             •: J : ~'r*^' ••• ■-'■                                                               a&iss§*:a
Hivl-- v. -T;                                                                                               '■     •■'
                                                                                                                                    •-. f'»'^' -;I, 'v'*'
                                                                                                                                                        *s4
                                                                                                                                                          jr- '            '
        ■ "-                                   '■      i'%'
                                                          "“
                                                           ''',. „.v’ '-i
                             n ii!                         if ti




 anC *?£ S<2-£ r \               cc    fto~>        fu n £           C -o llc L fS n ^

. t f t -*- ^ ' o U i ' y c l . 'I h j i A1                         u>ej'4L m o r e            fa n < >

  r tp p itn tj       o ff        / ' id \ j £ i rt i $ i n c y    ^ o o r c h f r * / r \ a ro o p cl

          p itc h )        -to        oce         us,       m a £ & s h ift             s ifd e h e /f

  fo r                  i'r > ju fu L v fk e n                    th e       fu n *       c a r ft i d

             tty a r i d far\i 'towards, td^t fo re st
_ @ nd         o f     & £ p '< L c h .             ac-><xu)             f r c / 'h    £/* t    s l til

   e s V t y v ^U virfocl fu r s *
                  CJhil-&- a(( thtS                      on
  d f j ^ d skood U'I'B-Cjl sh o c ked > i then
  noliczd ont fa n ori ktC hand* a n d Z                ^/w-5
  _pu>ncht r\y bh-t g ro u n d t <3 s /i t£ m a il la y
   <S&i/l , b&£<diL ht/vi^      prjL^/v\cd>itj        hcxd
    elf jid-j -Li O J n S t ^ C r \ ~L 'LciCflJid b o
     m a .it         l*j l £/-\       t £ Q .r ^ in         m y £ y .l$               a n d    s c u d

     O ur                   d d-ci.m a.rt in b h c f £ mjLctrt,rcj
     ^
     f h j i L t p p u ' ) ^ L a * 1-*- £ ^ d . f I D o K l d loujardC
      (d \-£ p i t c J \     CiXjci.tA *6o £ * 4 . i f th z -fJ L U->CLC a CJ(X(j



           •<%*
i        Cco i d                    on        I c lr y         and          ' f i n d 'th ju V ',
b o b         b h ^ U       U iu f       QL    h h jL     o f    fc ltc ^ fv ta ^           u itd

ki\jLtf P v ( j c s i o p p i p c j f a n r f a w                671'
i^ ju d b s to o d       f h t r i n o n n b q j ,[J\ s h c c K , a n d
    C r y ;n j,         ci/o    d d 't t 'i e .d L c S f o t                                  ^-G. n

    on. ( d t p d c d i k r o ^ Cjh Lh & rY ia S S
    a - l r t a c/cj     Oi'i i t -
                                       ■/I jl t A e h i t 't f -£                    pc^m c
                                                         /> j                                i
    U stf $       C fo * n y       cr\9 bht             i'ciite.jo ^b               stood
    U ^et'4.      //?       cx h n x -        an     th ^< j      c o r d o n £.ci c f f
    lr ($ lf o f                 p 'it d \ l       u jh d -c     old'*-*' f u n ?            &L>n±
     a lt     U lc       u^crKj          ciid< ^y          £7? ^         / / iJ   c SjlU   and
     bh-e.      dgad-                            od       c d ic o b         <3 <2.0. c r i ^
               nnuj      mocL-e. s ,           u*hc                  S      Sittin g          cit
     (d n t                      * f     b k <2- A jw drA " S i o-                         s p c t^ d
    m ji.        c in d .      s h o u t 't d                   to        Q ornji c i o u . n
    ~&c ^ ci c d Q             J] i r v \ .    Jt\ t p     £ j , st               o o O -n b S t c K
     / n <. i d £ ,       cx s d d -S e /i S t c l              <S tm -i. b h c             u t a s"
,^S Q i't O kJ ^ I ( A J t'" Qlr'\0^                     *       f        '\/ l t d /                 d        r\A(H_d

 m y             ljocj            towardC                     h t w              ctnd            sat'd              ttkati

h s ro A j''                 a n d              J l£ ,ju c t                    c a m -c          o u t

    i t         c » .n c l        S c a d          A\jo       o f z . d C c in            s'     d e a d '

£         J u s b            ^cud               A! o j       h i                                      b jh ji'x -        t£

    h&          U 'X g/'i              h jL       S tu d                 C jO / y '&                  i   /YtjL,, a n d
                                                                                                           I           I\
     £j!         -L cl ^JL ^ 6 0                   cXot^n                  ~C?>

    h jh x n            X          S   j l jz k                          h ji     u a s          K n ju h n c j


     d o t-J rt             C r ^ ,'^             h l£         4-C jg&                  oot/,             /L     WO £

     ( J 'l & K         X          C la liJ -tc i              it            h/ L < . £   ~ t r C’X             ccbcot

    _Za^i .                  X      .ju s t           b ro ^ J L                d cw n           >'n £ e a f £

     C ^ a ' t r\                a n d            < S c ii'c {            ^ o <                       N h -tfi.

      hjL                                   hj* s a i d                          ThiUjv* b c o K h f y
          in thjL GyrYY&LSiO*Y\ ( IsjhCch I $ <Jo $t t.z/ohj
                    A   U * ij\         S     i a n   c l )          N     j i {y o b          b < ^       ( d \t     d /O C f

      o     f    ( d \& .        G c f/y y n a & o w                 i     h jh ^ r ji           h s6          h S a fJ i


          S h o p p e d                 b (j                     P c h c £ tY i6 .r \             .

          S a i d        *                        ooi         //e               hjacj t                        f c r o t d '< 4 jX
 rn                             I lib IJS i n s t t ' a i j k b a u c u y
                       AHUS in trha-L &ymn a u A i
 bJicj'ut X S a te bhg m o s i StcJSjirtihy s<<jkL
X hov<£,             $dVjZ/\ in t Y i y l t f t t n h u A
 Hill s b a c j hfiCh WjL f o f a s Ivyiy u s X
 h ^ £ , ih^Lfji N&rui cl*-*cl bcdiJL** a-ll
  o\f£.r   Id'sg     floor        ^SiCl^      coortc           Q\J&r jhjitt

 hdaci z , U^ji-n hj£ had. iLo f/nd, -X<%rt .
        no, -s th ■L P e s t L c S p d A s / V I ,
  1L f o l l o w <1(1 h i m , stj^ppintj o v e r a ( (
                       clca-ci          b^digS,          /VI2

  Kr\ jiI^   hgctd*'          £o.n          crcjung            our     £-<j£$

   O0b t g h a fa n y hi ha a c                (hooo.k               /r^7r>
                                                                        UC
                                                   ■y
      kjoolcl ^josb          HuKjL         op> ~     7f\£(i     ib>yjc

   f&CpI £         ri C ' b l C e c L    OS        CU'lJL       CCLtYiJZ

      a^'Jir a n d         to c jf o s        &<AsictJL4 hjh^r^L
             occL       Q-C      cldMt'X ..




                                                     i y j|j
                                                                                          _________________________________

                                          St ^TE-H'Sk!t ".„o £ .X H £ H i l l s Bo r 0 uc,h . xa i_s ftsxE R .
>tdcxc, V^iL r'STcx.

                                      1                                                      V^-jD-goJl _oJc__ A _cx. rv\ . ^ o J c                ulcA c

Sjflk                                                                                     __Slt3CLjQ^V-a . „ ^ o uVVv jmx^. Abn-Q^r

cxv\— o j c \< L J v^O-n^                                                   L9o,vke^_^^„O G L.L.o^\^cK ^vv\                                  .0
          ,     ,i     v>         V o -------------                             [
                            "TOVU^nA.^

                                 U        e _                          __ \^V I2— <^ CX^J L O _ c x ^ Z _ YA   _ 3C L _. o jy\ck      ^ .'f e .I r v J lL

           lLv_jAxA_

                      _Q^OjcxSI_^(5^C           L^U^i^crvfi!                                                      _0__


V-6A^v\3r- •..

                                                                                                          Ujp_ pccfl. O.Ul^i ..Wy c ^.

oA^vv)c^cx!Lriyt-A-V- - J© ^b^^toV ^_B c^JcX urvlf\j2JL                                                                      ., G<AjOoJkr„_
_   3 0-~i3f>z- c r o u ^ A o ^ s t ^ f c ^ L A ^ C o m f i j ^ s z x ^ J c ^ t ^ _ u ^ W A ^ x ^ A X A _ v „ L r x j U L , au.v\A._.u>o_

                                          jf^oJLS   u   ^c   l m   _>__ ^£g.v>. c\ V        9. - k-SlJ^nM2__W            q   _c   v l l s           c.cL.mjz.

                                          JbCjaA.-cXov^>W \^g-~t!9A-Jra>r C A                  In BftJjJuCLA^r C.r t X ^ V                  b)Q A-Wt?^ry

t>-

    iVJC-CXArx(X
3_«^e>A—         -U^-0LO_ _W ^ w ) f — Q
         wv\c\.--VAJ-WO__*i«^v_.OJL*^—                                  ^                                       L O X^.VC_^Q\-Q£LS\_______
                                                                                                                          ^ OJ f c C c A -

U>SdJLC—sX<0 cCi V\ 7—^^"L»-----ry\GL.icv—IDOL.^!—to.-. YW£ . o w^BfNO- V^cn .>-v-i n f                                                     COQ ^ v cAc
./v > A _ ^ g l S ^ iV-y\c^ -Vo T —                     Vu ^ — sijix-tXf i . I q — c»                                                              © s t ___

C _ o w e e—         tovv\                                                          .-V                ^f\gvv \\r\a, -cls J ^ jt^ xa vagrxo

               li^yjcOCi.tsvv___________________________________ ________________ _____ _______ _______ __

                     ---1— u0>qjz_jb t x x . p ^ A ^ 3 x ^ O L j J i a ^ ) L ^ ^                                   IfT- 3 .n rv\t^./a;

rcA_tx ^v x q ^— t^w\<>                                                 _^acja—                                m .       ^je-o^iLa-.u^v^--.

j V A A ^ - a J C i C A - e ^ ^ v N j ^ _ ta._.9tN0=-^JP&V_02- . ^ O . t l R c S ^ _ , ^              Coxxi2_<\ ^ ^ n y r              J-T^rrvg.O

^xxk;t*\cj,                                                         \>~t.c/vxc^a/m c . W -.A...ouO>cu> _ ^ e . t ^ v c ^ | q k ^ ( \

CH2X—b b ii— W           xa~;                     -cxa^ \ . . cxV           o   v\fi- p o Uw3c - -^v>u^ Wc_cxcX cO cua . rvort.vfl ^
J>U-cXxuvxC^_.AUj                k.VAj2j2^/ \                          r>x^           sV\t>-Oa                               ,£^..CX a ^ \ _____

        .-QjL-Oy^ ..Q O OV\ c^              V\AA_vv\Vi ..........................
aV   —            — U ^ CX-fo-Vv— \Az _s^ j^CL jQ— jcxoju.tV€-g V\                                    £l - $ Q     CXy\A               3 l - S~ S>    T U i ^        lA   CLP

    — t2A ov\/r>'; o ^ka..r W q                          A. t <? \       .

                       - i r k s - - ^>0 ? t C,Q»—v ^ ii/\V r                       5^-<?q yv\j? r \                      S ^ ~ » Kc^vW V

                                          r \S ) S t, c x ,w < ^


CVoAl           lU f tf o - J l i r k r ^ _ . p j x j ^ - g _ < x            r\      A f l .- i A ,             1^ m W > r              t^v& _ ^ J ? y w r t 2_
                                              — fc^rVQ— S iA -M jQ ^ iJS k lii                        (X/$            | r>i 1*0 / n y y\_A            ~\ v P C L 1A _ t®

                                   SlA^rocfee r -                                                                            ^     i   \To L ..A           S a ^ y o >«
                .^3
                 ~uaffv.C Q rv\g.,w— c u L >±=g— \a / \ q u A v                              ts> v w o v x k X ^          cx/y\<^ W c m tV                 wxnjr^ri rt r y

                                                                       ^)KfAAJ

^                  ^         r—k W ^ J b o . r                                                                     p n s O a e ^ v , t_oe_-^o<ju
usaA.       _A^rssu v — yv\-gx<^sA—                    o >u   _c ..a /v\ q - ^ j l r T x e i ^ ^               \V\.o

Xj v x \        ( a ^ Q -»-Vg-< \ ' ^ v Q J b ^ - ^ o S l_ ^ ^ jL J ..\rg . S o JQq-g— b w w u ) - U v\ <g _V \\£jrv w \ o                                 \   o     r\
                                                                                                                                                                     QVi_iT_

     (Xa^       ,.fc\\ f T > u «-CjVv         b W a^    \z l   u q y\'iiSj— L a / x f e    ~Hr\ g      c p a j lt-V - ^    a _oc \        . . . Vm? w ?        (~\n r^_


                          lk^V^       — CVArvvo-A-OLct/Jft/S-C                       iQrXtg^ iX± <2_Y~R.— ( ^ U i U v \ q ^ .Cyyfl_A^l_g_Ci ^                        Cy\<\



^    .                        jQ ltJ iu s ,                                                           -cxJLo_u__i^ _ ^ < ^ ( ^ _ o u Q . ^ S 3 l_j^yvu^_

OAJ^ S           r*.v\A -S1q-\a\cx^^
                              '      ;cu^<\„aouJl^__Y^oV s ^ ^ ( \ ,S^VQi
                                                                       • qVOc
                                                                          \- -                                                                     H - 11 k i ^ l---
                                                                                                                                                                  Wr
           A-                  -      \       v«         *           \ v       .                                                               •      O
CUxAiL—S aA_V^_                       \                                    V\i?jL^> 7 \H^£LV\             CX   ^ tjlico                     ICQ-C         t~~n>oW m o

                      -CCL-j<Z,O^C^J^JL^
                    $>.__   C            IajSLs^HL. \3yNg .<^JLr\ A, O A v ^                                         °V/V^ ‘ * '’^ ' V - -

                                                                       c\ vA a . vv\\^ lui^Q ^-g Q-.
                     ^       ^ CxA,— ^ . r J ^ a _ j L ^ ^ Q L v y \ ^ - X V g oS c ^ J 2 j ^ C .                                          ^       y-r^            OwVX



                                                                „   c O c „ _ _ \„ c x .\^ ^ S u u v > A o u j l ^
                         1     L          \                            \           Ktv                1           "-O
                         L _ K < x \ _ _ c x ^ -u i                                           ov_W__cx.s— L -C o o tJ L \ ^ \ A ^
SttriX-l-C^Vvl^_.O^V\(X                        YWAJ^                   s _OCi^.V<2           V\AJLwOo~              l>eLV\

 I— sJxfiJL-^dcx. vx ^ o t — ^ e o i J                                ^ x e » f w ^>-ro^Q-Y^

                                                                                           OAjuvq>.                              ('l
                        0£!$Q TBALL a s s o c i a t i o n


                                               m   m   m    &      &   M



                 m'fM
                                                                   i<V!X®¥G



                          m
                                      wm - m* i m m m m m m
                                                           -vW':
                               ^\v,^\v>>:\vv
                               THIS PORTION TO BE RETAINED
TO BE GIVEN UP
r



                    »V
                     VS3N
                        M <ai

           J rLsa^LmsLj
          (J j VJtanmN«a«w“n




                                       t»
                      S
                      PIO
                        NKO
                          P     SpotiM 6Nmh
                                    C
                                    arMi

    m U        2 3 3
           T
           oCity.
                                             /V^L>                                            H* * ^~°>

      \     e ^ U * * A . -0-    W-^*Wu                      ****"■                                         ***•- •*> «• ■W                  ^ [
          - va* c ~         n u a . • fi~     ^      »   «       w    *      iu-          » « •             “ ' « •           J i *'

uaaa «. **»'—
s u j x

                    **n tLCiS                                        n j U j \

          krr*'*£.*
" ^         VT ^ T           1   * X t L                     o        J T                 C             v ^ y ^ ^ o
                                         w     •                      i ^v ■       oub   V*«)L       JS o    o^   W   v   O     ©   u a    J^   a   A ^ aX   o   .



V                   ***^            J ^ L ^ T ^ W * . -W                  J tU       t^ v ttb s . -% W ~ A ., \                 t ^ » v u . .W e V z .


                   -u a * JtTjtkc    Ja-^Jcju,               ©cJL              w    U            \ -w*~fc                                 ^ U c ^ L

S:
kJS-> ^ r fT^JXI ^                                                                                           v ^      jwST
VW5A          V     OueK^U^                                                                    •    *7°                         ^^JU_
 *.                      ^             *y-~>             < ^ v v y ^                       Jfc > 0 ^ 0 ^
 ^ J C     c j u   . JdU    JOa^       x u   ^.      *%                                          ^          ' - W « .                 . V * * ~ *•
•   JL^O       fkorjL.                                   «WrA. J C ^ ^ v a f c A ^ •



      iz£\£i~                                                    «   -    r   —        - *
                                                                                                      &
                                                                                                         —
                                                                                                                       *


                      ^     *        •A—         —         *''




           ,   /.i-                          t       A                                               ■'4 .
                                     I


                                 /   .* •

                      *».                                                                i   i.i r       ■ "f     •      /       . .--- r ' , i . -   f,
                                                                                                                 -\/.,i i.                            >.
               *. r-            '•' ' ' ? ,'
                                tc.*> , „ ■I                                                         /   *■•    <■■*' ••"■■•                       ,1.
                                                                                                     1                   *
                                                                                                                      • / V -                  ,      I.


                                            L    .:. .,                                                                                   • •i
                                            ■h-....                                                               ’          /                  >t
                                                                                                     '1
t.

     5th May 1989




     I    was     involved        in       the    incident     at    Hillsborough            Stadium           on   the    15th    April

     1989 when I was subsequently injured as a result of the crush on the terracing




     I came by my ticket about four or five days before the day in question.

     The ticket entitled me to admission to the Leppings Lane end terrace




     The     evening        before,          Friday         14th    April,       a    group        of    us     travelled         over    to

     Sheffield.            There           were    about     nine    or     ten       of    us   and      we    travelled         over    in

     a mini bus/van which had been hired.




     We actually slept in the van                         which we parked in a lay bye outside of Sheffield

     What       actually         happened          was that        when     we        arranged the            trip,       it    was     with

     a     view      to    going to         Sheffield        for      the        Friday      evening,           spending        sometime

     there        socialising                and     then finding accomodation                     there.           However,       by    the

     time       we   all    met        in    our    home     district       in       Old    Swan        , Liverpool            , time    was

     getting by and consequently we ended up spending the whole evening in Liverpool

     and    then      after       the       pubs    had      closed in      Liverpool            and     after      purchasing          some

     carry out beer , we then got into the van and drove over towards Sheffield.




     Consequently,            the            following morning we            continued             onto       Sheffield,         arriving

     in    Sheffield        at     about          7.30am.      We    then    went          and   found a cafe where we had

     some breakfast.




     We     then     went     to       a    Gateway       Supermarket,           which       was    not       all     that      far     from

     the    ground.          We    parked          the    vehicle     there.          We     then went to the             local shops
I




    and    we purchased              a football             which we        then used         for a kick around from about

    9am to 12 noon.               This was on the car park of Gateway.




    At about 12 o'clock we decided to make our way down to the ground.

    On    our       way      we   bumped       into      one    of      our    mates     father who was               in his vehicle.

    He asked            us   if we were going for a drink                            to the , I think, Fox public house.

    We    had       a   quick       vote    on     the      matter       and    we decided          to go there for a couple

    of pints before going to the match.




    We    realised            that      with     the     time      only       being    around       mid    day    we    still       had    at

    least       a       couple      of     hours       to    play       with    before       we    really       had    to    get    to    the

    ground.




    We then set off in the direction of the Fox public house, using the directions

    given to us by my mates father.




    We    appeared           to    get     lost,       however,          and    we    then    spoke       with    a    police officer

    and    asked          him     for    directions.               He    then    told    us       that    all    the public houses

    within a three mile radius of the ground were closed.




    We    carried            on   walking        for        what     must      have     3/4    miles       before       eventually         we

    encountered              some       other    Liverpool              supporters       and      they     pointed          out    the    Fox

    public house to us.




    Consequently, we arrived at the Fox at about 1pm.
Clearly,        we     weren't           watching       our        watches         at      that    stage         for    we    realised

we still had plenty of time.




The pub itself was packed

It    seemed        to be     that       this     was       the    only      pub open on the side of the ground

designated to the Liverpool supports and as a result , it was full of Liverpoo

fans.




After arriving there it took about 20 minutes for us to get served.

Obviously,           because        it    was    difficult          to get          served,       in       the   hour    or       so that

we were present in that building I think I consumed two pints of beer.

■These    had       been      the    only        drinks          that    I    had       consumed        that      particular         day.

I appreciate           that        I had        been    drinking          the night before                  and perhaps           running

into     the    early        hours       but     certainly          from the time we               set off in the morning

for    Sheffield            from    the    place        where       we    had      parked     up       overnight,        we       had not

been drinking anymore alcohol.




In    fact      the    drinks        that       we    bought       were       purchased       as       a    result      of    a    double

round when we had our one and only opportunity of getting to the bar.




I    have      to     say    that        the    Liverpool           fans      in     and    outside          that      public       house

behaved        impeccably.               There        was    a    good       atmosphere.           People         were       exhuberant

and there was certainly no acts of hooliganism that I witnessed.




We    consumed        our     drinks            and    at    about       five       to   two we        then all         walked      down.

The whole company I was with left at the same time.

It was roughly a twenty minute walk or so.
We thus came near the ground at about twenty past two

As we were          walking down towards the ground I remember seeing about 30 mounted

policemen coming away from a car park or at least some waste land.




A lot of police officers were congregated in that area.

The   nearer        you got to the ground                     the less    the police officers             were    inclined

to    let    you        stand       and     wait    for       friends      They    were constantly           moving        you

on towards the ground.




By    the    time        I    arrived       at     the    Leppings       Lane,    the     time    would      be   as   I   say

about       20    past       25   past    two,     and        although there were plenty of people around

the queues at that time seemed quite well defined and in order.

There were queues going into each turnstile.

I    think       there       were    about       four queues and they were all                   about    10 to 12 feet

in length.




There were a lot of people milling about on the road.

I did hear some people asking if there were any spare tickets going.

That, however,               is usual where ever Liverpool F.C. play.




As soon as we got there we then joined a turnstile queue.

I now know          that the         turnstile at             which Iqueued was the one directly                  adjacent

to the gate that was opened.




Whilst       we    were       standing       there       a few of our friends             saw a lad who was known

to    them        and    they       asked     if   we     would    hold    their     place       in    the   queue     while

they went over to have a quick chat, that we did.



The   queue moved             along and          I then called to my friend,                                      , telling

him   he     had        better      hurry    up.         He    shouted   back     words    to    the     effect    that     he

would see me in there because he wanted to go and buy some cigarettes.
I    thus       continued          on    my     way       into       the    queue        and      eventually         I went         through

the turnstile.




I    was     not       searched          by     any       police          officer        before      entering           the     turnstile

but        on    the otherside of               the       turnstile             within the         confines        of     the       stadium

I was searched




Thinking         back,       I     recall       only seeing in the immediate                         turnstile area                 outside

the     stadium,            two    police       officers,             one       was a    female      mounted         police         officer

and    the       other       was    a    male police officer who was on foot and was stood near

to the turnstile that I entered. He was standing between two queues.




As    soon as         I was        in the stadium grounds,                        I then went and purchased a lottery

ticket of some description off a steward                                        who was selling them.

I    saw    two       stewards          who    was       standing         at     the    entrance        to    the    stairs         leading

to the upper west stand.                                I didn't see any others.

There       were       certainly no             police          officers          nor        stewards        at     the entrance         to

the         tunnel leading to the                        particular terrace in                     question.




When       you       come    through          the        gate    after          the turnstile,        the         first    think        you

see        if    the tunnel          and       on       looking       through         the tunnel      the playing pitch                  is

very much in evidence.




Consequently,               you naturally gravitate down that tunnel                                    towards the terracing

area.           At    that        particular             time        it    is    by     no    means obvious          that       there are

other       ways       onto       the    terrace. I            had    never       been       to         the       ground      before and

consequently,               as     far    as        I    was     concerned,             that      wasthe      only      way     I    could

see to get onto the terrace where my ticket would allow me.
Because         I    had    stopped      to    buy      a gold goal            ticket or a lottery              ticket,       there

was only myself and                                       who actually walked down the tunnel together.

My other friends had obviously already gone down there.




We then walked down the tunnel slowly and we emerged onto the terrace

There were plenty of people on the terracing at that particular time.

It wasn't packed but nor was it empty




My    friends         and     I   then      stood       in     a   group near to the            entrance        of the    tunnel

but actually on               the terracing itself.

I would hazzard a guess that we were six feet away from the entrance itself.


                                                                                                                                      «

The time would now be about 2.45pm

Gradually            it started       to fill up and so much so that you                             began       to get pushed

further down the terraces.

When       there      was     a   surge       of    pushing         you    would travel         down      the    steps perhaps

8,    9,    10       steps    but     then         only      recover       about 2/3       steps     in    making      your    way

back up the terraces.




Conseque ntly,              gradually         you       were       being      forced     down   to     the      bottom    of    the

terrace area.

Also       we       moved    from     the     left        hand      side      of   the    terrace      near      the    top    ( as

you look at the pitch)                   to the bottom right hand side of the terracing.




It    got       to    the    stage    when         we   were       at   the    bottom of the           terracing that when

the    crowd          was    surging          forward,         you      realised         that   there      was    no     movement

back and, of course, people were being jammed right up front.




It    was       a    situation        whereby           myself      and    two     friends      were      jammed       near    to    a

barrier and it may have been the barrier that eventually gave way.
One of           my f r ie n d s ,                                 was jammed r i g h t up against the bar by

his    waist.            I    could       see   th a t      he was beginning              to panic and he asked me

to     help       him and          I    managed to          maneouvre myself              into    a s i tu a ti o n where   I

had     both        arms      braced       against         the     barrier     either      side     of   him and I       then

pushed back with a l l the force I could manage



When I had managed to force the crowd back a small distance,                                                   I then braced

my r i g h t        knee     ag ain st      the     bar      and    thus with my free              r i g h t hand I helped

to    push        him by          the    head     under      the     bar.          He then popped up fu rth er down

the te r r a c in g .



I     then       tried       to    stay    in     th a t    position         for    a while      but     quite frankly my

arms     gave         out     on me and,            of      course,      I    was    forced      onto    the    bar   myself.

However,           because        of     the    force       of     the crowd I was l i t t e r a l l y          squeezed out

of the gap between the bar and the crowd behind me, so much so th a t I actually

rose out of the crowd i t s e l f .



I was jammed ag ain st the bar th is time by both knees



A fellow           in f ro n t         of the bar could see the p o sition I was in and he helped

me in        forcing back the crowd who were jamming one of my legs against the

bar which enabled me to get th a t foot onto the bar so I was now in a si tu a ti o n

where        I    was standing             on the          bar   with    one       foot   whilst       my other foot was

s t i l l jammed on the otherside of the bar.



After some manipulation, I managed to get my other leg free



I then waivered on the bar u n t i l                             I cou ldn't control             my balance and I f e l l

forward.            I f e l l onto what was l i t t e r a l l y a carpet of people.
The same fellow t r i e d                     to a s s i s t me by grabbing my hand and to some extent

I    regained          my balance             and    I    ended up in a semi standing pos ition                  on the

bar again.



This     same fellow              then        said       to    me t h a t     I should    run to the bars.           I saw

no a l t e r n a t i v e .       There was no room fo r me to get down back onto the f lo o r .

There was no way of escaping.

I then in my panic l i t t e r a l l y ran across people                                 to tr y and get out.    Within

reach of the bars, I tripped and f e l l                                and I managed to clamber up and reach

the     bar      and    eventually             drag myself             onto     the   perimeter    fencing.     It    must

be remembered t h a t                I was constantly f e e t of f the ground because, of course,

t h i s a l l happened on the top of other sp e c ta to rs .



I t was sheer panic on the te rra c in g a t t h a t time.

It     was not         only       myself who acted                   li k e   this,   there    were   many others      and

in the circumstances i t i s p e rf e ct ly understandable



I remember, when I was f i r s t on the bar with my leg jammed, I was screaming

at    the     police         o f f ic e r s    who were             looking into      the te rra c in g   from the walk

way around the p itc h , to open the re lea se gate onto the pitc h



I then saw an o f f i c e r did open the gate and about 10 people scrambled out

very     quickly        and       others t r i e d            to follow but then the o f f i c e r unbelievably

began       to   push        them back into                   the    crowd     and a t   the   same time attempt       to

close the gate again.



I    always      remember           th a t     when I         managed         to grab hold of the fence         I could

hear a g i r l screaming for what seemed lik e ages.
I remember looking down towards her and could see t h a t she was in d i s t r e s s .

I    remember      also      that     as    the     people            managed      to        scramble      through    the gate

when the police             officer        opened i t ,          a gap formed and t h i s                  girl    simply f e l l

to the ground and i t was quite obvious t h a t she never emerged again.



As soon as any gap appeared on th a t te rr a c in g                                    it    was closed automatically

by the force of bodies frombehind.



As I clambered              over the       fence I caught my                    r i g h t ankle on one of the spikes

which caused acute and considerable pain



I     then    jumped        down on to          the           track    and a lad came over to                     me and asked

i f I was a l r i g h t and I told him th a t I was.

I     then    turned        and    looked towards               the    te rra c in g          looking fo r my mates and

as     I    did   so    I   then     saw people with t h e i r                   faces        jammed r i g h t against the

perimeter fencing.                  I could see people vomiting and with t h e i r eyes r o l l i n g

upwards.           I nearly        vomited        myself          when I        saw     the condition of people a t

the fro nt        of         that     te r r a c in g .        I re al is e d     then fo r the f i r s t time the enormity

of the s i t u a t i o n and the f a c t th a t thing were desperate in t h a t area.



The same          lad        who      came to me and asked                        if    I was a l r i g h t       began to ask what

we could          doand quite          frankly            I    was     saying      I     d i d n 't   know what we could

do to help the oth ers.



We then went to a police sergeant who was standing there who was j u s t waving

his        arms   around      and we told             him to           do something and               to    stop     the   game.

He said t h a t he c o u ld n 't stop the game.                           The lad who I was with then burst

into te a rs and we r e a li s e d t h a t we had to do something.
Consequently,               we were       then    two of          the f i r s t people        to even encroach upon

the p i t c h .        I remember I went towards Steve Nichol and was                                      ,    in my panic

and      stress,       telling          him to      stop        the   game because           people     were dying.             I

remember          th a t     Steve      McMahon ran           over    andaskedwhat           was going on                and    I

said very much the same to him.



Eventually people began to r e a l i s e                         exactly what was happening and the game

was brought to a swift close.



The      players           then    left     the     p itc h     and people        then       began    to    converge        upon

the      te r r a c in g     to   try     and get          the people       out.         I   remember          seeing before

this,       however,         police o f f ic e r s        j u s t standing onthe perimeter                 fencing urging

the crowd in the terr ac es to push back.



I     was    unable         to    see     the gate by t h i s            time because there was j u s t a mass

of people who were obscuring my view of i t .



My next          concern          was     obviously        to     find    my friends          and    e s ta b li s h   whether

or not        they were a l r i g h t .           I t reached the stage where we were helping move

the      injured       and the          dying and          indeed     the    dead,       across      the       pitch   to    the

area where the ambulances were entering the ground.



Eventually          I found a l l          my frien ds          with the exception of one.                     We tr a v e ll e d

the      various       hospitals          searching        fo r him.        It    was in one of the ho sp itals

th a t   a nurse looked a t the i n j u r i e s to my legs and she confirmed t h a t there

was      nothing       broken        but     that     I    should        simply    seek      medical       advice      when     I

reached home.



I think        that afte r v isitin g               the ho sp ita ls and what have you I arrived home

in Liverpool a f t e r 11pm
I    consider     th a t    the    blame for the whole incident                 lies    firmly a t        the door

of the po lic e .



It     seemed    that      there    were plenty         of    police       officers    well        away from the

ground    but     when you got          near     to the ground,            particularly       a t the Leppings

Lane end there was a d i s t i n c t shortage of police o f f i c e r s .



It   seemed      that      the    officers     on     duty within      the     confines       of    the stadium,

noteably      on the p itc h        looking      into th a t     te rr a c in g , did not ac t       as    quickly

as they could have and I was,                    of course,       struck by the f a c t t h a t when th a t

officer      in itially      opened t h a t gate he l e t            about 10 people through and then

he   attempted       to     close    the gate.         The f a c t    is      that     by   l e t t i n g 10 people

out of t h a t area,         i t would make l i t t l e or no difference a t a l l to the crush

th a t was going on.



The fa c t      may well be t h a t by opening the gate                      and l e t t i n g those 10 people

then    their     live s     were    c e r ta in ly   saved    but the       gate     should have been l e f t

open and more people should have been encouraged to come out of the terrace

as quickly as pos sible .



By the     time     the     officers     did     start       to do something about i t ,             it   was,   of

course, too l a t e and people had               already died.



The whole thing in my view could have been b e t t e r organised.
                                                                                      3    bottom

                                                                                      scause 'B'

                                                                                           We

                                                                                      1 infront

                                                                                          sid e
             TO TEE HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

           RE: LIVERPOOL V NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1989
                                                                                      standing

                                                                                          on, l e t s
           and myself a r r i v e d i n S h e f f i e l d a t 2.05pm» we l e f t
                                                                                      i c o u l d ’n t
•k and walked down towards the ground.                  We saw q u it e a l o t
                                                                                      ived
t l y i n g around on the grass embankments and s i t t i n g on
                                                                                          the wide
ught to myself then t n a t they were l e a v i n g i t a b i t l a t e .



  the xiillsborougn ga te s about 2.20pm.              r/hen we went through
                                                                                      .closure
  then s p l i t <up, J i n and citeve v e n t towaras the stands
                                                                                      ,ce and
f i o n and I went towaras the t u r n s t i l e E f o r the Leppings
                                                                                      nigh and
        I t .vms alread y congested, we were a l l squasheo up then.



           a co try to queue up :'or cue t u r n s t i l e ,      t ut t fie re was
                                                                                      q     climb
3 »’.     I'here .vere three or :'our policemen on horsebacK
                                                                                          the crowd
veryone to get in l i n e s ,        cut you j u s t could not, wereas l a s t
                                                                                      n the
re b a r r i e r s up to make you go in to l i n e s ,      and people were
                                                                                      i the fence
e going past tne n il ls b o ro u g h gates to see i f tney had a

h is year the re was none of t h a t ,          so people even witiiout

t r y i n g to get through the t u r n s t i l e .
                                                                                      eemed to

                                                                                          lo o k in g
ed to get to the t u r n s t i l e ,     the policeman who was on the B
                                                                                      \ over
igh j u s t i n f r o n t of us saying " I ' v e had enough o f t h i s . ”
                                                                                      i t h e r s id e
h the t u r n s t i l e , th e re was qu ite a l o t of policemen s ta n d in g
                                                                                      jate and
ng and I sa id to                  "look a t them sta nd ing t h e r e and            !
                                                                                      ft he
  c o u l d n ' t answer and j u s t said "keep pushing them ov er ."                    People kept

 screamirxjat p o lic e on the p it c h to help t u t they j u s t looked a t u s.



 J u s t on J.OOpm I t o l d                   to get over as i t was now g e t t i n g so bad you

 could h a rd ly move.           I t o l d him to meet me a t the coaches a f t e r .                He was

 one of the l a s t people I pushed over.                    Then i t became t h a t packed I was

 pushed around and was f a c in g the st an ds and looking up at. the match

 kick o f f .



 As the match kicked o f f the re was l i k e a sway, and I managed to t u r n

 around and fac e the p i t c n .            Then i t was t i g h t again and my arms were

 pinned to my s i d e s , one was being pushed through the r a i l i n g s and was

 h jir tin g as well as my c h es t.            I s t a r t e d to find my b r e a t h i n g g e t t i n g

 h a rd e r.     I then n o tic e a a boy between 16 and 20 y e a rs old; about th r e e

 people i n f r o n t of me, h i s face going pale then tu rn in g l i k e b lu e,                     and I

 then r e a l i z e d he was s u f f o c a t i n g .   I s t a r t e d to shout a t the policeman

 through the r a i l i n g s t r a t t::e boy was -joing blue and dying and he s a id

he c o u l d n 't help hir..



The second sqeeze s t a r t e d and I thought I was going to d i e , then everyone

s t a r t e d to f a l l ,   but with my arm caught in tfte r a i l i n g s            , I stayed and

people went past t r y i n g to hold onto me.                    People were on top of one

another i n f r o n t of me, (and a l l the photos shown l a t e r in the p r e s s ,                        of

people pushed a g a in s t tne fence, they were a c t u a l l y sta n d in g on people

th en ).       Ey now the p o lic e naa broken uhe fence by the tunnel e n tr a n c e

and opened the gate so the re was room to move.                           I - s t a r t e d to pick people

up o f f the f l o o r with a couple of o th e rs and push them over i n t o the

s e c t i o n where]________|was, who l a t e r t o ld me some of them were a lr e a d y

t u r n i n g blue ana tnese were people n e a rly on top of the p i l e .
  The boy I had e a r l i e r seen was slumped on the f l o o r and you could t e l l

  q u i t e c l e a r l y he was dead and I passed him over.           By now I was very

  t i r e d myself and the policeman kept shouting to keep going and get as many

  over as p o s s i b l e .



 I t was then t h a t I n o tice d a huge blue pipe g e t t i n g thrown over onto the

  pitch.      I r e a l i z e d i t was from the ba rr ie r. m e and E i f i o n had stood i n

 f r o n t o f, so i f we had stayed th er e we most c e r t a i n l y would have d ied .

 As i t balanced on top of the fence a l l kinds of rubbish f e l l out which

 I l a t e r r e a l i z e d was r u s t .



 By now th e r e was q u it e a l o t of room on the f r o n t of the t e r r a c e ,        as

 people who were not helping nad moved back.                    I then s p o tt e d a g i r l with

 her le g s trappe d and lyin g over backwards               so I pulled h e r out and c a r r i e d

 her to the s i d e .           I put her down and went to give her the Kiss of Life

 •m    then smelt the odour coming from her mouth.                   I r e a l i z e d then she was

 dead out I s t i l l did i t out of instinct.             I then pulled her arm out of

 her cardigan ar.u pull^a i t over her face' ai.a l e f t he r, and went to help

 anyone e l s e I could.



We c a r r i e d a few        o th e rs over to the fence and pushed them over, by mow

one of the policemen on                 the oth er side of the fence was j u s t s ta n d in g

th ere in complete shock as was a l o t of people sta n d in g on the t e r r a c e s .


                                                                                              %
I then saw a boy ly in g the re whose eyes were s l i g h t l y moving, so I , with

another man p u ll e d him to one s id e .            We put him next to the g i r l .       I

then t i l t e d h i s head back to give him the k i s s of l i f e ,        then n o ti c e d h i s

mouth had a few pieces of r u s t i n i t .             This must have come from the p ip e.

I p u lle d th e s e o ut, and s t a r t e d to give him the k i s s of l i f e . .   He   b r o u g h t



up l i k e a b i l e t a s t e i n t o my mouth and t h i s made me b r i n g the same t a s t e

up.    I turned to him again and h i s tongue had gone down to the back of
   his throat.          I t r i e d to p u ll h i s tongue out but i t kept s l i p p i n g with my

   f i n g e r s wet.       In the end a policeman t o ld me to stop as he had d ie d .                       I

   am so s o r i y now t h a t I d i d n ' t know t h a t i f you turned them on t h e i r s id e

   they d o n 't swallow t h e i r tongues.                  I now l i v e with the knowledge I helped

   i n a way i n him dying.              I then took h i s coat t h a t was t i e d around h i s

   waist and put i t over h i s .face.



  I then went back to picking up a few o th e r s , by mow you knew they were

  dead, i t      j u s t d i d ' n t sink in at the time.             By now we were p a s s in g them

  through the gate onto the p i t c h .                 I went to pick up a f a t man who I had

  e a r l i e r stood on because I knew he was dead to get a t the o t h e r s .                        Pour

  policemen picked             him up so I went to             pick up the g i r l but two policemen

  did i t i n s t e a d .      I w i l l never f o r g e t     the look of h o r r o r i n her eyes and

  her l i p s turned back as she must have a ie d .                     I cry th in k in g of h e r ,    and

  I kept th in k in g to m y s e lf ^ la te r , who i s going to t e l l h e r mother?.



  I then nicked up the boy in my arms because he was very slim, and I

 o . i . n e a iiim dov.n      .,0      s'ate, v/ere I         d i d n ' t '.vant to give hi a over to the

 p o lic e waiting; on zr.e pi ten Tor him.                     A man said something to me l i k e

 "come on mate, jjive :ne his arms and'you take h i s l e g s , " and we passed him

 over.      I then went back over to where I had been sta n d in g before i t                           all

 happened, because the l a s t person was-passed through.                           Then i t was a l l

 empty in f r o n t of me, except f o r shoes, sca rve s, watches, handbags and

 programmes.         I t j u s t looked l i k e someone haa thrown a d u s tb in over, you

wouldn't thin k about f o r t y people had died th e re and a l o t of i n j u r e d .

----------- climbed back over and we j u s t held each o th e r f o r a while.                    I t was

now i t was over t h a t I s t a r t e d to f e e l angry even in my s t a t e of mind.

I could see the sense i f I was a Policeman on t h a t p i t c h , I would have

radioed through t o the p o lic e t h a t had been sta n d in g around the tu n n e l s

entrance to block i t o f f as i t was f u l l a t about 2.50pm, and t e l l people

to go to the si d e t e r r a c e s ,       then t h i s would never had happened f o r the sake
Id be a l i v e today.
                                                          >ck.     In the end they c a l l e d a

                                                           me down, and I was put to bed.
ick to the coaches, I t o l d my
                                                          1.     I got up s t i l l f e e l i n g t i r e d
 get him a t i c k e t again because he
                                                          -O.JOpm Sunday n i g h t .           I t r i e d to
and I would'nt be ab le to look a t
                                                          jok a t a b l e t which                     dad
:k a t the coach, we met
                                                          i l l e d DIAZEPAM 5mg.           I went back
o th e r .      I t s t i l l d i d ' n t sink' in
                                                          loon f e e l i n g t i r e d s t i l l ,
(.ch, as the death t o l l risect. •
                                                          juiem f o r the v ic tim s in our

                                                          Lf I went t h e r e , but I c r i e d
>out a lad i n work who I gave a t i c k e t
                                                           before the end.
th r e e weeks.        This s t a r t e d to give

jut my own wife and baby who was
                                                          fc back i n t o shock,
> naa a baby ei&ht weeks o ld .                V.hat
                                                          i I went i n t o a s le e p .          They
.e me worry more.            Plus the g i r l s
                                                          1 to Pazakerly H o s p ita l.              When
■ b ig eyes and l i p s turned back, made
                                                          i s t who was p a t i e n t with me, so
I s t i l l h a d 'n t c r i e d widen at the

aM a ver;: e:’imotional person any'.vay.

                                                           the do cto rs because my t a b l e t s
 cab ana people were w a iti n g f o r
                                                         or worK. iv.y back was now very
y br o th e r came out of the house
                                                         shing and l a t e r ,       l i f t i n g people
i n and my wife <vas a t he r s i s t e r s
                                                         r gave me some more DIAZiiPAivl 5mg
nd as soon as I heard her voice
                                                         e have helped but i t i s s t i l l
e home s t r a i g h t away.        .Yhile w a it in g

 from work phoned to see i f I was

anly had to put tne phone down and
                                                         Anfiela for the minutes silence.
e I was s i c k .
                                                          and got into the ground at 1.30p.m.

                                                         n and aat there with hem in the
 and h e r mum and dad I j u s t h eld
                                                         et of flowers and all the scarves
ried.        I n the end they s a t me on
                                                          it was sad, yet so beautiful,
w ife, came i n with                  ind a few
                                                         e had to die for it to be done,
aep me awake, because my wife t o l d
                                                         irst time myself actually going
  back i n to the Hillsborough ground in my mind and I s t a r t e d to cry.                              As

  i t b u i l t up to the minutes s i l e n c e , I could c l e a r l y see the peoples

  fac e s and h e a r the c r i e s f o r help, and I f e l t so s ic k and churned up.                        I
                             nob
  v/as th in k in g t h i s was such a good idea a f t e r a l l so I went home and went
                               A
  to bed.



  I have had a s o c i a l worker coming i n to counsel me and t a l k and be

  sympathetic.       His name i s              , •quite a p a t i e n t man, because be fo re a l l

  t h i s happened I used to be          C jtu ite    a ; Happy-go-lucky person.          Now I c a n ' t

 be bothered to do anything.-' We are t r y i n g to t r a c e the g i r l s r e l a t i v e s

  to see i f t h i s w i l l help them to know someone t r i e d to h el p he r,

 because I f e e l i f I met them i t would help me because I f e e l so heavy

 witn g u i l t .   I could do no more, i t w il l sta y with me f o r e v e r , h e r face

 crying i o r he lp, but i t might j u s t take away some of the h e lp le s s n e s s I

 f e e l about .ier.    A boy,     „ike i s t r y in g so kindly to f i n d them f o r me.
                                    -t
 I know he i s t r a i n e d to tr y and cope >vith tnese s i t u a t i o n s , but i t

 must be hard l o r ai~. as .veil.              I z'eel quite sure t h a t without him I

 would fe e l a lot: '.sorse.      I t s oiii;.        trying to fi n d these r e l a t i v e s t u a t

 keeps me from crac..ing up.



 I then went back to the doc tors on the 26th April 1969 f o r a f u t h e r sic k

note f o r work and now my bowels nave been s o f t since the Sunday a f t e r

£oing to A n fie id .     Tuesday nig ht was t e r r i b l e , I c o u l d n 't move f o r pains

i n my stomach tnrough f o r c in g myseli and nothing l e f t to come, so the

d o c to r gave me I.'.iODIUL cap sule s.             I took two s t r a i g h t away which d i d ' n t

work so I took another one.               The next time I went to the t o i l e t and

a f t e r nine cap sule s i t stopped.               The doctor th in k s my nerves caused i t

as I d o n 't l i k e being on my own f o r too long.                  I s t a r t to worry and t h i n k

about what happened.         I went back on the 3rd May 1989 f o r a f u t h e r note

f o r work and to t e l l him my back i s s t i l l s o r e .            He has now given me

more DIAZEPAM 5mg and i s reducing the dosage i n two weeks to t r y and
b r i n g me o f f them.    He also gave me more GO-PROXAMOL f o r my back.                 I ’ve

asked him to sign me back to work because I'm a f r a i d of l o s i n g my

job, even though he said to stay o f f another week.



For the r e s t of my l i f e I w il l always be g r a t e f u l f o r the f a c t t h a t a

man r e l i e v e d h im se lf and t h a t I l i k e f o o t b a l l so much I moved so t h a t

I could see who was ta k in g the corner k ic k s .



Also f o r the r e s t of my l i f e I w il l f a i l to see', i f those gates were

opened, why was■ n t the tunnel blocked o f f then?



95 l i v e s would not have been l o s t , not only t h e i r l i v e s but thousands

of l i v e s have changed..      I f o r one w il l never f o r g e t the look on t h a t

poor g i r l s f a c e , and the boy who I thought I had saved, then l o s t ,



I have an e ig h t week old son who I love and keeps me sane, a b e a u t i f u l

wife who c a re s so de ar ly f o r me.       I love them bo th, but why do I s t i l l

f e e l so empty?.
                                                    >nday I went to a Church mass service
pool will say as follows                                feel bette r i f I attend Church, however
                                                    £h.       I went to Fazakerley Hospital and
i t b a l l Club for the Kop end.


>me baby A rt h ri ti s of the spine.    I am a
                                                        crushed in the incident and the thoughts
;r ray back.    I would not describe myself as a
                                                    Dung baby again distresses me.


                                                    i not seem to care about people who had
me run by Sefton Metropolitan Borough Council
                                                        Section and they did not react very

fin a l football match between Liverpool and
d Wednesday a t Hillsborough.
                                                    s ground were appalling when compared
                                                    of cordons of Police who were checking
.45.     X had a septic toe and was concerned
                                                    a ll ground.


                                                    ned the Police should have f i l t e d
    behind the goal post.    I stood in a crash
                                                    action.
’ow.      About 5 minutes before the s t a r t of
ing so I moved across to the ri g h t hand
                                                    hink was from l i f t i n g up peoples bodies
                                                    t even though I am a labourer because
                                                        a bag of cement which i s e n tir e ly
uld see that people were begining to be
ra the A Section to the B Section.

                                                    y bad diarrhoer.
    blue from^eneral mass of people down at

                                                    er ta b lets and I am also taking a form

    ront of a crash b ar rie r and seemed to be

                                                    ocident as I have j u s t not f e l t like
                                                        attendance and ra re ly took a day of f
the fence from A to B Section and I was



                                                        Aunty who was la id out in a Chapel of
    gates to the D Section should be opened,
                                                    t and at peace and I did not find that
nbathing as there was so much room there.
                                                    al Worker who i s giving counselling to

arted with more and more people coming

                                                    rfhen I arrived home I was sick on the
                                                    ays I feel g u il ty to s t i l l be aliv e and
1   you come to the steps.
                                                    I feel that I would have been k i l l e d .

0 wards    the entrance because of the number
                                                    iame of the g i r l and the boy who died
 side and I was in e f fe c t being pushed
                                                    3   my g r ie f .   At the moment I find that
ack up again.
                                                    ny g r ie f in order to make myself feel
.better.


Originally I was told that the girl who I had held and who may have died in my arms was
Victoria Hicks however, I have been told that it was not her and it may be a Paula
Smith.
D.O.B.   13.11.39




In the week leading up to the match at Hillsborough on Saturday 15th April

I acquired a number of tickets, including my own.       This was a terrace

ticket for the Leppings Lane end.


Consequently on 15th April    I left liverpool   at 11.30am.   I was in a car

driven by a friend,                     I had no choice in the route that was

taken by I            |jn driving us to the match.   As I recall   it was the

route that took us over the Fennines.       It was a pretty scenic route.

We didn't encounter many difficulties on route.       There were the usual

stoppages but there was nothing that particularly de.»ayea us.



Consequently we arrived in Sheffield at at>out 1.30pm.


             simply parked the vehicle.    It wouid have beer about a 10 or 15

minute walk from the ground itself.


We then made our way to the ground.       I was in the company of my girlfriend
                                                      We had of course travelled

with I          1 and another frienc             but after parking up we then

went our separate ways.


We then walked the distance to Hillsborough, arriving there at approximately

2.10.    I was immediately struck by the number of people who were gathered

in the relatively small area of space outtade the      ijrnsvi^es.



I could see that there were some queues which were organised into the turnstiles.

I say organised, what I mean is that they were organised in a fashion.          There

were many people milling around and I immediately formed the opinion that there

was a total     lack of organisation.




                                   1.
    €


        My girlfriend and I immediately joined a queue which was going into one

€       of the turnstiles.    Because of the chaos I couldn't tell you exactly how

        many turnstiles were in operation.



        About 50 yards away from the turnstiles there appeared to be plenty of

        Police Officers in attendance but once you got past that particular point

        then it seemed to me that it was every man for himself.        Thereafter there

        didn't seem to be adequate Police presence.      There were Officers on horseback

        and they did appear to be trying to organise the difficult situation that

        was obviously occurring.



        There die seem, however,    to be a total   lack of co-ordination and organisation

        at the turnstiles themselves.



        By now the crowd was building up so much so that at the entrance to each

        turnstile there would be about 4 individuals each trying to work themselves

        into a position whereby they could go into the turnstile next.



        I have tc say that there were queue jumpers.       This happens all the time and

        no matter what game you attend.        However this could possibly have been

        alleviate; by the presence of more Police Officers at each turnstile entrance.



        There was a Police Officer on the turnsiile that we were actually queuing inrc

        but he was about 10 yards away from where he was really needed.



        At 2.45p-   it became extremely crowded outside.    There was a lot of pushing and

        shoving.    Fortunately at that particular time we managed to gain entry to the

        ground.



        I was neither searched before I gained entrance to the ground or just inside

        the ground after I had     come through the turnstile area.



        Once on ~he other side     of the turnstiles and thus in the ground      we then

        automatically followed     the flow of people through the tunnel which     led to the

        centre of the Leppings     Lane terrace.




                                          2.
c

    I had never been to the ground before and therefore I had no idea of how

    it was set out.     Consequently I assumed at that particular time that I

    was going into the right end.



    As it transpired I was of course going into the area for which I had a valid

    ticket but at that time I did not know that the terracing was sectioned as

    it was.      there were plenty of people arriving at the tunnel          at the same time

    as myself.     I have to say that conduct of people in that tunnel           was a dam

    sight more orderly than the conduct of people outside.               Having said that

    it really was chaotic outside the ground.



    My girlfriend and I managed to filter into the pen which was immediately ber.inc

    the goal.    It was quite packed.            We managed to find ourselves a position about

    halfway down the terracing.       Obviously people were still        corr.ing in from the

    back arid it was a situation whereby we were being            'pushed down into the

    terracing but my girlfriend and I managed to manoeuvre ourselves into that

    position halfway down.



    I think that we took up this position at about 2.50pm.



    I then recall   that the teams came out which would be at 2.55 and obviously

    people began tc     applaud their presence on the pitch.          It was st that time

    that there did seen, to be far more pressure from behind.             I agree there

    was some kind of surge.     When the crowd surges forward in such a situation

    your instinctive reaction is to try arid stand your ground and to brace

    yourself against the pressure from behind.



    On this occasion,    however,   I also had my girlfriend's interests in rind and

    I was trying to save her from being pushed even further down.



    Consequently I was not able to stand my ground but like hundreds of others

    I was forced further down the terrace along with my girlfriend.



    Experience of cramming on terraces told me at the time that once the game

    had kicked off then gradually the crowd would sort itself out and the pushing

    would decrease and although you would net find yourself with plenty of room you

    would probably find that you would at least be able to watch the game with a

    degree of comfort.



                                        ■3   •
    C

        However this day it was different because the pressure just increased.
C
        I realised after a short while         that things down at the front of the

        terracing seemed particularly bad.        Other people around me must have felt

        the sa-ne as I did for,   of course,    people were then trying to find out

        what was going on and this didn't help either because of course with people

        leaning forward to see what was happening down front only added to the

        pressure on the back of the people at the front even more so.



        At one particular time with the pressure of the crowd from behind I was

        actually forced out of the crowd and was in mid-air about 3 or 4 feet off

        the ground.     I still managed tc- hold on to            By this time people

        were clirting out of the perimeter fencing and I could see that lads on

        the pitch itself were breaking up the hordings to be used as stretchers.



        I then became thoroughly determined to get myself and my girlfriend out of

        the beclar .



        1 managed to manoeuvre myself over to the left hand side of the terracing as

        you look at the pitch.     Against the railings I then managed to manoeuvre

        myself ar.d Sylvia back up the terracing and eventually back out through

        the tunr.el .   This was no easy task when one considers what was happening in

        that area and the fact that people were still trying to come down the tunnel

        into the terrace.



        My only concern     by then was to get away from the ground to protect the

        welfare of myself and my girlfriend.



        After cp-.ing out of the tunnel we could see that there was a main gate which,

        had beer, opened and the crowd was still spilling through that particular gate

        and there was also a flow of people such as myself leaving the tunnel wanting

        to get out of the confines of the stadium.



        After leaving the confines of the ground we were then in the turnstile area once

        again and it was still packed.     I have no recollection of seeing any Police

        officers there.     There were obviously Policemen there but my only concern was to

        get away from the ground sc consequently I wasn't paying much attention.




                                          4.
    c
e       We immediately headed back to the area in which the car had been parked.

        After reaching the car it was about 15 to 20 minutes later before

                                     returned.   We were all obviously distressed and

        shocked by what had gone on.


        At that particular time none of us knew that there had been fatalities.

        However having regard to the         experience we simply had nc appetite to watch

        the football match.        At that   particular time we had nc idea that     the game was

        to be abandoned or indeed had been abandoned.



        We then left Sheffield in the vehicle and arrived back in Liverpool            at

        approximately 5.30pm.


        It was whilst     we were on the motorway that we listened to the       radio and we

        learnt for the first time that there had been          fatalities.    At that time they

        were talking about 30 deaths.


        As soon as I heard about fatalities I was obviously concerned about the welfare

        of my 4 sons who I knew had gone to the ground.



        Upon reaching     Liverpool    I immediately went to the home of my eldest daughter

        to enquire as     to whether or not she had heard about mysons.          She was in a

        state of panic    .    She hadn't    heard anything.



        My ex wife also resides across the road         from my daughter   and she   was coming

        over constantly       to   establish whether or not we had heard anything.          The

        next thir.g I knew was that one of my other daughters came rushing across to

        say that my ex wife, who is quite highly strung, had suffered a mild heart

        attack arid had been rushed to hospital.



        We were constantly trying the emergency number that was given out but it was

        engaged continually.        Eventually we then went to Farnsworth Street POlice

        Station to establish whether or not they could be of any assistance to us

        in finding out whether or not my 4 sons were OK.
I            •




     We then went.      I have to say that the Police at Farnsworth Street were

     excellent in that they were most helpful not only to myself but to many

     other people who had gone to the Station for the same purpose as mvself.



    They managed to contact the Sheffield Police direct.                Eventually I was told

     to gc away for half an hour,      to carry on trying the emergency numbers and

     that they would do their best to find out about my sons in the meantime.



    Half an hour later I returned and I was told by the officers to gc away and

    try ana find out what items of clothing my 4 sons had been wearing.                They also

    gave me- £ telephone number for me to telephone once I had acquired that
    inf or.-at: o n .



    Subsequently at about 6.50pm I then learnt that my 4 sons were all right.

    I discovered that one son                   , had been taken to hospital but because of

    the relatively minor nature of his injuries he chose not to see the

    medical practitioner whose skills were needed more badly elsewhere.



    Thereafter Tuesday 18th April         I was still suffering from the stress and shock

    of the incident and       I honestly felt at times that I was going to have a heart

    attack for my heart       rate would increase without warning arid I would have, what
    I could only consider to be, palpitations.



    Consequently I went       to hospital to seek         some kind of guidance on this particular

    point.       It was a genuine worry        of mine.    I was then given the relevant tests

    ie an EC3 which fortunately established that I had no particular condition

    of the heart.       The doctor did ask me if I had experienced any undue stress

    recently and of course I explained to him about the previous Saturday.               He then

    advised re to take it as easy as possible and that if I was still suffering

    from stress then I should make use of the various counselling agencies that

    had beer, set up to assist people such as myself who had suffered from the trauma
    of this tragedy.




                                          6.
*
I*




     I have not seen my GP since.                I        do   consider however that I have not get over

     my experience.                  I have an obvious aversion at this moment in time to

     crowds.             I consider that it will be a long time before I venture into a

     football            ground again and that is if I ever do.



     I steer clear of crowds.                 I smoke far more            heavily      than I ever die and I

     appear to be considerably more anxious that                          I was.       I am also worried

     constantly about the effect the tragedy had on my youngest son|                                    |who

     has actually signed as an apprentice p ;rofessional with Nottingham Forest

     Football            Club.


     This disaster has had a devastating effect on him and I an. genuinely concernea

     for his future wellbeing.


     This incident is something that I will never forget.                               At the height of the

     proble-s on that terracing I remember that there were people falling to the

     ground under my feet and there were others in obvious distress and there was

     nothing that myself, my girlfriend or apparently anybody else could have done

     about it.


     The dav after the disaster                I went tothe Cathedral                in Liverpool for    the

     service         that        they held for the             dead.I was         standing outside on          m e piazza

     and after a while it began tc get a                        bid crowded and my instinctive reaction

     was tc leave.               I   actually felt that bad even though the crowd was more

     orderly than any that I have ever seen in my life.


     Returning to the                events of the 15th April         I   d i d    not see ar.y acts of hooliganism

     at all.             I saw the situation where people were panicking for their lives arid

     o b v i o u s l y    when that happens then there is a general                    lack of consideration for

     the next person.                Quite frankly, however, we should net have beer, put into

     a situation like that where there                         was a threat to life.



     I personally                consider that the             cause of the tragedy        was a lack          of

     organisation                in that there was             insufficient Police officers deployed atthe

     Leppings Lane end and I consider that there was a lack of                                guidance and

     supervision inside the ground ie in the area leading to the tunnel in question.




                                                     7.
I have indicated to you that by the time I arrived on the terracing that

there were more than sufficient people in that area even at that stage.

They however continued to let people flow into that part of the ground
when quite frankly there was nc room for them to fan out.
                                                                      & ^A                          3 . .j£$\Qas^ /C i^ /J^ /jijL ci- —
                                                                                                                                      /£ b                                                                   (SIq^ ^ L ^ olLcL^
jl&A^                       UJc^L                     '^&%>UjL&sa^                                s$*J              U                  'T                 ^               J                 6U*stJ ./&*<&£.._____
                                                                                                                                                                                                         .__

jLLsssUJL.                     &4. - X u ) __                                                                                         iS-U^r.
    L.                               1 ...v/                                                     \gb\s7SJ\As^Si
                                                                                                   j V ~
                                                                                                                ^                                        <w-i

(y/t.                                                                                            I IS             A iyt^K                          (a /&




                                          jStXn^.                                       /t^t

                       jta^LeA.— J&tJbck,                                                        — &3=flJSL.                                                                                                          ^tP~r

                               i.O                a m a j v u aJ jl

                                      _    j/u£S»_                                          d L & c L ___

J!&u                u u a   — y^>..^vucZ

✓U*A~.. , & a -

                                                                                                                                                         I       ^Ct-O

                                                                                                                                                           L A
J0S16^{1—                                                                                          tA&LAJ^LukJLh^                                                                                                y^^sJL-

J                                                     gsVld.                                        ^^e24-ia^<a_

J ^& c d z c d .                                                       SlsCoCe*                                                           __________ ^                           <>&**sSvC-,

                                                                                        Jjsts^2£*s*~~___ 'X^LtO sUSCLs)                                                          -^^^crec^-v^. -S’!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 j_________

                            h / n - M J a M & ( 1- d & j j L ^ - ^ b .                                                                                                                                             .'?-:1S p ^\

^^LtUJX^y^tK                                ytA jeM s*'                                                                   u£_/(MZLO                                                                      (    < 4S t£L --
                      Q^_yQ^t^t3d^r:__ ^J^^rt-i^^te*--t^___________ ^ ^                                                                                                                         jf* 1        £     ^t^V_ ___

tsJXxjLb— .--- £&l44JL--- 4a X ^ ^ S ^ __i 5 ^ W t v l < ^ |                                                                                                                                                      _^<-<5<tf._

                                                              -i/(SLA—                  <3.-- .>.                                                        <2-'t-g^



    -------------                ^   . W    l _   .   « ^ W   %   A   ^ ----------- W   K   f   .J ^ w r w -( ^ « T K   > _____ / W   V   ______ ✓ ^ U   ^ U   C J t^ V       - r - > i y   i ^ ^ j y                 ^     ----------------------




                                                                                        . ._ ^ ^ U ^ & J j L t ^ d .                            _A               ^                                      y U 2 e ^ L ^rr-f

                                                                                                                                                                                j           & s £ 'Z           2 > o pm-.
                                                                                                                                                  \
          LiJJruJU-*     ^CO&r                                        | ^ J^

                                                                            ^VL^S                s O isl..u CL.   LTT&a -^j

      Q*mL- Vi^&ic&UA—                   ia/zia^ _ .



      / O ^ M a ^ / L — / ^ V -<£*^0. __yQ,S&L<JL ..^                    . UJZXA^J ^ _ 't^L<^o( ^Jij^/v^________ __

      /lASLOVod*         /5j£ASQ<ss1Cx£._ _*/£Z/i*~4jtsO . .                                                      _ ____        ____

                            r                              zus-ttasxzd.
                                <ul&Ks      C9^JI~                                <2^ a o ^ u l                               ! ^cX^ocX,

                            /&&4^ .                    J ,/(A ^ - du>cU e^i sdk                                                    /ffiji-'
                            & s Q — 3 , J L o u l <5l.           ^      £     r      -       r     e    yCi^cA-o^~.



      A Jr. C-         d^^a-aeA----

      B> ( X < ^ S ^ U           ^T*^lyLO .^Cois&CA- ~A a >&u > -C/g^v*M - ^»tag                                                          a

      3-                  - / U + A ^ t s i j ^ > ^ C r S ^ yS> _                                       ...&^*-r.
      £y^tA^s^(L /nAjljLs-                ^J L a   a                                     B — Cty^euA^----

                                                                                                            -£^=<&c^          i^ a £


                                                                                                                                  /£ d t* *cJL-

                                                                     /C tL c n jis       .
      ^/sa^o           aws+r&{. %*u i * & £ / L            i z ^ s L b h s ' e*^_

      ^•&h*^LA*^a+^,               (^foCC&i&e*c$-                                                                             y^q^ j   ..__


     ✓2^- r i Z ^ Q ^ e r y ^ ,..^u<cfjls-'—               .'^X^UL'         j 7£L*jc >

                        .. .i6o£'.                     ^    /!'\£*€La s '                    y^X>*<1/U»-,
                                                                                                        ^ - ^ ^ iV.._                             ^

                                                           ■« ^ L < a s o y i ^ S .^t^n'tEL. $CL< s i .

                                         -Xx»o__

                                           .^drCi^sjZ.

—    y & G s yhAs>XA*<is&o&l*!3              /£&Q^rs^                4~P?L£^ ^ l*o ZP~*j                _



    ._S/*'Q6t'
             —            .^ ^ < 1^5 ,

      a   .      <2£S—                                                c tA & u J r ^                                  ._.#VC-<_*1^CC^jZ-a„
     A ^ l L a ..7. . _              ^         ^
     3- J&SZL2    _


                                     -&AS&4-           /£ >
                                                                               /feClxO                                     do        3


                                             3                         st±4jl^        S&L&st              y&JZs-Q'              XjJtCUq

                                                                g>-v^_...             __/fj2^sTZt-<£^ .



              v£"     y/£ci*s\sv<Ji^.                .                                           /£-u-<v_ y^Octy^               -^£>

                                                                 6>v^       •/6^s>.^ ^ f e r c L - u u             <X>-e^e_

  V      -       Q         ,         f

 /^3£>                                                                         _ ^i^€<>i^»vt<3




                yZ/L*&£- _/<3^6-r                              .._ p < 6 £ c & ~ >   i&*rz s£&je.~

                                                                                                          s   O O & i~s ±j£,-




 5H^C^ .S^LfL- ^X<o£c*£n*!.              —            ------




                     _&/t          / & J i s - y ^ s & L * s C ' ..._____ f$rf&Cx 2^_.                                     o£k<.

  C*>-‘
      GZs-^£L'                                                                                SlsU«*&W-               e^Vu<Jk.

 P&£jp£^-y6&^<!UA-                                                                                 ^yo£d?^

                                                                S^&<q C &        fOs(5&-(}rck. --O-^*—

                                                                                     <*rU ^£h      /£jZs£L.        ^^<^(JL           .. . .    CLXJ-.

,<&L^                           s£KjZ-               / £ > ^ /                                  ^ < D - t > * - - C ^

             ^ t ? ^ K X           4l + ~ ^ L        s^^5sz<yx>~~~~<Lo ^^                                                         L _____

 -Qsdu&l'-                                                                                                ^ .__...         _             . _            ._..

                    lASZU                                                                                                        A            i^        ( J

_ y£*&A/fL'— /ls\yB—                                                                  _.^t^/

r ^                         ^                    ^                           ^                                                                . .tfau*.




                     /6t*su(l                                       J^ts(rQ*s^                                       ' H ^ o ^ - «*-<sl^jC         *.

                     'C L u L .'    C *A s Y T A r& tL                    v,         /^ x ^ .'C U o p j                —   $>-e*f^                  & t*« 3
                                                                             /




                                                                Xt^S-O

                 $£&2*U   _____ --,------------ —
                                                ---0 ^ — 00~c/X-' f

            /CQ^tesSrdg^k.   s^b-—        —

i   O   m    -




                                                                         1




                                                                         (
5th May 1989




I    was     involved       in       the    incident    at       Hillsborough            Stadium         on    the    15th    April

1989 when I was subsequently injured as a result of the crush on the terracing




I came by my ticket about four or five days before the day in question.

The ticket entitled me to admission to the Leppings Lane end terrace




The     evening        before,          Friday       14th    April,          a    group       of    us    travelled          over    to

Sheffield.            There       were       about    nine       or     ten      of     us    and   we    travelled         over    in

a mini bus/van which had been hired.




We actually slept in the van                        which we parked in a lay bye outside of Sheffield

What       actually      happened            was    that     when       we       arranged the            trip,       it     was    with

a     view      to    going       to       Sheffield       for    the        Friday          evening,      spending         sometime

there        socialising             and    then     finding       accomodation               there.           However,       by    the

time       we   all    met       in    our    home     district         in       Old    Swan       , Liverpool            , time    was

getting by and consequently we ended up spending the whole evening in Liverpool

and    then      after      the       pubs    had    closed       in    Liverpool            and    after      purchasing          some

carry out beer           , we then got into the van and drove over towards Sheffield.




Consequently,            the      following          morning      we     continued            onto       Sheffield,         arriving

in    Sheffield        at     about        7.30am.      We       then    went          and    found a cafe where we had

some breakfast.




We     then     went     to      a     Gateway      Supermarket,             which       was not         all     that      far     from

the    ground.         We     parked         the    vehicle       there.          We     then went to the            local shops
and    we purchased a football which we then used for a kick around from about

9am to 12 noon.              This was on the car park of Gateway.




At about 12 o'clock we decided to make our way down to the ground.

On    our       way    we    bumped       into     one    of      our    mates    father who was            in his vehicle.

He asked us            if we were going for a drink to the , I think, Fox public house.

We    had       a   quick     vote    on     the      matter       and    we decided to go there for a couple

of pints before going to the match.




We    realised          that       with    the     time      only       being    around      mid    day   we    still       had    at

least       a       couple    of     hours       to    play       with    before       we   really    had      to    get    to    the

ground.




We then set off in the direction of the Fox public house, using the directions

given to us by my mates father.




We    appeared          to   get     lost,       however,          and    we    then    spoke      with   a police officer

and    asked          him    for    directions.              He    then    told    us       that   all the public houses

within a three mile radius of the ground were closed.




We    carried          on    walking       for        what    must       have    3/4     miles     before      eventually          we

encountered            some        other   Liverpool              supporters       and      they    pointed         out    the    Fox

public house to u s .




Consequently, we arrived at the Fox at about 1pm.
Clearly,          we     weren't          watching           our    watches         at     that     stage        for    we    realised

we still had plenty of time.




The pub itself was packed

It    seemed        to    be    that      this     was       the    only       pub open on the side of the ground

designated to the Liverpool supports and as a result , it was full of Liverpoo

fans.




After arriving there it took about 20 minutes for us to get served.

Obviously,             because       it    was    difficult          to       get    served,      in       the   hour    or       so that

we were present in that building I think I consumed two pints of beer.

-These      had     been       the     only       drinks          that    I    had       consumed      that      particular          day.

I appreciate              that      I had        been    drinking         the       night before and perhaps running

into     the      early        hours      but     certainly         from the time we set off in the morning

for    Sheffield             from    the    place       where       we    had       parked     up    overnight,          we       had not

been drinking anymore alcohol.




In    fact     the       drinks        that      we    bought       were       purchased       as      a    result      of    a    double

round when we had our one and only opportunity of getting to the bar.




I    have      to      say     that       the    Liverpool          fans       in    and     outside         that      public       house

behaved        impeccably.                There        was    a    good       atmosphere.           People       were    exhuberant

and there was certainly no acts of hooliganism that I witnessed.




We    consumed           our    drinks           and    at    about       five      to    two we then all walked down.

The whole company I was with left at the same time.

It was roughly a twenty minute walk or so.
We thus came near the ground at about twenty past two

As we were walking down                     towards the ground I remember seeing about 30 mounted

policemen coming away from a car park or at least some waste land.




A lot of police officers were congregated in that area.

The   nearer           you got to the ground                  the less the police officers were                inclined

to    let        you    stand       and   wait      for       friends     They    were    constantly       moving     you

on towards the ground.




By    the    time        I    arrived       at     the    Leppings       Lane,     the         time    would beas       Isay

about       20    past       25 past      two,     and        although there       were        plenty of people         around

the queues at that time seemed quite well defined and in order.

There were queues going into each turnstile.

I    think       there       were    about       four queues and they were all                 about 10 to 12 feet

in length.




There were a lot of people milling about on the road.

I did hear some people asking if there were any spare tickets going.

That, however,               is usual where ever Liverpool F.C. play.




As soon as we got there we then joined a turnstile queue.

I now know that the turnstile at which I queued was the one directly adjacent

to the gate that was opened.




Whilst       we    were       standing       there       a few of our friends saw a lad who was known

to    them        and    they       asked    if    we     would    hold    their    place      in    the   queue   while

they went over to have a quick chat, that we did.



The queue moved along and                        I then called to my friend,                                   telling

him   he     had        better      hurry    up.         He    shouted   back    words    to   the    effect   that    he

would see me in there because he wanted to go and buy some cigarettes.
I   thus       continued          on    my    way        into      the     queue         and    eventually          I went       through

the turnstile.




I   was      not      searched          by    any        police          officer         before       entering          the    turnstile

but       on    the otherside of                   the       turnstile         within the         confines         of the        stadium

I was searched




Thinking        back,       I recall              only seeing in the immediate turnstile area                                    outside

the    stadium,            two    police              officers,         one was a        female       mounted       police       officer

and    the      other       was    a    male police officer who was on foot and was stood near

to the turnstile that I entered. He was standing between two queues.




As soon as I was                  in the stadium grounds,                     I     then went and purchased a                    lottery

ticket of some description off a steward who was selling them.

I   saw    two       stewards          who    was      standing          at    the    entrance         to    the    stairs       leading

to the upper west stand.                              I didn't see any others.

There      were       certainly no                    police       officers          nor stewards           at     the entrance          to

the        tunnel leading to the                   particular terrace in question.




When      you       come    through          the       gate       after       the    turnstile,         the        first       think    you

see       if    the tunnel          and      on       looking          through      the tunnel         theplaying             pitch      is

very much in evidence.




Consequently,              you naturally gravitate down that tunnel                                    towards          the terracing

area.          At    that        particular            time       it    is by       no    means       obvious       that       there    are

other      ways       onto       the    terrace.              I    had     never         been    to    the       ground       before    and

consequently,              as     far    as       I    was    concerned,             that       was   the        only    way     I    could

see to get onto the terrace where my ticket would allow me.
Because         I had       stopped     to    buy      a gold goal            ticket or a lottery ticket,                    there

was only myself and                                       who actually walked down the tunnel together.

My other friends had obviously already gone down there.




We then walked down the tunnel slowly and we emerged onto the terrace

There were plenty of people on the terracing at that particular time.

It wasn't packed but nor was it empty




My    friends         and    I   then      stood       in     a    group      near to the entrance            of the tunnel

but actually on              the terracing itself.

I would hazzard a guess that we were six feet away from the entrance itself.




The time would now be about 2.45pm

Gradually            it started       to fill up and so much so that you began to get pushed

further down the terraces.

When       there      was    a   surge       of    pushing          you    would travel down            the     steps perhaps

8,    9,    10       steps    but     then        only      recover        about 2/3       steps     in   making       your    way

back up the t e r r a c e s.




Consequently,               gradually        you       were       being    forced        down   to     the    bottom     of    the

terrace area.

Also       we       moved    from    the     left        hand       side      of   the    terrace      near     the    top    ( as

you look at the pitch) to the bottom right hand side of the terracing.




It got          to    the    stage    when        we   were        at   the    bottom of the         terracing that when

the    crowd          was    surging         forward,             you   realised         that   there     was    no    movement

back and, of course, people were being jammed right up front.




It    was       a    situation       whereby           myself       and    two     friends      were      jammed      near    to   a

barrier and it may have been the barrier that eventually gave way.
One    of        my    friends,            ________________             was   jammed         right     up       against        the    bar    by

his    waist.               I    could          see     that     he     was   beginning           to   panic           and    he    asked    me

to     help       him       and       I    managed         to     maneouvre        myself         into      a      situation w he r e         I

had     both          arms       braced          against         the    barrier     either          side        of     him     and    I    then

pushed back with all the force I could manage




When    I had              managed         to    force        the crowd back a small distance,                               I then braced

my    right           knee       against          the      bar    and    thus     with       my   free        right         hand     I helped

to    push        him       by       the       head     under      the    bar.          He   then      popped          up    further       down

the terracing.




I     then       tried          to    stay       in     that      position        for    a    while         but      quite      frankly      my

arms        gave       out       on       me     and,      of    course,      I    was       forced         onto       the    bar     myself.

However,           because            of       the     force     of     the   crowd      I was         litterally             squeezed      out

of the gap between the bar and the crowd behind me, so much so that I actually

rose out of the crowd itself.




I was jammed against the bar this time by both knees




A    fellow           in    front         of the bar could see the position                            I was           in and he helped

me     in    forcing            back       the        crowd     who    were   jamming         one      of     my     legs     against       the

bar which enabled me to get that foot onto the bar so I was now in a situation

where        I    was       standing             on    the      bar    with   one       foot      whilst          my    other       foot    was

still jammed on the otherside of the bar.




After some manipulation,                             I managed to get my other leg free




I then           waivered            on    the       bar   until       I couldn't        control         my     balance and I fell

forward.              I fell onto what was litterally a carpet of people.
The    same       fellow          tried    to    assist      me     by    grabbing             my    hand       and to some extent

I    regained          my    balance       and     I       ended    up    in       a   semi         standing          position    on       the

bar again.




This    same       fellow          then    said        to    me    that        I    should          run    to    the    bars.         I    saw

no    alternative.                 There    was    no room for me to get down back onto the floor.

There was no way of escaping.

I then in my panic litterally ran across people                                                to try and get out.                Within

reach of the            bars, I tripped                and fell          and       I managed to clamber up and reach

the    bar       and    eventually              drag myself         onto       the        perimeter             fencing.         It       must

be    remembered            that     I was constantly feet off the ground because,                                           of course,

this all happened on the top of other spectators.




It was sheer panic on the terracing at that time.

It     was       not    only       myself       who     acted      like        this,       there          were     many      others        and

in the circumstances it is perfectly understandable




I remember,            when       I was first on the bar with my leg jammed,                                          I was screaming

at    the    police          officers        who      were        looking          into    the       terracing          from    the       walk

way around the pitch                  , to open the release gate onto the pitch




I    then    saw       an    officer       did     open      the    gate       and        about       10 people         scrambled out

very    quickly             and    others       tried       to    follow       but     then         the    officer        unbelievably

began       to    push       them     back       into       the    crowd       and        at    the       same        time   attempt        to

close the gate again.




I    always       remember          that    when       I    managed       to       grab        hold       of    the    fence     I could

hear a girl screaming for what seemed like ages.
I remember              looking down towards her and could see that she was                                               in distress.

I    remember           also        that       as     the    people          managed      to     scramble         through        the    gate

when       the     police          officer          opened       it,    a    gap       formed    and       this    girl    simply fell

to the ground and it was quite obvious that she never emerged again.




As    soon        as    any       gap     appeared          on       that    terracing         it    was    closed       automatically

by the force of bodies from behind.




As    I clambered                 over     the      fence            I caught my right ankle on one                      of the spikes

which caused acute and considerable pain




I     then       jumped           down    on     to    the       track        and         a    lad    came    over to      me and asked

if I was alright and I told him that I                                        was.

I     then       turned           and    looked        towards         the     terracing            looking       for    my     mates    and

as     I    did        so    I     then     saw       people         with    their       faces       jammed       right    against       the

perimeter          fencing.               I could see people vomiting and with their eyes rolling

upwards.                I nearly         vomited        myself          when       I    saw     the    condition          of people       at

the front              of that terracing.               I realised             then for the first time the enormity

of the situation and the fact that thing were desperate in that area.




The    same            lad         who         came     to   me        and   asked if         I was    alright          began    to ask what

we    could            do and       quite        frankly         I    was      saying         I didn't       know       what    we     could

do to help the others.




We then went to a police sergeant who                                         was        standing there                  who      was just waving

his        arms    around           and     we      told     him       to      do something           and    to     stop        the    game.

He    said        that       he    couldn't stop                 the game. The lad who I was                      with then burst

into tears and we realised that                                  we had to do something.
Consequently,          we    were      then        two      of    the    first       people        to    even     encroach          upon

the    pitch.         I remember           I went          towards      Steve        Nichol        and    was    , in     my       panic

and         stress, telling          him      to       stop      the game       because         people          were    dying.         I

remember        that    Steve        McMahon         ran        over    and     asked       what     was    going        on    and     I

said very much the same to him.




Eventually       people        began       to    realise          exactly       what    was        happening       and the game

was brought to a swift close.




The         players then       left        the       pitch       and people           then      began      to     converge          upon

the     terracing       to     try     and       get       the    people      out.          I   remember          seeing       before

this,       however,    police officers                just standing on the perimeter fencing urging

the crowd in the terraces to push back.




I     was    unable     to   see      the       gate       by    this    time    because           there    was        just    a    mass

of people who were obscuring my view of it.




My     next    concern       was      obviously             to    find     my    friends           and     establish          whether

or    not     they    were     alright.            It reached the stage where we were helping move

the         injured and      the      dying        and      indeed      the     dead,        across       the     pitch       to     the

area where the ambulances were entering the ground.




Eventually       I found        all      my     friends          with    the exception of one.                     We travelled

the    various       hospitals        searching             for    him.         It    was     in    one    of     the    hospitals

that    a nurse       looked at the injuries                      to my legs and she confirmed that there

was         nothing broken         but        that     I    should       simply        seek     medical          advice       when     I

reached home.




I think       that     after    visiting           the      hospitals         and what have you I arrived home

in Liverpool after 11pm
I    consider        that     the      blame    for       the   whole        incident         lies     firmly       at     the    door

of the police.




It     seemed        that    there       were    plenty         of        police       officers      well      away        from    the

ground       but     when     you      got    near    to     the      ground,          particularly          at     the    Leppings

Lane end there was a distinct shortage of police officers.




It    seemed       that      the      officers       on    duty       within       the    confines           of     the    stadium,

noteably        on    the    pitch       looking      into      that        terracing,         did     not    act     as    quickly

as    they    could       have     and    I was,      of course,            struck by the fact that when that

officer       initially        opened        that    gate       he    let       about    10 people           through and then

he    attempted        to     close      the    gate.           The       fact     is    that     by    letting           10 people

out of that area,              it would make              little or no difference at all                            to the crush

that was going on.




The    fact     may    well      be    that     by    opening         the       gate    and    letting those 10 people

then    their        lives     were      certainly         saved          but    the    gate    should        have        been    left

open    and     more people           should have been encouraged to come out of the terrace

as quickly as possible.




By    the    time      the    officers         did    start          to    do    something      about         it,    it    was,    of

course,      too late and people had already died.




The whole thing in my view could have been better organised.
4th. May 1 98 9 •




                                   TO THE HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

                               RE: LIVERPOOL V NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                                     SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1969 .



                               and myself a rr iv e d i n S h e f f ie ld at 2.05pm> we l e f t

the coach park and walked down towards the ground.                        We saw q u ite a l o t

of people j u s t l y i n g around on the grass embankments and s i t t i n g on

w a ll s .    I thought to myself then t h a t they were le a v in g i t a b i t l a t e .



7/e arrived, a t the Hillsborough gates about 2.20pm. ,,'hen we went through

the g a te s, we then s p l i t <up, Jim and Steve went t owards the stands

tu rn stile,                 and I went towards the t u r n s t i l e B f o r the Leppings

Lane stand ing .          I t was already congested, we were a l l squashed up then.



             and I s t a r t e a   to try to queue up fo r the t u r n s t i l e ,   but th ere was

no organization*.            There were three or four policemen on horseDack

snouting a t everyone to get in l i n e s ,             out you j u s t could not, wereas l a s t

year th ere were b a r r i e r s up to make you go i n t o l i n e s ,        and people were

checked before going past the Hillsborough gates to see i f they had a

t i c k e t , but t h i s year th e re was none of t h a t ,      so people even without

t i c k e t s were t r y i n g to get through the t u r n s t i l e .



When we managed to get to the t u r n s t i l e ,           the policeman who was on the B

one went through j u s t i n f r o n t of us saying " I ' v e had enough of t h i s . "

'He got through the t u r n s t i l e , there was qu ite a l o t of policemen st a n d in g

around c h a t t i n g and I said to                  "look at them standing th e re and
 i t s chaos o u t s i d e . " #e walked down the tunnel and we got to the bottom

 although our t i c k e t s were f o r 'B' we went in to ’A* compound, because 'B'

 looked q u ite f u l l and 'A' wasn't a l l t h a t f a r from i t as w ell, fe
   \
 worked our way down to the f r o n t near the p it c h fence and stood i n f r o n t

 of the b a r r i e r .     This was about 2.40pm.      We could see i n to the side

 s e c t i o n and we both remarked how empty i t was.



 We stood c h a t t i n g f o r a few minutes to an old man, then a la d st an din g

 behind ttie; baferier r e l i e v e d himself and I said to |            I11come on, l e t s

 move because i t w i l l smell i n a minute with the h e a t . " Also you c o u l d 'n t

 r e a l l y see the corner flag to see who took the cor ne rs, so we moved

 about si x or seven f e e t to the in d iv id u a l fence between us and the wide

 enclosure sweeping round to the Forest stands.



 Almost immediately people s t a r t e a to cry ana climb i n t o t h i s enclosure

 which vfas n ea rly empty.           So I put my foot on the bar of the fence and

had my thig h l i k e a s t o o l .      People would put t h e i r foot on ray tnigh and

lift    themselves up, and I would push tnem over.



While we were pushing peple over, some people s t a r t e a to tr y and climb
                       %
over onto the pitcr:, who were in turn pushed or poked back i n to the crowd

by the p o l i c e .       One lad a c tu a ll y got onto the p i t c h and stood on the

fence and was t e l l i n g people to push back, but he was pulled o f f the fence

by h i s h a i r and led away.



The po lice s t i l l d i d ' n t seem to grasp what was going on, they seemed to

th in k th e re was some s o r t of p itc h invasio n.       They seemed to be looking

a t i t and not ta k in g i t i n a t f i r s t .   While I was pushing people over

in t o the o t h e r s e c t i o n therewere two policemen standing on th-e o th e r sid e

of i t c at ch in g them, and I kept saying "why c a n ' t you open the gate and

l e t them through onto the p itc h and into the next s e c t i o n ? . "        But he
  c o u l d n 't answer and j u s t said "keep pushing them over." . People kept

  screaming a t police on the pitc h to help but they j u s t looked at us.


    \                                          '

 J u s t on 3 - 00pm I t o l d ________ to get over as i t was now g e t t i n g so bad you

 could hardly move.                  I t o l d him to meet me a t the coaches a f t e r .             He was

 one of the l a s t people I pushed over.                       Then i t became t h a t packed I was

 pushed around and was f a c in g the stands and looking up at. the match

 kick o f f .                                                                           0 -J-C



 As the match kicked o f f ther e was l i k e a sway, and I managed to tu rn

 around and face the p i t c h .              Then i t was’ t i g h t again and my arms were

 pinned to my s i d e s , one was being pushed through the r a i l i n g s and was

 hiarting as well as my ch es t.                   I s t a r t e d to find my b re a th in g g e t t i n g

 h ard er.      I then noticed a boy between 16 and 20 years old; about th r e e

 people i n f r o n t of me, h is face going pale then tu rn in g l i k e blue,                        and I

 then r e a l i z e d he was s u ff o c a tin g .         I s t a r t e d to shout a t trie policeman

 through the r a i l i n g s tr.at tr.e boy was -:oing blue and dying and he sa id

 he c o u l d n 't lie Ip h ir..



The second sqeeze s t a r t e d and I thought I was going to d ie , then everyone
                             n
                             %
s t a r t e d to f a l l ,       but with my arm caught in the r a i l i n g s , I stayed and

people went past tr y in g to hold onto me.                        People were on top of one

another i n f r o n t of me, (ana a l l the photos shown l a t e r in the p r e s s , of

people pushed a g a in s t tue fence, they were a c t u a l l y standing on people

then ).      Ey now the po lic e naa broken one fence by the tunnel entrance

and opened the gate so th ere was room to move.                            I - s t a r t e d to pick people

up o f f the f l o o r with a couple of oth er s and push them over in to the

s e c t i o n where                 was, who l a t e r t o l d me some of them were already

t u r n i n g blue and tnese were people n e a rly on top of the p i l e .
  The boy I had e a r l i e r seen was slumped, on the f l o o r and you could t e l l

  q u it e c l e a r l y he was dead and I passed him over.        By now I was very

  t i r e d myself and the policeman kept shouting to keep going and get as many

 over as p o s s ib le .



 I t was then t h a t I noticed a huge blue pipe g e t t i n g thrown over onto the

 pitch.       I r e a l i z e d i t was from the barrier„me and             had stood i n

 f r o n t of ,    so i f we had stayed ther e we most c e r t a i n l y would have died .

 As i t balanced on top of the fence a l l kinds of rubbish f e l l out which

 I l a t e r r e a l i z e d was r u s t .



 By now th e re was qu ite a l o t of room on the f r o n t of the t e r r a c e ,      as

 people who were not helping had moved back.                I then sp otte d a g i r l with

 her legs trapped and lyin g over backwards so I pulled her out and c a r r i e d

 her to the s id e .          I put her down and went to give her the Kiss of Life

 an:, then smelt the odour coming from her mouth.                I r e a l i z e d then she was

 dead but I still            did it out of instinct.   I then pulled her arm out of

 her cardigan and            pullea it over her face ana l e f t her, and went to help

 anyone e l s e I could.



We c a r r i e d    a few others over to the fence and pushed them over, by mow

one of the          policemen on the o th e r side of the fence was j u s t st an d in g

th er e in complete shock as was a l o t of people standing on the t e r r a c e s .


                                                                                         *
I then saw a boy ly in g ther e whose eyes were s l i g h t l y moving, so I , with

another man pu lled him to one s id e .          We put him next to the g i r l .       I

then t i l t e d h i s head back to give him the k i s s of l i f e ,    then n o tic e d h i s

mouth had a few pieces of r u s t i n i t .         This must have come from the pipe .

I p u lle d these o ut, and s t a r t e d to give him the k i s s of l i f e . . . He brought

up l i k e a b i l e t a s t e i n to my mouth and t h i s made me b r in g the same t a s t e

up.    I turned to him again and h is tongue had gone down to the back of
      his throat.          I    t r i e d to pull h is tongue out but i t kept s l i p p i n g with my

      f i n g e r s wet.       In the end a policeman t o ld me to stop as he had died .                     I

      am so sorxy now t h a t I d i d n ' t know t h a t i f you turned them on t h e i r side

      they d o n 't swallow t h e i r tongues.              I    now l i v e with the knowledge I helped

      i n a way i n him dying.             I   then took h i s coat t h a t was t i e d around h i s

      waist and put i t over h i s f a c e .



      I   then went back to picking up a few o th e rs , by mow you knew they were

  dead, i t        j u s t d id 'n t. sink in at the time.             By now we were passin g them

  through the gate onto the p it c h .                  I       went to pick up a f a t man who I had

  e a r l i e r stood on because I knew he was dead to get at the o t h e r s .                        Pour

  policemen picked him up so I went to pick up the g i r l but two policemen

  did i t i n s t e a d .        I   w il l never for ge t the look of h o rr o r in her eyes and

  her l i p s turned back as she must have a ie d .                      I   cry th in k in g of h e r, and

  I       A.ept th in k in g to m y s e lf ^ la te r, who i s going to t e l l her mother?.



 I then picked up the boy in my arms because he was very slim,                                 and I

 carried nim down zo t.\e cate, were I didn't want to g i v e him over to the

 police waiting on trie pitch fo r him.                          A man said something to me l i k e

 "come on mate, give me his arms and'you take h is l e g s , " and we passed him

 over.         I then went back over to where I had been st an din g before i t                        all

 happened, because the l a s t person was-passed through.                             Then i t was a l l

 empty in f r o n t        01    me, except f o r shoes, scarves, watciies, handbags and

programmes.            I t j u s t looked l i k e someone had thrown a du stbin over, you

wouldn't thin k about f o r t y people had died th ere and a l o t of i n j u r e d .

E if io n climbed back over and we j u s t held each o th e r f o r a while.                        I t was

now i t was over t h a t I s t a r t e d to f e e l angry even i n mv s t a t e of mind.

I could see the sense i f I was a Policeman on t h a t p i t c h , I would have

radioed through to the police t h a t had been st an din g around the tu nn els

entrance to block i t o f f as i t was f u l l a t about 2.50pm, and t e l l people

to go to the side t e r r a c e s ,            then t h i s would never had happened f o r the aake
of 10 or 12 policemen,          95 people would be alive today.




W h e n we left the ground and walked back to the coaches,                   I told my
  V
brother-in-law                 , I wo u ld never get h i m a ticket       again because he

w a s 'nt all that b o t hered about g o i n g and I w o ul d * n t be able to look at

my sister again.         W h e n we arrived b a c k at the coach,        we met      .        ------

and we were all relieved to see each other.                     It still d i d ' n t s i n k in.

as w e l i s t e n e d to the news on the coach,          as the d e a t h toll risei.:^.:




O n the way home I started to worry about                 a lad in w o r k who I gave a t i c k e t

to,    because he had only been married three weeks.                   T h i s started to give

me a h ea d a c h e   a s well as worrying' about my own wife and baby who was

only     six w e e k s old,   and my sister      who haa a baby eight w e e k s old.         what

they     must have been going through made me worry more.                   Plus the girls

face     kept c o m i n g back to me,     with her b i g eyes and lips turned back,              m ad e

me want     to be sick,       but    I could'nt.      I still had'nt cried wh i c h at the

time     I could'nt u n d erstand because I a:n a very eramotional person any.vay.



’.Vhen   I get home we all got out of              tne cab ana people were w a i t i n g l o r

us ana we all huggea each other ana my brother came out of the house

c r y i n g (27 v e a r s of age),     bo we went in and my wife         aas at h e r sisters

with h e r mum and dad.             I phoned her and as soon as I h e a r d her vo i c e

I started to cry.          I asked her to come home straight away.                 :
                                                                                   ,vhile w a i t i n g

for her to come home,           one of my mates from work phoned to see if I was

alright.       .Vhile talk in g to him I suddenly had to put tne phone d o wn and

tried to make         it to the ba t h r o o m where I was sick.




W h e n my w i f e a r r i v e d home w i t h my son and h e r muni and d a d I just held             ^

h e r and the ba b y in the k i t c h e n and cried.           In the end they sat me on

a chair in the kitchen and                             wife, came in with            and a few

o t h e r people and all were t r y i n g to k e e p me awake, b e c a u s e my wife told
 me l a t e r I was going in to a s t a t e of shock.             In the end they c a l l e d a

 Locum out to give me a sedative to calm me down, and I was put to bed.

 I s l e p t t i l l nea rly 1pm Sunday afternoon.             I got up s t i l l f e e l i n g t i r e d

 and went hack to hed and woke again at 10.30pm Sunday n i g h t .                         I t r i e d to

 eat something hut c o u ld 'n t and I then took a t a b l e t which ________ dad

 went and got on p r e s c r i p t i o n .     I t was ca lle d DIAZEPAM 5mg.           I went back

 to bed to sle e p and got up Monday afternoon f e e l i n g t i r e d s t i l l .

 (mywife) t o l d me they were holding a requiem f o r the v ictim s i n our

 church.     I thought I would f e e l b e t t e r i f I went t h e r e , but I c ri e d

 throughout the s e rv ic e and had to leave before the end.



 We went back t o _______ house where I went back i n t o shock,

 did as well.                 gave me a t a b l e t and I went in to a sl e e p .            They

 c a l l e d an ambulance and took me and |                 to Fazakerly H o sp ita l.          Y/hen

 I came round       I had a talk.,to a psychiatrist who              was p a t i e n t with me, so

 I felt    a lot    better.



 On Wednesday 19th April ly 'c y , I went to the doctors because ay t a b l e t s

haa run out,'       and I needed a sick note Tor work.                &y back     was now very

sore from the Saturday, with                 a l l the pushing and l a t e r ,    l i f t i n g people

over a 6 foo t or more fence.                The doctor gave me some more LIAZEPAlvi 5mg

and some CO-PROaAIVIOL f o r my back.              These have helped but i t i s s t i l l

sore.



On Saturday 22nd April 19&9>. I went to Anfiela for the minutes silence.

I queued up with my wife from 10.45a.m. and got i n to the ground a t 1.30p.m.

We met                                                     and aat th e re with bem i n the

Kemlyn Road st a n d .      Looking a t the carpet of flowers and a l l the sca rv es

and the Kop covered i n a l l the scarves, i t was sad, yet so b e a u t i f u l .

W i t was sad to see a l l of t h a t , someone had to d ie f o r i t to be done.

At 2 .jOp.m. I s t a r t e d to f e e l f o r the f i r s t time myself a c tu a ll y going
  back i n t o the Hillsborough ground in my mind and I s t a r t e d to cry.                        As

  i t b u i l t up to the minutes s i l e n c e , I could c l e a r l y see the peoples

  fa ces and h ear the c r i e s f o r help, and I f e l t so si ck and churned up.   I
     '   .    .              net
  was th in k in g t h i s was^such a good idea a f t e r a l l so I went home and went

  to bed.



  I have h a d a social w o r k e r coming; i4. to counsel me and talk and be

  s ympathetic.      His name is                 'qtiiit-e a patient man, b e c a u s e bef o r e all

  this h a p p e n e d I u s e d to be cjuite a ha p p y - g o - l u c k y person.   N o w I can't

  be b o t h e r e d to do anything.;-- We are trying to trace             the girls r el atives

  to see if this will h e l p them to know someone tried to h e l p her,

 because I feel if I met            them it would h e l p me because I feel             so heavy

 with guilt.        I could do no more,          it will stay with me forever,            h e r face

  crying tor nelp,        but it might      just take away some of           the helplessness I

 feel about n e r .       A ooy,    viike is trying so kindly          to f i n d them for me.

 I know he is trained to try and cope with tnese situations,                          but it

 must be n a r d lor nin sis .veil.            I xeel quite sure that without him I

 .voulci feel   a lot w o r s e .   Its oni;      trying to find these relatives             tnat

 keeps me f r om crac.--.ing up.

                      *




 I then went back         to the docto r s on the 26th April           1989 f o r a f u t h e r sick

 note for w o r k and now my bowels have b e e n soft since                 the S u na a y aft e r

eoing to Anfield.          Tues d ay night was terrible,           I c o uldn't move for pains

in my s t o m a c h through f o r c i n g myself and n o t h i n g left      to come,    so the

d o c t o r g a v e me I.'.iODIUiu capsules.     I took two straight         away wh i c h did'nt

work so I t o o k anot h e r one.        The next time I went to the toilet and

after nine      ca p sules it stopped.          The doctor thinks my n e r v e s cau s e d it

as I don't like b e i n g on my own for too long.                 I start     to worry and th i n k

about what happened.           I went back on the 3 rd May 1989 f o r a fut he r note

f o r work and to tell h i m my b a ck is still sore.                He has n o w gi v e n me

more D I A Z E P A M 5mg and is r e d u c i n g the dosage in two w e e k s to try and
  :v?-. '

  *                                              2
                                                                                *       '*
b r i n g me off them.         He also gave me more C O - P R Q X A M O L for my back.       I've

a s k e d h i m to sign me b a c k to w o r k because I ' m a f r a i d of l o s i n g my

job,   e v e n tho u g h he said to stay off another week.




F o r the rest of my life I will always be grateful for the fact that a

m a n r e l i e v e d h i m s e l f and that I like football   so m u c h I m o v e d so that

I could see who was t a k i n g the corner kicks.




A l s o for the rest of my life I will fail to see', if those gates were*-'5’
                                                                                             !§'-"!
opened,     w h y was ' n t   the tunnel blocked off then?                                          ^




95 lives wo u l d not have be e n lost,          not only th e ir liv e s but t h o u s a n ds

of lives have changed.             I for one will ne v e r for g et    the look on that

poor girls face,          and the boy who I thought I had saved,             t h en lost,


                                     i
I h av e an eight w e e k old son who I love and k e e p s me sane,              a beautiful

wife who cares so dear ly for me.              I love them both,       but why do I still

feel   so e m p t y ? .
D.O.B.   13.11.39




In the week leading up to the match at Hillsborough on Saturday 15th April

I acquired a number of tickets,    including my own.     This was a terrace

ticket for the Leppings Lane end.


Consequently on 15th April I left liverpool at 11.30am.         I was in a car

driven by a friend,                     I had no choice in the route that was

taken by              in driving us to the match.    As I recall   it was the

route that took us over the Pennines.       It was a pretty scenic route.

We didn't encounter many difficulties on route.        There were the usual

stoppages but there was nothing that particularly deia^ed us.



Consequently we arrived in Sheffield at about 1.30pm.



;           simply parked the vehicle.     It. wo u l d have been about a 10 or 15

minute walk from the ground itself.


We then made our way to the ground.       I was in the company of my girlfriend
                                                       We had of course travelled

with            1 and another friend,           Jbut after parking up we then

went our separate ways.


We then walked the distance to Hillsborough, arriving there at approximately

2.10.    I was immediately struck by the number of people who were gathered

 in the relatively small ares of space outside the turnstiles.


 I could see that there were some queues which were organised into the turnstiles,

 I say organised, what I mean is that, they were organised in a fashion.         There

were many people milling around and I immediately formed the opinion that there

was a total     lack of organisation.
€


    My girlfriend and I immediately joined a queue which was going into one

    of the turnstiles.   Because of the chaos I couldn't tell you exactly how

    many turnstiles were in operation.



    About 50 yards away from the turnstiles there appeared to be plenty of

    Police Officers in attendance but once you got past that particular point

    then it seemed to me that it was every man for himself.        Thereafter there

    didn't seerr. to be adequate Police presence.    There were Officers on horseback

    and they did appear to be trying to organise the difficult situation that

    was obviously occurring.


    There did seem, however,    to be a total lack of co-ordination and organisation

    at the turnstiles themselves.



    By now the crowd was building up so much so that at the entrance to each

    turnstile there would be about 4 individuals each trying to work themselves

    into a position whereby they could go into the turnstile next.



    I have tc say that there were queue jumpers.      This happens all the time and

    no matter what game you attend.        However this could possibly have been

    alleviated by the presence of more Police Officers at each turnstile entrance.



    There was a Police Officer on the turnstile that we were actually queuing into

    but he was about 10 yards away from where he was really needed.



    At 2.45pr it became extremely crowded outside.      There was a lot of pushing and

    shoving.   Fortunately at that particular time we managed to gain entry to the

    ground.



    I was neither searched before I gained entrance to the ground or just inside

    the ground after I had     come through the turnstile area.



    Once on the other side     of the turnstiles and thus in the ground      we then

    automatically followed     the flow of people through the tunnel which     led to the

    centre of the Leppings     Lane terrace.




                                      2.
€



    I had never been to the ground before and therefore I had no idea of how

    it was set out.    Consequently I assumed at that particular time that I

    was going into the right end.



    As it transpired I was of course going into the area for which I had a valid

    ticket but at that time I did not know that the terracing was sectioned as

    it was.      there were plenty of people arriving at the tunnel at the same time

    as myself.    I have to say that conduct of people in that tunnel was a dam

    sight more orderly than the conduct of people outside.            Having said that

    it really was chaotic outside the ground.



    My girlfriend and I managed to filter into the pen which was immediately behind

    the goal.     It was quite packed.        We managed to find ourselves a position about

    halfway down the terracing.     Obviously people were still coming in from the

    back arid it was a situation whereby we were being -pushed dowTi into the

    terracing but my girlfriend and I managed to manoeuvre ourselves into that

    position halfway down.



    I think that we took up this position at about 2.50pm.



    I then recall that the teams came out which would be at           2.55 and obviously

    people began tc     applaud their presence on the pitch.        It was at that time

    that there did seem to be far more pressure from behind.           I agree there

    was some kind of surge.     When the crowd surges forward in such a situation

    your instinctive reaction is to try and stand your ground and to brace

    yourself against the pressure from behind.



    On this occasion, however,    I also had my girlfriend's interests in mind and

    I was trying to save her from being pushed even further down.



    Consequently I was not able to stand my ground but like hundreds of others

    I was forced further down the terrace along with my girlfriend.



    Experience of cramming on terraces tola me at the time that once the game

    had kicked off then gradually the crowd would sort itself out and the pushing

    would decrease and although you would not find yourself           with plenty of room you

    would probably find that you would at least be able to watch          the game with a

    degree of comfort.




                                         3.
However this day it was different because the pressure just increased.



I realised after a short while         that things down at the front of the

terracing seemed particularly bad.         Other people around me must have felt

the same as I did for, of course, people were then trying to find out

what was going on and this d i d n ’t help either because of course with people

leaning forward to see what was happening down front only added to the

pressure on the back of the people at the front even more so.



At one particular time with the pressure of the crowd from behind I was

actually forced out of the crowd and was in mid-air about 3 or 4 feet off

the ground.         I still managed to hold on to           By this time people

were climbing out of the perimeter fencing and I could see that lads on

the pitch itself were breaking up the horaings to be used as stretchers.



I then became thoroughly determined to get myself and my girlfriend out of

the bedlarr..


I managed to manoeuvre myself over to the left hand side of the terracing as

you look at the pitch.         Against the railings I then managed to manoeuvre

myself and Sylvia back up the terracing and eventually back out through

the t u n n e l .   This was no easy task when one considers what was happening in

that area and the fact that people were still trying to come down the tunnel

into the terrace.


My only concern        by then was to get away from the ground to protect the

welfare of myself and my girlfriend.



After coring out of the tunnel we         could see that there was a main gate which

had been opened and the crowd         was still spilling through that particular gate

and there was also a flow of people such as myself leaving the tunnel wanting

to get out of the confines of         the stadium.



After leaving the confines of         the ground we were then in the   turnstile area once

again and it was still packed.        I have no recollection of seeing any Police

officers there.        There were obviously Policemen there but my only concern was to

get away from the ground so consequently I wasn't paying much attention.




                                     4.
c

    We immediately headed back to the area in which the car had been parked.

    After reaching the car it was about 15 to 20 minutes later before

    Mr Slater and Mr Gough returned.        We were all obviously distressed and

    shocked by what had gone on.


    At that particular time none of us knew that there had been fatalities.

    However having regard to the experience       we simply had no appetite to watch

    the football match.     At that particular    time we had no idea that         the game was

    to be abandoned or indeed had been abandoned.



    We then   left Sheffield in the vehicle and arrived back         inLiverpool     at

    approximately 5.30pm.


    It was whilst we were on the motorway that we        listened to the    radio and we

    learnt for the first time that there had been        fatalities.      At that time they

    were talking about 30 deaths.


    As soon   as Iheard about fatalities I was obviously concerned          about the welfare

    of my 4   sons who I knew had gone to the ground.



    Upon reaching Liverpool    I immediately went to     the home of my eldest daughter

    to enquire as to whether or not she had heard        about my sons.      She was in a

    state of panic .    She h a d n ’t heard anything.


    My ex wife also resides across the road       from my daughter    and she      was coming

    over constantly    to   establish whether or not we had heard anything.               The

    next thing I knew was that one of my other daughters came rushing across to

    say that my ex wife, who is quite highly strung, had suffered a mild heart

    attack and had been rushed to hospital.


    We were constantly trying the emergency number that was given out but it was

    engaged continually.     Eventually we then went to Farnsworth Street POlice

    Station to establish whether or not they could be of any assistance to us

    in finding out whether or not my 4 sons were OK.




                                       5.
t




     We then went.     I have to say that the Police at Farnsworth Street were

     excellent in that they were most helpful not only to myself but to many

     other people who had gone to the Station for the same purpose as myself.



    They managed to contact the Sheffield Police direct.        Eventually I was told

     to gc away for half an hour,    to carry on trying the emergency numbers and

     that they would do their best to find out about my sons in the meantime.



    Half an hour later I returned and I was told by the officers to gc away and

    try and find out what items of clothing my 4 sons had been wearing.        They also

    gave me a telephone number for me to telephone once I had acquired that
    information.



    Subsequently at about 6.50pm I then learnt that my 4 sons were all right.

    I discovered that one son               had been taken to hospital but because of
    the relatively minor nature of his injuries he chose not to see the

    medical practitioner whose skills were needed more badly elsewhere.



    Thereafter Tuesday 18th April I was still suffering from the stress and shock

    of the incident and I honestly felt at times that I was going to have a heart

    attack for my heart rate would increase without warning and I would have, what
    I could only consider to be, palpitations.



    Consequently I went to hospital       to seek some kind of guidance on this particular

    point.   It was a genuine worry of mine.      I was then given the relevant tests

    ie an ECo which fortunately established that I had no particular condition

    of the heart.     The doctor did ask me if I had experienced any undue stress

    recently and of course I explained to him about the previous Saturday.       He then

    advised me to take it as easy as possible and that if I was still suffering

    from s c s s   then I should make use of the various counselling agencies that

    had been set up to assist people such as myself who had suffered from the trauma
    of this tragedy.




                                     6.
I have not seen my GP since.               I   do    consider however that I have not get over

my e xp e r i e n c e .        I have an obvious aversion at this moment in time to

crowds.              I consider that it will be a long time before I venture into a

football             ground again and that is if I ever do.


I steer clear of crowds.                I smoke far more heavily than I ever did and I

appear to be considerably more anxious that I was.                      I am also worried

constantly about the effect the tragedy had on my youngest son)                           who
has actually signed as an apprentice p ;rofessional with Nottingham Forest

Football             Club.


This disaster has had a devastating effect on him and I an, genuinely concerned

for his future wellbeing.


This incident is something that I will never forget.                      At the height of the

problems on that terracing I remember that there were people falling to the

ground under my feet and there were others in obvious distress and there was

 nothing that myself, my girlfriend or apparently anybody else could have done

 about it.


 The dav after the disaster              I went tothe Cathedral     in Liverpool    for    the

 service that they held for              the dead.      I was standing out&ide on unepiazza

 and after a while it began tc get a bid crowded and my instinctive reaction

 was tc leave.               I actually felt that bad even though the crowd was more

 orderly than any that I have ever seen in my life.


 Returning to the events of the 15th April I did not see any acts of hooliganism

 at all.             I saw the situation where people were panicking for their lives and

 o b v i o u s l y    wher. that happens then there is a general        lack of consideration for

 the next person.               Quite frankly, however, we should not have beer, put into

 a situation like that where there                   was a threat to life.



 I personally consider that              the cause     of the tragedy    was a lack of

 organisation in that there              was insufficient     Police officers deployed at the

 Leppings Lane end and I consider that there was a lack of                     guidance and

 supervision inside the ground ie in the area leading to the tunnei in question.
I have indicated to you that by the time I arrived on the terracing that

there were more than sufficient people in that area even at that stage.

They however continued to let people flow into that part of the ground
when quite frankly there was no room for them to fan out.
      (f^l (VbfcsfcS'   ^S^I / Q ^ s - a ^



                                  _ ^ v \ t c-h-es


                         !+-i(S




 © .

^ )         Virv/rl                   ($**-      fcu-cl/e   •
                                                                                             qja                                                              'OAsaMs^/
______                                                                                       \Jj3for&rd . fig. < X                                                lAo       (ssvtn-J'

                                                                                                                                                                   J_____



'tCiawwM.             Oft                           /SW      y r x f             H e ?                   /                                 /C^e

                                           ^ 4 6 ?           ;        tf/-               U 'Z O                      bM            J tJ f         /
          uevo <a=J
                                                                  ^                                              < > rn ^ jJ c o r
Lt       veiH^                                  1,          (X^!/t/'— ^                                   $^2                y^ir^n 4m *L

                                                ^          1/JUuJ'                   !&          AflwiMji#                         UsflJctf

                      jkMrytwjL                                            yy                                                          OJJL       lOU^t.
VV^VV* 0 ^ •)

                                                          ? /io            $ti                                           *

                                 6^
                                                ffits#            UUrxi                      ^ U     aa4c        & - ^

                                                    -£ U
                                                     ^0            -f™ ~ ~ ~ ,                   ~y          ’               . -•

                                     ^ jtdbrzM                        ZpQ                            < 2 f **sn</                  t

                                                stxtd                 M A , 7                    d M r                                                    ,       ,-

                                                          .$.... J r                                      <Zfu*s?                  M i          - 'OUf^mC

                      - l- jo            P yn         ^      A         X         -       M            ^               j o              0          ^           ^
 f;
                      ( J            # e             t t t i M a           ,                     C           a T          - J          w         M » * i 2

                       "m   as                                         1       ^ h               y                                             * * /- - . o f L y J
                        A c m e /               t                            O^i^id                       G                  M e                                    .p ^        [
                      Jtccfcpsi— ®if                                  - -&*°*<,                           -uter^                   $kj-c              'tt’
                                                                                                                                                         U/) w&tf
                       'fi^sdzT                     # /          f<wri           t-                                                                   -                             ^

                                     ^   (Jif               2- fy-o                                                  3       -                  yu M ^ C
                        jduyzjO L.                   C ^ T K ^ ^ S lif           -# •4 ^ '                                     CotL>^£                                      *

                                                4 0 & *           4W % ; ■                                            W              ^                                  J

                          C M & tf              * C fl *          C ^~           -2 - ' 3 ^                  -7

                            t<Uj                                                                                                                ^ 4 >
                                                      ' “     ’                 ^                'l^az-tdz^a                                   "K?                O^nJ^c

                                                                                                     0       4       ^ /         <7?             O        u ^ /         £       r



                                 *

                                     ^
                                                    ^                        CL*d& j
                                                                                     ~       Z        A          ?       J       Z         k     '

                                                                                                                                               ^Luf^-
                                                                                                                                                              / 52     <o/+*4(Z&

                                C b i'      s fy k                ^ 2 * -& < j 2             ;                   < 0 ^ /?                                     c ^a A z)             s St/ V



                                LM :
                                    7L4ZA                                                                                     ,u^ ^ o 6 q ?
                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                               u
        jO /     a * h t /               *7     7
       f m p      V   Ottf:           (Xuf  - a j                                    Otufe
                                                                                                             S
 fo>        d.          1 ^           J                                                       j u w
 CLAttW           $ 0         62SM*.

                  s U £ w             /&>                          ^                      ^

     _-ZuU.______
 /S'.C      st{l*sn<Ltr)         _ _
                                 6U4.0                Jll

 f a x           U*df            £ & /              / t c ^ z ^ ^ / ^                                                    H

 *-         /           /y      -           ^        t        % f            Qbubc        f Z j ^          r A       ^
                                    £ 4 W td J ~                  < %    /                                  n £ /~



                                    <02             <m 4.                        Ms            $&<£,         & & &
                                    -d.         Mto#.                  d L d J

                                        A uslrav




                        isrtcA~-£ *                           a              '^?Z€                    ^

                        d u t^ L jy

                d y                                                                               /2 ^ /    u £ a^   £       z/

 „   PlO#       ^Czl/~ , v^Sq                       fi/vesT?                          /2d       sd^UcuA/zs^) 6S~



tij~        Z'{0         f-rt J           fioC^                    ^ 2          c&t&4

                      tfJ h iU U ^              d        jf                           s
              :               (Vj w e ^        ^X)          J) .    / ■£




0         £.tsf.            h o o ^ j ,


          C -          (M o £-/w4 .




                                             ^ <Zi2JL_   Ixinof/g    /\3



(%)       P*          ^ A ^ € T T .


(b) 3 ^ ^             l^‘    'ftftfcT'-ey >



/7)       ^




          p\      ^         { b c c u C S To*! '



    tc
     P)           , 8                   oclc         (son      k
                                                               uvo
                                                                 /il

    ©
    'iW
               ^ Ssl£__


               £          jpUs^lU-



UrCNjbn&3> •
                                                                                                                        STATION

  ■      •
NA ME:                GEOFFREY        NIGEL
                      MOODY

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:             33                08091955

OCCUPATION:           CLUB BAR MANAGER


Who states-.- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED:       270489                                                                                       (SIGNED,



              I am Geoffrey Nigel MOODY,                   a bar manager employed at Thames

              Television Studios,                Teddington,       Middlesex,          aged 33 years and I live

              at _______________________________________________

              I support Chelsea football club and attend football matches of all

              kinds on a regular basis and have done so for about seventeen years.

              I think I have visited most major football grounds in the country and

              I am well experienced in crowd problems,                               and also the effectiveness

              with which some grounds control the crowds attending matches at their

              grounds.

              I was aware that two friends of mine - I                                              _______________

                                                                                                                and

                                                             (I c a n n o t    remember       the    nu m b e r )

                                                                     were      intending        to go      to     the

              Nottingham       Forest       vs    Liverpool      match        at   Sheffield Wednesday                  F . C . ’s

              ground,    Hillsborough,             Sheffield,        on S a t u r d a y    150489.

              The   father     of                        is a s e a s o n     ticket      holder     at    Liverpool            F.C

              and   I became        aware    on    the    Saturday morning             that     he h a d       tw o s p a r e

              tickets    for    the    game.                 |f a t h e r   li ves    in L i v e r p o o l .
MOODY                                   GEOFFREY         NIGEL                                                         P AG E


I had been off work with the flu and I decided to go to the match

with some friends,                     those I mentioned,                        and_

At 1130am on Saturday 150489 I was picked up by                                                   and            in

car,    from my             home and travelled up to Sheffield via the Ml

motorway.         We did not stop on the way nor were we subject to any

delay until we reached Sheffield.                                   Once we came off the motorway

there there police signs followed by Police Officers directing

traffic to the ground.                        We arrived in Sheffield at about 1330 but

were then held up in traffic queues.

Eventually        a woman              who    obviously knew              the    area who was          in a n o t h e r

car,    and was         unknown          to us,      led   us       to a r o a d w h e r e w e      parked.            N on e

of   us w e r e    aware          of    the    location        of    the     ground     f r o m t hi s    p o i nt ,     but

were    directed            by    this woman.           I d o n ’t k n o w the r o a d n a m e w h e r e we

parked,     one        of    the       others may       know        it.     We    d i d n ot   know      th e   area      at

all .

After    a while            of w a l k i n g w e     encountered             crowds      of    other     people making

thei r w a y      to        the g r o u n d .       T h e r e w as     no    police      d i r e c t i o n at th is     stage,

however,       where         we    were       pa r k e d was    about        a thirty minute             walk    f r o m the

ground,     and p r o b a b l y not             close      enough         to w a r r a n t    a police      presence.

I did not witness any disorder,                             fighting or drunkeness on our way to

the ground,            but did see a couple of pubs which were obviously heavily

congested,         as supporters were stood outside drinking.                                          All of the

supporters we saw on the way to the ground were Nottingham Forest

supporters.

My friends were in possession of tickets for the West Stand,                                                      Leppings

Lane entrance, which they had purchased from Mr. D I V I N E ’S father and

I had arranged to meet his father at the Leppings Lane entrance.

We approached the ground on foot from the north and eventually came

down Leppings Lane to that entrance.                                      There were police officers
MOODY                            GEOFFREY    NIGEL                                           P AG E


about outside the ground,             but even at the point outside the

turnstiles none appeared to be engaged on duties of directed

supporters.           However,    having said that there was no need for any at

this point,      as the supporters knew where they were going.

I a r r i v e d at the e n t r a n c e to the g r o u n d at a b o u t 1420 a n d c o l l e c t e d

my   ticket    o ff                 Iwhich w a s    a   ticket     for   the   Leppings   L ane

stand.      It cost me       6.00.                      |(sen)    left us and made his way

to the north stand.

We then commenced queuing to get into the ground,                          and at the entrance

to the turnstiles          there were two mounted police attempting to control

the very heavy crowd             congestion.       As Ihave stated I am a regular

attender of football             matches,    and even at         this point,     the crowd

congestion was the worst I have ever encountered.                              Knowing what the

conditions were probably going to be like inside I was having second

thoughts about, going            into the ground.         To     some extent this was due             to

me still suffering from flu as opposed to                        an impending sense of danger

There was no apparant steward control at this point,                             and outside the

previously mentioned mounted police officers were the only two police

officers I could see.              In addition there were no signs whatsoever

directing people to entry points to the ground.

At this point I witnessed numerous persons gaining unauthorised entry

to the ground by climbing over the walls surrounding the turnstiles

and over the tops of the turnstiles,                    and also when the actual

turnstile barrier was released to let a ticket holder pass,                               several

presumably non-ticket holders would force their way into the ground

as w e l l .

Finally I gained access to the ground via the middle turnstile or

second turnstile from the left.                  Once inside the ground I could only

see a few police officers and there were no signs visible to me,
MOODY                   GEOFFREY    NIGEL                               PAGE


directing supporters to viewing points.          The only visible place of

entry to the stand was the central tunnel and myself and any friends

made our way into it.      At this point there was no police or steward

direction evident to me.

We made our way down the tunnel which was averagely congested as one

would expect for this sort of game.           Initially I made my way to the

point I have marked as 1 in pen three on the grid which I can produce

as an exhibit    (Ex Ref         ) (Ex No).    At this point I looked

at my watch and it showed 1448pm.

Even at this time congestion in the pen was extremely bad and because

of the weight of numbers still entering this pen myself and my

friends attempted to look for a safe viewing point.           This was because

 I knew that the congestion was going to get worse to the point of

being dangerous.

 We moved to the right side of the pen to a point approximately about

 a third of its length from the fence,         separating the pitch and the

 pen    (the perimeter fence).

 I at no stage witnessed any incidents of violent or disorderly

 behaviour just the usual boisterous behavoir for a football match.            I

 did not witness    the consumption of any alcohol by any supporters

 whilst in the ground.
 The weight of numbers continued to increase and was worse than

 unbearable,    and there was no doubt in my mind that there was going to

 be major problems.
 My friends managed to climb the fence to the right of pen three into

 pen two, I was a few feet behind them and was going to do the same to

 get out of the crush in pen three.

 suddenly, a crowd surge carried me down to the perimeter fence to a

 point as marked on the grid at 2 which I can produce as an exhibit (
MOODY                     GEOFFREY   NIGEL                              P AG E


Ex Ref         ) (Ex No         ).   This was the worst crowd surge I have

ever experienced,      and I was powerless to resist the crowd movement.

I managed to force my way away from the fence to a point I have

indicated as point 3 on the grid, which again I can produce as an

exhibit   (Ex Ref           ) (Ex No.         ).

I at this time noticed a white lad, of about 14 years, who had blond

cropped hair    (possibly sandy colour) wearing a Liverpool football

shirt and blue jeans, with white trainers, who was lying on the floor

of pen three.       He was unavoidably being trampled by the other

spectactors and was completely motionless.           I am of the opinion that

he was dead.     This would be by point      3 as indicated on the grid.

Because of the crush,      nobody could do a thing about     it until

eventually people managed to lift him up and pass him to the right,

into pen two.

From the time       I had entered pen three to this point I     would say about

ten minutes had elapsed.       At no stage had I witnessed      any match play,

nor had I seen a player on the pitch at all.

I was again forced back to point 2 on the grid and again managed to

force my way back to point 3 marked on the grid.           I was obviously

aware of the danger of being near a fence or barrier in the pen.

At no stage did I see any barriers collapse or gates being opened.

At   this time the pressure seemed to ease a little and I thought

something was       being done about the congestion.      I was then able to

move my limbs       a little which I had not been able to previously.        This

lasted for about thirty seconds and then the pressure returned very

suddenly.

Other than the aforementioned white lad,           I did not see anyone else in

pen three who I thought was dead.

I was having extreme breathing difficulties and after about 3-4
MOODY                 GEOFFREY    NIGEL                                  P AG E


minutes I became unconcious.      I had just given up,   I had fought for

my life and could not stand the pressure any longer.          I was convinced

I was going to die.

At no stage during these problems did I hear any announcements made.

The next thing I recall was to some extent regaining consciousness in

the corner of the pitch by West and South stands.        I have no idea how

long I had been unconcious for at this stage.        Shortly after I passed

out again and next regained conciousness       in the gymnasium area.

I can recall seeing a number of people laid out near to me,         after I

had found my self on the pitch,     and saw them receiving treatment or

attention from other people.      There were about four of them,     white

males between 30 and 40 years,     of stout to heavy builds with beer

guts.   I think they were dead,    or died whilst I was on the pitch.

The people rendering first-aid were mostly in civilian clothing,             but

I did see at least one uniformed first-aider.        These are vague

recollections because,    I was slipping in and out of conciousness

during this time.

At no stage did I witness anything which I would consider to be a

criminal offence and I cannot really comment on how the incident was

handled after the match was stopped because I was unconscious.

Following recieving first-aid treatment in the gymnasium,         principally

from my friend, my friend and I remained in the area of the pitch as

we were prevented from leaving because injured persons were being

taken out of the exits.     Though I did not see much of what was

happening whilst waiting to leave,        from what I did 3ee I have nothing

but praise for the supporters,     first-aiders,    police,   etc, who were

trying to deal with the situation.

The only announcements I heard and I do not know when they were one

by Kenny DALGLEISH to the effect there were problems,          and one
       MOODY                          GEOFFREY         NIGEL                                                P AGE


       advising       people   to   retain    their        tickets     should      t h e r e be     a repl ay.

       We     eventually    left    the g r o u n d   of    o ur   o w n a c c o r d at a b o u t    163 0pm.

       The principle causes in my opinion of the tragedy were:-

        i)     The lack of police control of persons entering the Leppings Lane

       stand,        on the outside of the ground,

        ii)     The lack of stewarding of persons once inside the ground for

        that stand,

        iii) The lack of visible signs directing people to viewing points in

        the West stand.

        The only injuries I received were some bruises to my chest,

        apparantly for which I have not sought hospital                              treatment.          However,

        mentally I have suffered and I am still suffering a great deal

        because of the incident or tragedy,                        undoubtedly due to post traumatic

        stress.

        Further to the above, whilst entering through the turnstiles I d i d

        not see any other gates opened or beng opened.                               Once admitted I had

        surrendered the        3   t u b of my ticket and retained the remainder.                               I gave

        this to my f r i e n d ^                ^on        Wednesday 260489 and he was due t o

        return it to his father




                                                                                               G MOODY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

             TIME:                   DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                                     STATION

NAME:             CHRISTOPHER
                  MORAN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:       19         14Q919&9

OCCUPATION:       UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of G 1 1 pagss, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I snail be liable to
Drosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED:   290489                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am asingle man residing         at the above address which my parents own

           house.      I have lived here    all my life.

           I am currently unemployed       and have been sofor the past six      months,

           prior to that    I was a delivery assistant.

           On Saturday the 15th of April        1989 (150489)   I attended the F-A. Cup

           Semi Final Football match played between Liverpool and Nottingham

           Forest at the Hillsborough football        ground,   Sheffield.

           I am a supporter of Liverpool F.C.        I have been a fan all my life and

           I have a season ticket.         I do not usually travel   to the away games.

           I travelled to the match on a coach which had been organised by a Mr

                                                                          He normally

           organises a coach from GARSTON to all the home matches and some of

           the special away matches        like the F.A.Cup Semi Final.

           The coach firm is VILLAGE TOURS,        I think the address    is CHURCH RD,

           GARSTON.     I cannot remember who was driving the coach.          It was not an

           official    supporters   club party but   independently organised.

           The pick up point was WINDOW LN,        by the WOODCUTTERS Social Club at

           09.30 hrs    (093Q ).
                             CHRISTOPHER                                         PAGE
fORAM


I purchased my ticket from Liverpool F,C,                 on the Tuesday or Wednesday

the week before the match.            I paid £6 for the ticket.          1 obtained it

by using a shareholders          voucher which had been given to me by my
                                                                             Liverpool
brother ___________________________________________________________

•18.       I am not sure where he obtained the voucher from.

Although       I am a Season Ticket      holder    I was not entitled to a ticket

as mine was       not one of those with a ticket allocated to it.

I went with the following            people

•1„    c          m          ^          ^           ^

                                                             I d o n ’t know his number
2.
rt .

4,     His    brother                         I d o n ’t know his address.

                                                        who organised the coach/    i
5.

d o n ’t know his address

6,

7.                      he resides   at either

            , Liverpool.

                                         '    I don't know his address.
8.
The people I have named are all Season Ticket                  holders and go to all

 the home games.

 I think there were about 40 people on the coach altogether.

 The coach left at about 0945 h r s ( we did not stop on the journey.                     We

 were stuck       in a traffic jam on the M62 because of road works,               this

 delayed us for about 30 minutes.               The driver took a wrong turning in

 Sheffield and we found ourselves              in with the traffic of the

 Nottingham Supporters.          After several minutes a Police Motorcyclist

 spotted us and gave us an escort onto the Ring Rd.                   This delayed us

 by about another 30 minutes.               We arrived at the coach park between

  1245 hrs and 1300 h r s , it was          just a road about one mile from the
MORAN                         CHRISTOPHER                                     PAGE


ground.     All    I can remember about      it was that it was on a hill*

On our coach roost of the         people took cans of beer,     I personally took

four    cans and most of the others         had about the same.    I consumed mine

before    reaching,    Sheffield a>3 ain I think most of the others had also

drunk theirs as well.

I attended the same match last year and the Police stopped the coach

outside Sheffield and took all the alcohol            off us,   but that d i d n ’t

hapoen this year although we did see them stop and search some of the

other    coaches whilst we were en route.

I did not see anyone walking along with any cans of alcohol.                  Once

we got off the coach we walked to the FOX INN,             I believe   it is in

FOXHILL RD.        This was    just my group of friends.     I don't know where

the others       from the coach went.

Once we got off the coach I did not see any signs and we were not

given any escort or directions          by the Police.     There   could have been

some signs but I knew where          I was going anyway.

I did not see any drunkenness          or disorder   problems on the way to the

g round.

We arrived at the Leppings Ln entrance to the ground at about 1435

hrs.     When we arrived at the entrance there was already a large crowd

queueing at the turnstiles.           I would   estimate the crowd to have been

two to three thousand in numbers.             There was no queue,    just a mass of

people just       pushing and swaying trying to get to the turnstiles.                It

started at the turnstiles and stretched back to the two main gates

out of the ground and into LEPPINGS LN for a distance of around 30

mtrs.

I did not see any stewards or club officials             giving directions at

this    point,    however,    there were two mounted Policemen just       in front

of the big metal       gates    leading to the turnstiles for the Terraces.
MORAN                       CHRISTOPHER                                             PAGE


These two policemen were moving backwards               and forwards     in a vain

attempt    to assist    the crowd into an orderly queue.

The    crowd was swelling all the time and the people at the rear were

pushing,    it was becoming more       compact and frightening by *'!A*33 h rs *             I

had only    lust got ins ids t he two ma in gates         afvrl wa s s t-ill we 11 away

■pr o m t h e turnstiles*

At this    stage    I had already lost     most of my friends        there was only

               and m y s e 1 f ieft   X d i d n *t see a ny o n e injured ii*u t    I could

hear screams      and cries.    The   reason 1 d i d n ’t see anyone      injured was

that    I could only see the heads        in front of me-       I c o uldn’t turn

around or even move my hands about.             I could still      breath but it was

becoming more difficult.

I would    also    like to say that at this     point    I could see several

mounted    Policeman at the side of        the gate that was eventually opened,

they did not appear to be assisting            in the control      of the crowd at all

Also at this time some of the people within the crowd were sensing

that a serious      problem was developing and started to try to extract

themselves    from it and return into LEPPINGS LN but they couldn’t move

an inch.

Whilst    I was in still     in the crowd,     I could see people        climbing over

the wall    into the ground.

Suddenly the crowd just serged forwards             carrying everyone        including

myself with it.        As we moved forward the pace quickened,             there was

just a sea of people moving forwards past the turnstiles and threw a

gate on the right hand side.

Once threw the gate,        I could see the tunnel entrance under the West

Stand. At this time I thought the layout of the ground had been

changed and there must be turnstiles further on.                 As I moved closer

to the tunnel      I could see the other end and onto the pitch.                   I could
'MORAN                              CHRISTOPHER                                         PAGE


see L i v e r p o o l   players on the pitch*

At this      point I         observed a sign on the wall             above the tunnel

entrance saying              'A’ and    "S’.

At this      stage      I    had travelled some 50 to 60 mtrs           in only about "iO

seconds.         I had       by no1/.1 lost                    .i was out of breath and

frightened,         it was      obvious     that something was seriously wrong.             I tried

to go threw a large gate on the                     left hand side which I knew led to

p Pns £ a n ,H 7 ,          i knew this from my previous           visits   to the ground.

There was no way I could get myself out of the crowd I was just being

taken along and into the tunnel still all the time the pace was

getting faster and faster.

Once     inside the          tunnel    i was   lifted off my      feet completely after

about the first              couple of metres, I could hear screams and shouts                but

 couldn't understand what was being said.

Just as       I neared the end of the tunnel I was spun around and carried

 along backwards out of the tunnel and onto the terraces.                           I have

 looked at a plan and it was Pen 4- that                   I was    carried into,   still

 backwards with my feet off the ground.                     I went for several metres

 onto the terracing before I stopped up against a barrier.                           I was then

 able to put my feet onto the ground.                     While    I was being   carried along

 my feet were about six inches off the floor.

 When I hit the barrier                it   was just the end of it and I was then

 turned side ways,             so    that   I was    now facing Pens 5, 6 and 7.       I had no

 control      over my movements at all.

 I would estimate that from the tunnel entrance to where                         I stopped on

 the terraces took only five seconds.                     At this stage      I saw Alan JONES

 along side of me to my right which meant that he would have normally

 been in front of me.                He was facing the correct way.

 At this      point     I came       to a stop.       I could not move at all,      there were
                          CHRISTOPHER                                      PAGE          6
 ORAN


arms everywhere as soon as you breathed out the space was taken*                I

could see that                 face was    red and his eyes were closed

although he h a d n ’t passed out,     he was very close to it*    I managed to

move my right hand and get it threw his belt to stop him being

pulled away in the flood.

I also noticed a youth to my left,         he was bright   red and sweating,        it

was   running down his face.      His eyes were flickering,      his mates who

were also nearby were shouting and screaming at him in panic,              trying

to keep him conscious*       No one could move their hands so we were ail

blowing on his face trying to help him.           After about a minute he was

moved away in the crowd,       I don't know what happened to him,       I have

not seen him again.        I would describe    him as follows.    White male,       19-

2 0 yrs,   6*0 tall,   stocky build,    fat faced with a moustache*

Behind me jammed up against the barrier still facing backwards,              was

another man.      I would describe him as follows,       White male,   4-0 to 50

years, 5*10 tall,       medium build.     I think he was wearing a suit type

jacket and open necked shirt.

This man was being bent over the crush barrier backwards.              He was

facing up into the West Stand.           The way he was bent it appeared to me

that his back must have been broken,          it is just impossible to get

 into that    position without   seriously injuring yourself.       He first

went grey and then blue in the face,          he was   like that for a couple of

minutes*      During this time I managed to turn around fully and face

 the correct way so I was adjacent to the barrier and this man.               I let

 go 0f         [and tried to push this man back up straight       but I couldn't

 and by this time he was coughing and choking and died.             I was then

 pushed forwards myself and had to let go of him* The people all round

 me told me to leave him as he was gone.          I believe he then went over

 the barrier and onto the floor*




                                                                       f
MORAN                       CHRISTOPHER                                      PAGE


We were still      being   pushed forwards     and I could now feel    people on

the floor under my feet,           the crowd were just walking ail over them

there about 3 of them..            I could not describe any of them,

I have seen the Liverpool Echo and there was a picture              in it of the

man that died next to ms,           his name is Henry BURKE -

Event'ial iw we moved down near to the front,          suddenly there appeared

 n j-,B 2.r> o peni ng t o my r ight , there was man ha 1 f on the floor with

someone    behind him was trying to pull him up by the s h o u l d e r .     Alan

grabbed at his trouser waist            band and also tried to pull him up.

They got him to about waist height then we realised he was already

dead so they let him go and he just disappeared under              people's feet.

Just after    that   I suddenly went backv.'ards but my feet remained where

they were.     I was about a foot off the ground and the gap had closed

over me and it was         dark.     I was down for a couple of seconds when

someone behind me pulled me up by my jacket.             If this    person hadn't

pulled me back up I would have been trampled on and killed.

After several more minutes we reached the fence and climbed over it.

It took us every ounce of my energy to get over the fence as I was

exhausted.     Alan got over before me and was screaming encouragement

at me to get me over.

Once on the pitch I sat. down for about a minute.               I was serverly

shocked and although I d i d n ’t realise it I had a number of injuries.

Once    I was on the pitch I could hear the Nottingham fans booing and

then it was anounced over the            loud Speaker System,   "Do get off the

Pitch” .

When I got onto the pitch I remember            looking at the clock,    the time

was    1525 hrs.

I then saw                                                Ln Pen 7.    They then

came onto the pitch and led us away to the refreshment bar where we
MORAN                      CHRISTOPHER                                           PAGE       I


sat on a wall*        We remained there for about ten minutes,           '.-.'hen we then

left the ground and walked back to             the coach.     We left the ground of

our own     accord,    it would have been about       1540 hrs,

I did not witness anything          that    I would have considered a criminal

offence.

After game was stopped,          when I was on the pitch,      I saw an off duty

p n i i ram an go up to a Senior Officer        policeman,   hs was waving his

warrant    card about and shouting at him to get the rescue organised.

I think the Senior Pol iceman just            ignored him.

Some of     the policeman were helping pull         people out of the crowd but

many of     them were wandering around disorganised,            they may well have

been in shock themselves.           I did not see any stewards assisting the

crowd control    at    any of the time at all*        I did see two on the pitch

but they did not       appear to be doing anything to assist.

I would describe       myself as follows,      White male,    19 yrs,   6*4 tall,

stocky build,    weighing       15 stone.     My hair is short and brown in colour.

I was wearing a black       leather and canvas bomber style jacket,             blue

jeans and black training shoes.

When I arrived home       I found that the top of my left          leg was grazed

and very badly bruised and swollen.              I also had pains and bruising to

my ribs.

On Sunday the 16th my mother called the doctor,                a locum came out and

examined my injuries*           By this time I was just staring at the walls

and he treated me for shock as well.              I d o n ’t know the name of the

doctor that visited me*

My own d o c t o r ’s name is

                                                            I give permission for

the details of my medical          record to be given to the enquiry.           I have

sent my ticket to the Daily Mirror             in London as they were requesting
           MORAN                 CHRISTOPHER                PAGE    c


            t h 9 IT! .         Chris Moran

                                               Chris Moran SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

                TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OF FICERS S I G N A T U R E :
                                                                                                                                                    STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS


AGE   / DATE       OF    BIRTH:         33                         13Q71955

OCCUPATION:             SOCK       KNITTER



W h o s t a t e s : - T h i s s t a t e m e n t c o n s i s t i n g of 0 0 6 p a g e s , e a c h s i g n e d
b y me, is t r u e to t h e b e s t o f m y k n o w l e d g e a n d b e l i e f a n d I m a k e
it k n o w i n g t h a t if it is t e n d e r e d in e v i d e n c e I s h a l l be l i a b l e to
p r o s e c u t i o n if I h a v e w i l f u l l y s t a t e d in it a n y t h i n g w h i c h I k n o w
t o be f a l s e o r do n o t b e l i e v e t o be t r u e .



DATED:     260489                                                                                                      (SIGNEDJ




             On    Saturday             150489          I went           to       the       football           match        at    Hillsborough-                      I

             support           Liverpool             Football              Club.             I went           with    a     friend       of     m i n e ____

                               who      lives        at      Blidworth.                     I got       my     ticket         from      Liverpool

             Football           Club         because           I am          a    season          ticket        holder           at    Anfield.             I

             paid       £6     for      the     ticket             and       it       was    for       Leppings           Lane        standing         area.             I

             travelled             to     the      match           in m y         friends             c ar.     We    did        not    stop     on     the          way

             to    the       ground.            We      joined           the          M1    at         junction        £ 9 and the        traffic               was

             heavy.            This       was      at     about          11.45am.                     We      came    off the m o t o r w a y          at

             junction           34      because           there          were          signs          saying     don't           leave     the     motorway

             at    junction             33.        The       traffic              was       very       heavy     all         the w a y     in     to    the

             ground.            We      parked          in     a    ca r         park       at         the     side       of t h e S p i o n    Hop.            We

             got    to       the     car      park        at       about          1315pm.

             On    the       way     to      the     ground          there             were       people        drinking              outside      all          the

             pubs       we     passed.             They        would             be    Notting          Forest        supporters               because           we

             came       th e    same         way     they          did.

             I    have       been       to    the       ground           a       number          of    times     so       I knew        where      to       go

             once       we     had      parked          the        ca r.          I did          not    see     any       Police        officers            giving

             directions.
                                                                                                                                                 PAGE



I did      not        see    anyone            causing           trouble             or    fighting              people          where          singing


but    nothing             else.

I got       to    the       entrance              to    the         ground       at       about       2pm.           There           was    a    queue

of    about       20       people         at      each        turnstile.                  I was        surprised             that          there

were       so    few       people         going         in.

There       were       a    few      Police            Officers            directing              fans          to    the        seats       and

standing             area.         But       there        were           not    as    many        Police             Officers          as       I

thought          there       would           be     nor        as    many       as    there           were       last       year       at       t ns

ssrvi“ m a t c h .          There         were          stewards           by    the           gate    and       the        turnstiles


directing             fans.

I did       not       have        any        difficulty               finding         my        entry       point           as       I have         been        a

number          of    times         before.              I would           like           to    say    that          once        through            the

turnstiles              there         is       no      sign      to      say    that           you    can       go     to    the       right         or

left       to    get        to    the        enclosures.                  Having           been       there          before           I know         that

you        can,       but        someo ne who             di d not kn ow              the        ground          would           not    know         that

you        could       get        a r o u n d a n d if        you        look    right           or        left        it    seems          as      if     it

 is    a   dead        end.         All        that       a    fan       would        see       after           comming          through             the

 turnstiles             would           be     the      centre           tunnel           and    the        pitch       at       the       end       of

 it.       He     would          automatically                      go   that        way.         I did          not    see          any     stewards

 in    that       part       of      the       ground           either.

 I did          not    have        any       difficulty                  entering          the        ground.              I went          in       through

 the       turnstiles               Nos      A ~ G.              I d i d not         see       any         gates       open          other          than

 the       turnstiles               I did not                 see a n y g at e s          being            opened.               I did       not       se e

 anyone          getting           in     other         than         through          the        turnstile.                  I knew          exactly

 where          I was       going         to      stand         and       went       straight              to    the        place.           I went

 down       the       tunnel         at      about        1415pm.               There          was     a    steady           trickle            of     fans

 going          down       the      tunnel.             There            were    no        Police          Officers              m     the       Tunnel

 or    in       the    standing              area       but         I did       see        some       Police          up     in      the     West

 Stand          they       shouted           to     a    lad        climbing              on    the    fence          to     get       down.              I did
                                                                                                                                                   PAGE



not    see        any       other       disorder             or    incidents                 between             the     entry           point       and

my    viewing           point*           There          were       no    stewards                about           either»              I did         not

see    anyone           drinking          alcohol             in    the          ground.               I was       stood            by    the       first

barrier           after          comming          out    of       the    tunnel              in P e n        4    by     the        fence          between

Pens     3    and       4.        At    about       1430pm           the         Pen        No   4 was           about         SO     pe r      cent

full *        People            were     still          comming          down           the      tunnel           and       I was         pushed

forward           a    few       yards       and    then          I would              be    able       to       move       back         to    where          I

was*         This       happened          about          3    or    4    times              until      about           1 4 4 5 pm.            At    about

1450     the          players          came       out    and       I was           pushed             down       the       terrace            and     1

ended        up       about       4    steps       from       the       front*               Then       I was          pushed            again        and             I

ended        up       with       just    one       person          between              me       and    the       fence.              I had         also

been     pushed             towards          the    gate*              I was           squashed             and       c o u l d n ’t m o v e *               My

hands        were          in    front       of    me    and       I     could          not       move       them.              There         were

people        on       the       floor       underneath                me.         I was          treading             on       them       because                I

could        not       move.           I could          feel       people              pulling          at       my     ankles           but       there

was    nothing              I    could       do*        There          were        people             being       sick*             People          were

shouting              for       the    gates       to    be       opened.               There          was       a Policeman                  and     a

Policewoman                 right       in    front          of    me        on    the       pitch*              They          were      looking

into     the          crowd.           People       were          shouting              that          people          were       dying          but          they

did    not        do       anything.              About       5    or        6    minutes             later       I heard             the       gate

being        opened             and    then       the    pushing                 and    crushing             became             worse.             I was

having        trouble             breathing*                 I was           pushed          towards             the       gate       and       when          i

was    about           2    or    3    yards       from        the       gate          I thought             I was             going       to

be    alright              then       there       was    a    big        surge          and       I ended             up       about       15-

20    yards           past       the    gate       towards             enclosure                 No    5.        Within          a minute                or       2

there        was       another          big       surge        the       opposite                way    and        I ended            up      right           in

front        of       the       gate.        As     I got         to     the       gate          there       were          2    male       Police

Officers              pushing          the    fans       back           in       they       were       saying           "get        back"*               I

heard        something                about       there       were           enough          on       the        patch         already.              I
______________________________                                                                                                                PAGE            4


thought           to    myself             t h e r e is      no    way       I am       going          to    stay       in    here.           I

reached           forward          grabbed             the       Police          Officers             coat       and     pulled         mysslf up

on    to    the    pitch.               I though             to    myself             I d o n ’t       care       if    I go    to       prison           I

am    not    staying             in     there.            As      I was          pulling          myself          out    I saw       a Police

Officer       run       from          my     right          on    to       the    Pitch.           Later          that       evening          when        I

watched       the       scenes             on     the       television                I saw       a Police             Officer          run       on   to

the    Pitch       to        the       referee          andthe              match       was       stopped.              This    was          the

Police       Officer             I had           seen       as    I was          climbing             out    of    the       pen.After

getting           on    to       the       pitch I tu rned                  around           to    face      the       crowd       in    pen       3

there       were       about           E-3       hundred          people             some       standing          some       lying       down.            I

and    other           people          were       shouting             to       the    crowd          to    move       back    to       ease       th e

pressure          at     the       front          but       they       w o u l d n ’t.            I was      looking          into       Pen       3   and

at    the    front           I    could          see    about          6    people           squashed            against       the       fence

there       faces        were          purple          and       they       were       not        moving         I thought          that          they

were       dead.         There          was       one       woman          in    particular                who    was    about          25    years           of

age.        She    was           very       purple          her    tongue             was       hanging          down    by    her       chin .

People       all        around          were       going          purple.              People          were       being       helped          over        the

fence.There              were          some       St    Johns          Ambulance                people       there       giving          mouth         to

mouth.        There              were       about       20-30          Police          Officers             there       by    this       time

helping       people              out       of    the       pens.           There          were       also       about       100    Police

officers          across           the        half      way       line,          because           the      Forest       fans       at       the

other       end    were           chanting.                 I think             that       if     some      of    the    Police          Officers

had    gone       around           to       the    other          side          of    the       tunnel       and       made     people             come

out    of    the        pen       that       way       it    would          have        eased         the    pressure.

The    only        injuries             I had          were       bruising              to      the    arms       and     ribs      and       grazes

to    legs    and        arms.              I did       not       attend             any     hospital.             The       delay       in

opening       the        gates          may       have         been        contributory                in     causing          deaths         and

injuries.               If       the    gates          had       been       wider          or     more      gates        I feel         more

people       v^ould          have       been       saved.
     H                                                                                                PAGE
     ■•Ss

            I eventually          left       the    ground    at    about      1 6 3 0 pm*        I    left    of    my    own

            accord       and   went     to    the    car    park    and   my    friend           was    already       in    the    car.

            The    only    incidents          I saw    on    the    pitch      were     cacnermen            being    pushed       away

            because       they    were       trying    to    take    photos.           There          did    not    seem    to    be

            any    control       it   was     total    mayhem*        There       were       2    off       duty    Police

            Officers       from       Liverpool       who    were    trying       to    organize             things.




                                                                                                                             SIGNED

STATEMENT        TAKEN
                 PLACE:

                 TIME:                        DATE:

WITNESS     TO    SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS     SIGNATURE:
PETER GARRETT,
My name is Peter Jeffrey Garrett I am a Police Constable with
Merseyside Police stationed at Belle Vale Police Station in
Liverpool.    I have been a Police Officer for 11 1/2 years.


On Saturday 15th April 1989 in company with Rogan Taylor, Peter
Jackson and Lawrence (Larry) Moran, I travelled to Sheffield to
attend the F.A. Semi-final football match between Liverpool F.C.
and Nottingham Forest F.C. being staged at the Hillsborough
Stadium.     I was in possession of a match ticket for admittance to
the North Stand.     I was collected at my home by Peter Jackson in
his motor vehicle at a little after 1000 hours.     Rogan Taylor was
already in the vehicle. After picking up Larry Moran from his home
in Widnes the four of us began the journey to Sheffield.


We travelled by way of the M56 and M63 to Manchester and then by
A roads to Sheffield via Glossop and the Snake Pass.     Having
travelled this particular route on many occasions in the past, I
would estimate that given reasonable driving conditions, the
maximum time for the journey would be between 1 1/2 and 1 3/4
hours.     However, due to traffic congestion leaving the M63 and for
a number of miles through Bredbury and Hyde as far as Glossop,
progress was pitifully slow and the volume of traffic eventually
added something like an hour to the travelling time.


Our party eventually arrived in the Hillsborough district of
Sheffield at approximately 1300 hours and the vehicle was parked in
a side street where I knew there was a walk of about 10-12 minutes
to the Hillsborough ground.


On leaving the vehicle, myself, Rogan Taylor, Peter Jackson and
               walked to a nearby Public House called The Freemasons
Arms: The pub was busy but not overly crowded.     Nonetheless it took
approximately 15 minutes to be served at the bar.     At the
Freemasons Arms I drank two pints of beer and enjoyed the company
of many fellow Liverpool supporters who were all in good spirits,
occasionally singing football songs etc.     I did not see anybody in
the Pub that I would have considered to have been drunk.
                                - 2 -




Just after 1400 hours Peter Jackson,               and I left the pub
to walk to the ground.    Rogan Taylor had left several minutes
previous to us as he had arranged to meet somebody else at
Hillsborough.    The three of us then walked through the shopping
area en route to the stadium.     Many of the Liverpool supporters in
the Pub had already left also, or were preparing to do so.


We arrived in Leppings Lane near to the visiting supporters'
entrances somewhere between 14.15 and 14.25 hours.     I do not recall
looking at my watch to be any more precise than that.     The first
thing that I noticed at this end of the ground was that there
appeared to be no direction with regard to queuing for the
turnstiles.     There was just one mass of humanity milling about in
the ante-area between the turnstiles themselves and a set of high
entrance gates at the roadside.     More and more people were arriving
by the minute.     Reflecting on the events that were to come later, I
can only recall seeing three or perhaps four mounted Police
Officers in the area and when I arrived these were positioned
outside the high gates in Leppings Lane itself.     There were none
stationed in the area between the gates and the turnstiles, or if
there were, I have no memory of seeing them there.     I then,
together with Peter and Larry, moved towards the block of
turnstiles on the left-hand side which were shown as the entrances
to the North Stand.     There were 8 turnstiles in all and I saw only
two Police Officers on foot positioned immediately by them.       They
obviously had no hope of trying to order any formal queues and as a
consequence the hundreds of people who were there by now were
trying to maintain some order themselves.     There was some
considerable crushing and jostling for position, it was quite a
tight squeeze; so tight in fact that until I actually reached the
turnstile aperture at something like 14.50 hours, I was unable to
get my hand into my trouser pocket to take out my ticket.        In this
crowd there were obviously people already in a distressed
condition; many voices were heard imploring a lessening of pushing
and emotive requests to the two Police Officers to get help to sort
the situation out.
Being a fairly robust person I did not suffer any undue discomfort
personally.     I have, in fact, experienced similar situations at
many football stadia over a number of years.      I do recall, however,
getting a distinct feeling of uneasiness about the situation, which
seemed to be getting more perilous rather than slackening off as
people eventually got through the turnstiles.      When I got into the
ground I had lost contact with Peter Jackson and                    but
knew that I would meet up with them at our designated seats.         What
I saw on going through the turnstiles, however, more than slightly
surprised me.


Inside the ground I saw several groups of Police Officers standing
together; it would be difficult to put an exact number on the
contingent, but certainly there were 30 or more.      I had already
determined to myself that a problem existed outside the ground, the
turnstile operation had seemed exceptionally slow and, of course,
this was probably due to the lack of proper queuing.       I felt
relieved that I was now actually inside but still had a gut feeling
that things were not as they should be.      As I walked past the
Police Sergeant and a group of Constables I made a comment to them
that is now only too clear in my mind, I said "You lot would be
better off outside, its murder out their".       I cannot recall exactly
but I think it was the Sergeant who responded to me "It's nowt to
do with us".


I then entered C Block of the stand to find my seat.       Peter Jackson
and                [were already there.   Peter greeted me and indicated
towards the Leppings Lane enclosure and commented on how full the
centre section was compared with the two outer wing sections.
When the match commenced, which was almost immediately, I went to
sit down.     It was then obvious that there was an extra person in
the row as a number of youths, three in fact, were trying to
squeeze onto two seats alongside me.       I questioned their right to
be there and asked if they had got tickets, I pointed out quite
strongly that if they did not have the appropriate tickets for
those seats they had better move on.       All three then left the row.
Given that the time was now just gone 1500 hours it may be possible
that these people had come through one of the gates now known to be
                               - 4 -


have been opened and overtaken me on the way to the stand, as I had
paused briefly to purchase a match programme and then relieve
myself.   X seem to remember that just about kick-off time a large
number of people seemed to have gathered on the gangway at the
end of the row of seats I was on.


The next 50 minutes or so from the time I had seen a Police Officer
run onto the pitch to instruct the referee to adjourn the game were
quite harrowing.    Whilst, like many others around me I was aware
that there were problems with over-crowing in the centre sections
of the Leppings Lane terrace, the reality of fatalities occurring
only dawned on me when I saw firstly a group of supporters running
with a makeshift stretcher carrying an injured person and then
seeing a second group with a similar burden, but these people were
walking and the face of the person on the stretcher had been
covered with a coat.   I said to Peter Jackson mainly, but generally
as an expression of disbelief, "Christ, he is dead".      I then stood
and watched the procession of stretchers.    I gave up counting them.
The dilemma I had was should I try to do something personally to
help or stay where I was.   The growing confusion on the pitch and
the arrival of what I thought at the time was an adequate medical
response i.e. ambulances, decided me to remain where I was.      Only
after I had heard the full extent of the casualty list did I think
that me decision was the wrong one.


After the official abandonment of the game, I looked for and found
Rogan Taylor who had been sat some dozen or so rows of seats behind
me.   I went to him and suggested that we, as officials of the
 Football Supporters' Association, should make ourselves available
 to assist in whatever way we could.   To do what exactly had not
 been fully considered, just to do something seemed imperative.
 Rogan Taylor, myself, Peter Jackson, _____________ and    John Will •=>
  f the Leicester University Sir Norman Chester Research Centre
 ffjotball went down onto the pitch and walked towards the now emp
 Leppings Lane terrace.   Near to the fence and seeing the
 devastation and also shoes, clothing and scarves littering the
 steps I, perhaps wrongly but emotionally, accused a group of Police
 Officers of being party to murder.    The only foundation for this
allegation at the time came from seeing so many Police Officers
stood on the pitch, either in a line across the ground or
individually or in groups and apparently doing little or nothing to
relieve the chaos that had been in progress a short time before.


I then walked across the terrace and out through the tunnel behind
the centre sections of Leppings Lane.    A Liverpool supporter,
having recognised either Rogan Taylor or myself because of our FSA
involvement, then came to our group and told us that he had heard
allegations that a gate had been broken down by fans.      I went with
this fan on his imploring to check the gates near to the turnstiles
that I had entered 1 1 / 2 hours or so earlier.    I personally checked
the operation of them and they were completely undamaged.      Mr Andy
Williamson, a Football League Official had also by now joined us
and was present when the gate was examined.       After a discussion
with other Liverpool supporters still in the vicinity and trying to
comfort a totally distressed Police Inspector, I and the rest of
the party aforementioned, made our way to the main entrance of the
stadium and went to the press box to try and gain more information
about the exact nature of the tragedy.    At some time well after
1800 hours, myself, Rogan and         were driven back to Liverpool
by Peter Jackson.
                                                                             23rd April, 1989-


Dear Rogan,

Following my telephone conversation with your wife on Thursday 20th April, I
am putting in writing for record, if required, facts which we feel are a vital
contribution to the Public Enquiry following the Hillsborough Disaster.

My wife and I travelled to the F.A. Cup Semi-Final by car and left the M1
Motorway at exit 36.   We then followed the signposts for Sheffield North, A 6 1 ,
leading off the first roundabout from the M 1 . Several yards along this road,
the Police were stopping all football coaches, which is usual practice noted
from our previous visits to Hillsborough, thus delaying the arrival time of
these coaches at the ground.   We then approached the next roundabout, where
Police were stopping all traffic except traffic coming from the M1 direction.
However, whilst following the road around the roundabout, a Policeman was
standing next' to a large traffic indication board, complete with directional
arrow, directing traffic to the Hillsborough Ground.   As I approached this
board, I hesitated and almost stopped as the arrow was incorrectly pointed,
thus sending traffic down the Manchester/Stockbridge road.   Fortunately,
because of my previous visits to Hillsborough, I realised just in time that
the arrow on the board was pointed in the wrong direction.   The Policeman
in question noticed my hesitation, quickly glanced at the board and
immediately moved the arrow to the correct direction of Sheffield North.
Certainly the two cars in front of me were football spectators and were
clearly directed away from the ground, the approximate time being 2.00 -
2.10. p.m.   We both looked down the Manchester/Stockbridge road and as far as
our eyes could see, all the cars were held up in a traffic jam and Policemen
were not allowing traffic from this road into the roundabout.

We ask ourselves,                   how many cars were sent in the wrong direction and for how
long were they held up?

Obviously, we both feel very strongly and passionately about this tragedy
and if you require any further details or confirmation of these facts, please
do not hesitate to contact us.

We wish you all the very best in your efforts to see that this time the
truth is told to the public, not only for the families of the bereaved and
injured, but for all decent people.

Yours sincerely,




Davlci Hartley                      \s
   • T   v   H O _ w iJ L * 4   .
........... ./■
Margaret Hartley
 / A /K

S&C^SXF         ^\JASX'       ^       ^k-qd'^Jc)


/ * i ^7?v<r          s< 3^ & ? -xk<        ocv?     /A o(y?A jj^ ^ .      (xjm <jo*t
^ 0       /9 ^ /^ V /J M ^    ^ o        ^ 7 ^ -    X "0 0   xaj   /^ s v a c t^

          06^       ^S'".     /JS      7% *cy<&00<^I         <^i^Kr7" /T -
0 3 ^ ^ 4 (K f               'T^Azy    X /^ & r    -S oA ^77
y^s -^y<^><-o^>«-i                    (X6x?j /^ \i<r                      ^<r

                                    <£^Ar          Q«ys
S$<sy      y^b^T^tS^ %
  M
  1SO
    UTH
S
H E
  FFIE
     LDC
       ENT
         RE
  R
  OTH
    ER
     HAM

                    S
                    HEF
                      FIE
                        LDNOR
                            TH
                    T
                    OHILL
                        SBO
                          ROU
                            GH



                 /%</C<7MAi &'7>y
                   & & -C 7 7 0 A S X X .
                   ^//& <:07vs4g -7 ^ /y ^ /c   -t t /'C
                   t i y & w g &/y.




      U
      NOP
        ENE
          DRO
            AD
                            MAN
                              CHE
                                STER
                            S
                            TOC
                              KBRID
                                  GE
                              I
                         Ml    SOUTH




                                                                                 Ml    SOUTH

                                                                          S H E F F IE L D   CENTRE

                                                                                 ROTHERHAM


                                                                                                                 S H E F F IE L D   NORTH

                                                                                                                 TO   H IL L S B O R O U G H




                                        S H E F F IE L D   (N O R T H )
                                                   A61




BARNSLEY




                                                                                             U N O PEN ED ROAD
                                                                                                                       M AN CH ESTER

                                                                                                                      S T O C K B R ID G E



           E X IT   36




                          Ml    NORTH
STATEMENT F*HM MR T HICKS - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15 ._4._89^

Myself, my wife and 2 daughters obtained our tickets from Anfield

with the 2 girls getting standing tickets on vouchers from their

Kop Season Ticket.       My wife was allocated a seat tickeu,           and I

myself was given a standing ticket, - by the allocation, based on

the Main Stand Season Ticket Serial Number allocation.



We travelled together in my car to Sheffield making only 1 stop ao

the Woodall services just after Junction 30 on the Ml.                 We then

proceeded along the M1 and followed the Police signs at the first

junction, asking us to proceed to the next.         We encountered a long

tailback    ( 1 - 2   miles   in nearside lane)but I continued          in the

 centre lane towards the front of the queue, where I was able to

 leave the motorway down the dual carriageway section of the slip

 road.   (Time approximately 12.10 pm).      We then followed the signed

 route to Hillsborough and when we got to the Ground, I travelled

 along the A61 Penistone Road towards the city until I was able to

 turn round and return to the car park which was being provided in

 the c o r n e r of the large park between the A61 Penistone R oa d and the

 A616 Parkside Road.      We parked the car at approximately 12.45 pm

 and we had the picnic lunch w h i c h we had brought with us.



 At about 1 .40 pm we left the car, walked along Parkside Road to the

 Leppings Lane end and arranged to rendezvous with my wife outside

 the small tobacconists to the left of the approach area.                In the

 bridge    approach   area,   I would   estimate   perhaps   6 - 1 0     Police
Officers were present (no Police horses) and it was all fairly calm

with only small numbers of fans milling around.



Ti-tween the car and arrival at the turnstiles, we were asked by

about 3 people if we had any spare tickets - normal for such a big

game.



Other than in the approach area,           I only remember seeing Police

Officers (2 or 3) near a small Police kiosk on Parkside Road.                 I

do not remember seeing any mounted Police at all.



At about 1 .55 pm, my 2 daughters and I went through the turnstiles,

 our tickets being taken, split and the "retain” section returned.

 Upon entering the yard beyond, I remember small numbers of people

 milling around, with 1 Policeman near our turnstile and perhaps 1 -

 2 more in the yard area.       There we r e about 2 - 3        stewards in the

 general area plus 2 selling programmes to the left of the tunnel.



 The    "standing”   sign   above    the   tunnel   was   the    only   guidance

 v i s i b l e /given to us and there was no indication that it was not the

 only way to the terraces.        My daughters proceeded down the tunnel,

 and    I bought   2 programmes     from   the venders    to the left of     the

 tunnel.



 I wanted a-cup of coffee and observed a refreshment kiosk to the

 right of the tunnel - I believe under the stairway into the seating
area.    I queued for a few minutes and purchased my cup of coffee.

It was this act that enabled me to see it was possible to go around

the base of the West Stand into the corner Terraces between the

West and South Stands.        This area was sparsely occupied with a wide

choice of positions, I took up a position about 2nd barrier from

the rear in front of the floodlight tower and to the left of the

Police box. (See exhibit A).           I stood in this position drinking ray

coffee, reading the programme and listening for Team news etc on

the small transistor radio I had in my pocket.



A little before the kick-off,               (approximately 14.50 pm, I noticed

there were large numbers of people in the centre sections (I now

understand these to be known as Pens Numbers 3 and 4).                        From my

position on the terrace,            I could quite clearly see the dividing

fence and could see several people crushed against this side fence,

many clearly in some distress.               One in particular, an old man, I

believe wearing a light grey coat or possibly suit, had his oyeg

closed.     People were being pulled from the rear of the Pens up into

the     seating   area   of   the    West    Stand.    People were      also    being

pulled/assisted      over     the    dividing     fence   and   some   youths    were

 scrambling       over    the       pitch     side    fence     but    were     being

 repelled/arrested by Police Officers on the pitch.



 A senior Police Officer was standing on the landing of the Police

 Box,   I would estimate some 10 feet away from my position and I

 called several times to him trying to attract his attention to the
crushing.     (I believe he had gold braid on the peak of his cap and

was wearing a light coloured anorak).               He ignored me completely and

continued to observe the scene for some minutes until he walked

down the steps and round the segregation baccier underneath the

South Stand.      (I believe he was the Officer who ran onto the pitch

and told the Referee to stop the game some few minutes later).



A television cameraman with a shoulder held video camera (I think

the one shown in Exhibit "A” ) took up a similar position but after

many    shouts from the crowd            (and possibly some coin throwing) he

then left the landing and went back under the South Stand.



Another Police Officer who I believe I can recognise facially (I

believe to have had black braid on the peak of his cap) took up a

 similar    position     on      the    steps/landing.         X   again       implored      him

 several times      that people were being crushed and couldn’t he do

 something to help.           He initially ignored tae and then after say 3

 of    4 calls    to him,     looked down      at me and said             "Oh,    shut your

 fucking    rattle", and          then     continued     to    look       in    the     general

 direction of Pens 3 and 4,



 Both    myself    and   the      man    standing   on    my       left   were        exv.'-eflely

 concerned as I knew this was roughly where my daughters were and

 this man said he had a son in the same section.                               More and more

 people were b e g i n n i n g    to climb out of the section and I became

 increasingly concerned for ray daughters* safety.
The gaitie had just kicked off and a Police cordon of 2 - 3 men deep

were put in an arc around the 2 central Pens behind the goal and

it was obvious that their purpose was to prevent anybody climbing

over    the    barrier.     It   is   my   belief      that    several   people   were

actually held back and *11 the signs were that the Police Officers

had been given instructions to contain the people within the Pen

area.    Officers along the fence appeared to be pushing people back,

whereas       their colleagues standing in the arc were just standing

watching, many with their arms crossed.                 I would estimate this took

place for some 5 - 1 0       minutes, bringing the time to approximately

15.05 - 15.10.



It was during this         time that the Officer in the light coloured

anorak ran onto the pitch aivl spoke to the Referee, whereupon the

game was stopped,         (I know this to be 15.06).



 I also noticed a large number                  (100 - 150 approximately)         Police

 Officers emerged from the opposite corner and they took up lines

 across the pitch at the ’’centre” and along the North Stand.



 I started to move down the terraces towards the side fence to try

 to find my daughters and to render what assistance I could.

 As I got approximately half way down, I saw the limp form of my

 youngest daughter Victoria,           being passed over the barrier.                    I

 therefore .changed        direction       to    the   pitch   access    gate   from   ray

 section (which was manned by a Policeman) and pushed my way onto
the pitch.



X came upon my 2 daughters Victoria <^iid Sarah, laid on the pitch

just at the touchline slightly to the right of the goal.             -Sarah was

receiving    assistance   front 1 man     and he,   ftyself   plus   2 others

started to render mouth to mouth resuscitation to both of them.

One of the men attending to Sarah called for suction {I have since

discovered that this was Dr C K Flenley), while we continued to

resuscitate my daughters I shouted my daughters names into their

ears and called to Police/Medics several times for suction but none

was available.       We then continued taking turns at mouth to mouth

resuscitation.       One man was called away to help a friend and it

therefore     left    myself   and   1    other   giving   mouth     to   mouth

resuscitation on Victoria with Dr Flenley and a man in a chequered

shirt,   (who was apparently an off-duty Policeman from the crowd)

rendering assistance to Sarah.           There was no medical equipment or

assistance available to us throughout this time.              We continued to

give mouth to mouth resuscitation, taking turns for some 10 minutes

or more, whereupon the first ambulance (the one trapped behind the

goal) tried to get past us catching my toes            I knelt and the foot

of someone else laid on the pitch.



This ambulance had taken up a ridiculous position with its movement

 onto/off the ground grossly impaired.         Presumably this was to avoid

 cutting up the playing surface.
We continued to attempt to resuscitate my daughters for a few more

minutes when a fireman came over carrying an oxygen bottle with a

face mask attached {smoke-inhalation device?) but this was no good

as we could not get the girls to breath unaided and the pressure

in the bottle/regulator was insufficient to force oxygen into their

lungs.



A second ambulance came onto the pitch area and stopped adjacent

to us.     We agreed to put Sarah and Victoria into this ambulance.

Two of us put Victoria into this second ambulance and were about

to turn around and lift Sarah into it, when a third group of people

put in a man who had to go onto the floor.              I then was faced with

the     awful choice     of   leaving Sarah,    who   I was assured would be

placed in the next ambulance which was apparently coining.



The ambulance started to move away so I rejoined Victoria and along

with a Pc.1926 McGuinness,- continued to give mouth to mouth.



In the ambulance was the ambulance attendant, a woman, myself and

PC McGuiness.         There was a young man in his 2 0 *s on the floor, who

did in fact have a throat tube in his mouth, but the ambulance man

 said    was   dead   within a    minute   or   so of   us driving   off.   The

Ambulance Attendant and the woman attended a person on the other

 seat, but he was also pronounced dead by the ambulance man.                The

 ambulance.man and myself continued artificial respiration with PC

 McGuinuess holding an oxygen bottle and we continued throughout the
time    it   took   us    to   reach   the   Northern General       Hospital.     The

ambulance man was of the opinion he felt a faint pulse on a couple

of occasions during this journey.



Victoria was        then taken straight         into the Casualty section and

because      they   thought      there   was    possibly     some   life,   received

immediate medical attention from a team of Doctors and Nurses aided

by PC McGuinness.          I observed for so«vie 2 or 3 minutes, whereupon

I was asktad to          leave the area and was taken into a side room.

Obviously conditions were extremely hectic with people and bodies

arriving very quickly.            The Hospital was well equipped and I was

given the impression that all possible care was being taken with

people who were believed to have a chance.



After about 10 minutes,            I was informed by PC McGuinness that my

daughter had been pronounced dead.              I thanked PC McGuinness for his

assistance and also apologised for the verbal abuse I had poured

upon him as a representative of the Police throughout our time in

the ambulance and at the Hospital.               Once I was told that Victoria

was dead, I then went around the Hospital trying to locate Sarah

on the grounds that I had been told she would be in an ambulance

following closely behind.



After    some   30 minutes       of    futile   searching,    I was    taken    to the

Physiotherapy Department by a Psychiatric Nurse                                    who

had come on duty to help with the problems.                    I was kept in this
area for some half to three quarters of an hour and on a couple of

occasions                          [tried to establish whether Sarah was indeed

at this Hospital or not.                Eventually,    I was taken round to the

section of the Hospital where the bodies of the deceased were being

attended to.           I gave a description of Sarah to the Police Officers

on    duty   and       it appeared     that   they had      "a young    un-identified

female'* who could possibly have been the Sarah.                   A Police Officer

went into the room and brought out a Swatch waccA wn.ich I felt at

the time was the same as that of my daughter Sarah.                       After about

10 or 15 minutes, I was taken across to the Hospital Mortuary to

identify who I expected to be Sarah.                  It is now a matter of record

that this was indeed Victoria who somehow had become detached from

her     label   when      I   at    first   identified her on      admission to       the

Hospital.          Despite     the    unnecessary     distress   this    caused    to me

personally         I    did   not    feel   bitter    towards    the    Hospital    as   I

considered they were attempting to cope with the extreme pressure

 that was put upon them.



 Myself,                           and a Reverend returned to the main Hospital

 building and I wa s retained for perhaps another half an hour or so.

 Throughout this time, I was trying to establish the location of my

 wife    and    Sarah.        I explained     again    that Sarah’s condition was

 obviously      serious when          we were   on    the   pitch and     that    she wa.i

 supposedly "in the next ambulance” .                   I was then told that         some

 casulaties- had been taken to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and

 that Sarah could be there (as could my wife).
Communications       were       difficult     and    everbody,   both   medical   and

administrative, were at full stretch and all telephone liaes were

jammed.      I was       told   that   11   people were dead at         the Northern

General Hospital and that no other females were there.                       Further

discussions took place and it was agreed that I should go to the

Hallamshire Hospital and if my wife arrived at the Northern General

Hospital,    I would be contacted and she would not be told about

Victoria’s death until I returned to meet her.



At about 6 o ’clock,            I was taken by a young female Padre

                                    to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.            Upon

arrival,    I gave       a full description          to the    staff and they then

circulated it to see whether Sarah had indeed been admitted.                         I

had to wait in the general reception area for some time, attended

initially by                        ^nd nurses from the Hallamshire Hospital.

At   one point,      a    man in a     suit    stood on a desk and called          for

attention.       He read out a list of ’'patients" who had been taken to

the Northern General Hospital.                He called out Victoria's name and

as I knew she was dead, I broke down and began to cry.



A nurse     took   me     into a side       room and     tried   to console me and

assured     me   they were       attempting     to    locate   Sarah and   that   some

people had been taken to Barnsley Hospital.                      I said T suspected

the worst because of Sarah’s condition on the pitch.

A Police Officer also took full details of the location of my car

and ray wife and assured me he would try to locate and re-unite me
with my wife before she was advised of the death of Victoria.



At    about   19.45,     I received    a message       to say that my wife had

arrived at the Northern General Hospital and I was then taken back

there by a ’’Cruse Councillor" (I                                        } in her cac.

At approximately 20.00 hours, my wife and I were re-united in the

fover of the Northern General Hospital, where I was appalled to

find she had been advised of the death of Victoria had been refused

permission to see her body and had been told I was with a female

at the Hallamshire Hospital whom she had assumed was Sarah.                               She

was distraught when I was unable to confirm Sarah’s whereabouts.




I made formal protests to both Hospital aad Police Authorities and

demanded our rights to see our child.                 After some 5 or 10 minutes

we were advised by the Assistant Matron that our daughter’s body

 was no longer on the Hospital premises, and at police instructions,

 had been taken back to the Hillsborough Ground.



 I    protested        strongly   at   this       callous     and     unnecessary         act,

 especially as I had already identified her twice, latterly at rest

 in    the    hosptlal    mortuary.        My    protestations were          met    by    off­

 handedness      by     the   Police   Officer      (who    claimed     it    was    at    the

 Coroners instruction) and sympathetically by the Assistant Matron

 (who had       tear    filled    eyes).        We were     advised    that    there were

 “several an-identified people at the ground" and we should return
there.



Nobody advised us how many casualties/bodies we could expect to

find, no transport was offereed and we were left to make our own

way there.



In the accompaniment of a

                            drove us back to Hillsborough in his car,

whereupon    we arrived   at the    entrance    to the Gynasium/Temporary

Mortuary at approximately 22.00 hours.           We were refused entrance

by an extremely callous, rude and unbelievably insensitive Police

Officer in charge on the gate.       He was a Ranking Officer (X believe

Inspector)    and   regretfully,   X did     not take   his   name.    He   was

totally callous to i<ty wife and 1 and this can be borne out by the

2   independent     witnesses   aforesaid-      After   considerable   heated

argument with him,      I compromised,       agreed to go to the park and

collect my car, whereupon he would then allow us access upon our

return.



The 4 of us plus a Police Constable walked back along Penis tone

Road to the corner of the park where I discovered the gate was

still open and my Granada car was the only one remaining on the car

park.     We then drove back to the Ground gates and parked outside.




Further remonstrations with aforesaid Police Officer took place and
we were again refused admission.           In addition he upset my wife

further by saying we had no rights in the matter, that the girls •

were the property of the Coroner, and would have to undergo a Post

Mortem.        His attitude to us, and handling of us, was unbelievably

callous.       I wish to make a formal complaint about this Officer when

he can be identified.       I gave my business card to a Norwegian Press

Photographer who took photographs during my remonstrations with the

Police Officer.         Should I receive contact from him, then I will

make these available.         The best that the Police Officer could do

was to offer for us to sit in a Police van for 30 minutes.                 This

I refused to do and said that I insisted that having been sent

there by the Hospital, knowing full well 1 daughter was dead and

suspecting the fate of the other, I demanded to be allowed access.

After a few minutes, two CID Officers (aged in their mid 30* s             with

one in a brown leather jacket) took charge of the situation and

guided my wife, myself and our 2 Social Worker colleagues into an

anteroom.        This Officer is to be commended for his handling of an

 extremely difficult situation.         He did explain that the formalities

 were not quite completed and he did so in a sensitive and caring

 manner.



 After some 10 or 15 minutes wait, we were shown into a room at the

 side     of    the   gymnasium   and   asked   to   view   some   81   Polaroid

 photographs which were pinned to a board.              My wife said "Oh, my

 God, how-can there be so many dead!" he replied "I’m afraid that

 this isn’t the end of it, Love".
We   quickly    identified      the    photograph of           our    youngest     daughter

Victoria/      bat    .Initially      were    unable      to    see    that   of     Sarah*

Naturally, we hoped at this time she may have been a survivor and

at one of the other Hospitals.                We were asked to look again and

whereupon we found what we beleived to be the photograph of our

elder daughter        (Reference No 24).           Again the CID Officer in the

brown jacket asked us would we please wait for a few minutes and

would we prefer our daughters bodies to be brought out together or

independently.         My wife and I requested that they be brought out

together.       This    was   carried        out   with    a    reasonable       degree   of

sensitivity     and    formal      identification         of   our    2 daughters      took

place.   During the identification, my wife cuddled both and noticed

that Sarah's body was still warm - calling out "She's still warm -

 are you sure .she's dead!".            I consolled her but also noticed the

distinct difference between Victoria's body and Sarah's.



After a few minutes to say our farewells to our 2 daughters we were

ushered to a series of tables set up at one end of the gymnasium,

whereupon we were interviewed by,                  I believe 2 male and 2 female

Police Officers, and I was asked to swear out a statement.                                We

also took receipt of the personal effects of Victoria which were

in a white plastic bag from the Hospital.



At the same time, I gave a description of a brown leather jacket

(American Flyer type) that Sarah had been wearing upon entry to the

Ground but was not wearing when I last saw her on the pitch.                          After
some   10    -    15   minutes   delay,   (coinciding   with   the   time    I was

swearing out the statement) the jacket was retrieved and returned

to us.      TJpon examination of the pockets, all of Sarah's personal

effects,     money, cheque book, wallet, cards, bus passed and I.D.

appeared to be intact.           We therefore took possession of the jacket

and signed the necessary forms for the Police Officers.                     My wife

and I were given a cup of tea and the Social Workers escorted us

from the Mortuary.



We were given offers of accommodation from various Clergy and the

2   Social       Workers   but   expressed   a   desire   to   return   home     to

Middlesex.        A half-hearted promise of a Police driver to drive us

back was made but I declined and preferred to drive myself.                      My

wife and I returned home,            arriving home at     some 2.30 am Sunday

morning.         Following release at lunch time of the first casualty

list which contained the names of our 2 daughters *;aong 14 others,

we were inundated with telephone calls and visits from the Press.

It is questionable whether full address details should have been

given in that first casualty list.



I would summarsize my assessment of what I experienced as follows



1      The Ground/approach areas policing/stewarding was low key -

       even casual, with little guidance and control being excerted.

2      There are a limited number of turnstiles through which to go.

3      Once through the turnstiles, the only sign visible was above
the tunnel, giving a natural inclination towards this route

in - especially if you were in a hurry.

Police/Stewards failed to notice the build up in the central

pens.

They did not distribute the fans to the side areas.

Senior Officer ignored (and many others) pleas to help those

in the central pens.

It was obvious the Police totally nisread events - believing

a     pitch   invasion./trouble        was     underway     and       mounted      a

restraining rather than rescue operation.

The rescue commenced some 10 minutes too late and was totally

dis-organised,      - The      death    toll    being     much    higher      as   a

consequence.

The     fences   were   such   they    prevented     escape       -    even   with

assistance over the top.

The single gate was of little use other than to those in the

near vicinity and it was opened too late.

Medical assistance and equipment was inadequate/non-existant.

Ambulance/Fire assistance was far too late arriving.
s/jrC/ts   m t m e V i   *0   tf/CLMaiMW   n/ipn   gt.H/tf'T   /*
Incident             102          ■;60SS9 O P 6453                 Li   U C v i'"1i:.N ; W C U r\D      r   r>   i'M ■

-- - t
                                                                                                            STAT-EriSiNiT                      1:361

                                                                                                                                             S t a t ia n

Surname

Fore names

Age                                                                           kts              at   birth

-
v"';Cl■
      •
      ■■T *->


0 c c j.      11 o n
                                                                                                             WES7 MIDLANDS POLICE
 T e i s pnq n a                                                                                          DATA PROTECTION ACT 1984.
 .£ C
                                                                               ; u     *   u      THIS COMPUTER PRINTOUT iS SUBJECT
                                                                                                  OF vM£ nATA PROTECTION ACT. IT IS
 hair       colour
                                                                                                  THE PROPERTY OF THE INCIDENT ROOM
 ”‘ia 1 r ---y
 ■                                                                                                IT IS YOUP RESPONSIBILITY TO
                                                                                                  RETURN THIS PRINTOUT TO THE
    ,CS                                                                          am p
                                                                                                ’I n c id e n t room w h e n you h a v e
 Facial            na:i.r                                                                         COMPLETED THAT ENQUIRY.

 lu .i.a S S 3 S                   W S                                               ::c n o

 Number            of Pag a a V

 ijcius a                          Li ' ;G569                                                                                                            gr^


                    I am a iTi'ir          sd man aru.; ^ * iva a i ths d.uovt -a-.,.J.; i ->                                 i in I'fry wite .an-.,,

                    t:h i I u r s n ,

                    I ain a life           long L i verpool            S u p porter and               I co          rsquiariy       to      thair

                    matches,,            I yea mos t      cf the horns matches ana as many away matches as

                    a   c:an.

                    For     the    oast     two yaar^i      i nave a r r a n g e d                  «o 90          o     -i * i juor'c jgn    uu w«s ^ u

                    L i v srsoo 1 play          in the r .A Cup den'll !• inai «                            in asnn c<ccatsi ot?s sfiy

                    friend                            •and 1 doth got a car tain                             nuiiid^r of tickati                fcr

                    the mat ch from Ar.f isia because we af8 age n us Wi»,i »na rtr.v i a a

                    De vs Ioprnent O r g a n i s a t i o n .                          arranges a 31 -saatsr coach                            t n r t;u s n

                    Voel     C o a c h e s » D y s s r i n , uiywa , I’.orir. u-jaiO's«                            a.;,ways     go inuq       »nv

                    ivia c ... h with a     qqgci    nvaty w   _   i      r-aiTtG x '>                                              -a.,u       Mu   v


                    tickets        for     the Lapping's L a S t a n d i n g                        area.           !ney wars at a            pri::;?

                    of £.6.00.                      was   goir.o       i rs the s Cana to watch \ , n s                         §arv<e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAGE                    ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  b-Iic;'~i

      On S a t u r d a y           15 April                         198? the                  coach set off at approx. 1 0 am to

      travel        to H i l l s b o r o u g h                            for           the      semi                  final.                          We stopped just                                  outside

      Sh e f f i e l d at a place                                   called S t o c k b r i d g e ? to have a couple                                                                               cf      oints             in

      the     oub ana              to get                     s o mething                 to eat                        before we travelled                                            onto the

      qarae.        It wauls                         have           been about                        12.15 to 12,30 when we a c t u a l l y cot

      into     the     pub.                      We       intended to stay in Stockbricge                                                                              unti i about

      2    o'clock ana qc straight                                                to          "ie ground                              from t hsra,                            *6       nad ohly seen

      in ths          u b for a few s m u U s                                             when a ~olice:na:; cahe                                                           into, t               .? ;:;uc ana

      to a a us ail                to dr:;.T-;< up ana                                    got                      Da c k                  - ic ins                  coach,                a;..:.                    .. ar'.u

      cot     cacK                 c                 ine          c oacn          aha set                          ofy             ■c i n s                     grouna.               uusv as we we-e

      aopreacninc; S h e f f i e l d                                      Coward':; the fcinsftd.eid v,.tana s aay ground,                                                                                    ins

> •   coach was          stoocec. by ins noiice                                                       ^no                searched                           iv         r a.,.conoi„                           snere

      was     no alcohol                         on the                   coach,          and we were                                      told by ine Po.„ ce to                                                  carry

      on to the ground ana                                           par;< up.                     Trie Police man                                          ::-o n 1.e d :-;.i to                        Che

      driver        w n i c n way                     i c g o out                       t ns r s were                              no o.i                        i o n s o n e r ~n a n                                       ••

       ;        O         O -v a       ' ■" '3   Q    Q    -J .   V: j.    3     w -S         w '. , i T       7" • - * -f   *;.    L- w    ■“   »>.        i    ~            r~r ■   isrW c ';   7 y     W   ■




      uoiilinci         !j1ant.                        it w o u l d                navs            been                  aoouC                   a c            c:. a:.-,    oy       ihis                    T.e .

      Everybody          qai                         oft          tne          c o a c h arid                      re ts?c                  Andy                 ana        _ dec idea to go ana

      find      a pub        to                      nave          a      c o u p l e of pin ts                              ana           get              something                 to eat               bef o r e

      we     went     into             the            game.                    There           were                  a        lot          of L i v e r p o o l                    suoportars                          in

      ths     Odb     but          the               atmosphere                         was        really                          friendly and                             gogd.                 'mere              was

      no     t r o u b 1 e in               there.

      ,;■) 0 ca tTie o u t oi*                   un e o u o a u a o o u i ,                            c . «         u a nex w -v                 u    ;j            •....t <s. ^
                                                                                                                                                                co a ’                       *- o         o-            ■          ■■■•

      to get some                  fish and                          chi ps w h i c h we ate                                           on the way down to the ground,

      we got        to H i l l s b o r o u g h at                                   roughly 2.30                                    pm,.               Last year                   before we

      actually          got            to the gates                                there ware Police Officers                                                                 stopping                        the

      fans anci fil t e r ! n q                                   everyone               slowly through towards                                                             the       entrance and

       chs    turnstiles,                            so tnat a l t h o u g h                                there was                              s o i - o?                oashin^ ana

      jostling          the Police                                 were          in control                                  cf the                situation.

      This year we want                                    s t r aight                  into               the sn Cranes                                    o t ^ne          g r aunu                   {t_e pp i no s
                                                                                                                                                                 H Aut
                                                                                                                                                                 S361

      Lane)       without being stopped.                                      1 can only                remember seeing                           two Police

      horses           by the gates and one Police Officer                                                on foot.                       They a p p e a r e d               to

      be trying              to get          some       crowd org a n i s a t i o n but there ware                                                literally

      hundreds              of people mill i n g ar c u n d the are a by the turnstiles and                                                                               tne

      police were                not m a n a g i n g           to organise                    the       crowd aC all.

      Peter           had    ieft       us earlier                 because            he was            going          mio             the stanas                    to

      w a t c h tne          cams.                      ana        1 went           through             tne       ::nrsrca                 ua-.-es an a ;:oua u

      see a           -c w cf turnsti... ss on the                             far     le--t for area                           'A"                tne       rer,,

      ones along              wees       far area              ‘C 5 «          We assumed                tna- area                       ' i - mu-,t nave

      Deer, aroui-d the                   cor;", er to tne                    right*           we ss;s               caugn,, ■ ■ »:un                        .no

      (■•f owd who           seemed          to oe         neaoinc             C,owarG.s area                     u- ' .           \        - e &v: '‘                     :^

> •   ■'J 3 O P 1 S    In    X: n 8    C fO ^Q     v       ^   1 ii    Wei a    &     S i &       vO      O       w .s i/ :*i     « >:     i ;f    utici j


      d i r e c t i o n      b a c a u s s    ws       w o u I g      i , w ^ r a i           Ha. v s    na.a                   r.-svn;    t o u c h v       h u t


        a c < through                 tnerti to have               tried, to fxna tna a-"ea ' s'                                          >.•u r ns u i * es ,,            v<e

      knew an y w a y from                   last year                that we           couia w a             a      around               „o           .*a t.f;■-*

      we were           :,n t h a g r o u n d .

      On the way               to the         t u rnstiles                I    can't          remamder               -.eeing any Police

      Officers              or S t e w a r d s         other          than the ones manning                                     tne td,- ns tilas.

      A nd y went            through first and                          the Stew a r d an tna turnstile                                            cueriao                ms

      ticket           because          it was           for       the        terraces            at area                         .       however with                      tne

      crowd outs i os the S t e w a r d                            let him            into the ground ana                                   i actual;, y

      tore       off        the       stub of my ticket and                             handed           it        i-o Che Stew a r d                    on          cne

      turnstile.                  He oid't             bother           to     check          it.        I had net seen anybody

      outside           geting          into       the gr o u n d other                       than through tne turnsti i e s „

      whe n we want                   into    the        ground           I knew the                layout              of the L a p p i n g s L a n e

      end and Andy and                       I walked              towards            the terraces,,                            Last year wh a n wa

      had got               into the ground                    it was a bit                   later,           proaaaiy at                        lease         tive            i,o

      three and there was a line                                      of Police Officers                              farming a cordon across

      the      entrance               to the        tunnel            stopping            people              entering                   tne      oens        cehma

      t h e goal.
                                                                                                                                PAGE
                                                                                                                                S 361

This year            it was        only about 2.40,              2.45        pm and as               there were              no Police

Of f i c e r s    or S t e w a r d s ar o u n d         the    entrance           of ths tunnel              directing

people a way towards                   the other             terraces,       we thought                'what we would go

thro u g h the          tunnel        to get a standing                 position behind                   tne goal,               The

tunnel was             fairly        crowded as wa went                 down       it and it get more                        aridmore

con g e s t e d towards              the opening at             the terraces,

At    the     en d     of    the     tunnel      we w e n t     into     pen 4 . on             tne     left       nanu         <ude

of    C he     tunnel.         Th;.s w a s n ' t        through       cnoi c:s . i.t was               lie c a u se       tne

pressure          of    ths    crow a a r o u r . c .    us    foresc        us    to    go to         tne    ...e f t - ,

and    I ..lot s o a t         uo and        1 ~as       carried        oy    the       •: ••c - u     o rwar cs »            1 endea

up a r o u n d area L5               on   Chs grid            chat was        shown to s* ay                 _____________                 i

d o n ’t know wnat             haspsnau          to                   I ' :■« su^s       Chat some of                 n      ti-'ny    my

feet     c o u ! a n vt have          even    bean on the             ground.            The         pressure         of the

crowd was            unba I ievac 1 s *          It was worse             tnan anything                      -naci ever          oear;

in before.              It was        probaoiy about £.45,                    2,50        by this         time.              You just

couldn't          says at all,             rriy arms were            pinned across my                    chss'C.             The-'?

was          a barrier two            or three          steps    in front           of me and             1 coula see             tr.ree

lads     trapped agai n s t                ths    barrier ana they coularrt move,                                         I thought

to myself            that     it just wasn't                 right,     tne       crush was            so bad that you

c o u l d n ’t move at all,                  I wanted          to gat        out out          it was         impossible               to

go anywhere,                 I was     f r i g h t e n e d by this           time and           I just        concentrated

on keeping my head up and making                                sure      that       1 d i u n ’t go          down.

E v e r y b o d y was        s h o uting at Police Officers                        who were on               Che area            in

front        of   the front           gates      behind        the goal           to open the gates and get

people         out.         T hey were       just       shouting at us               to push back but you

c o u l d n ’t push b a c kwards              at ail.           They obviously                  c o u l d n ’t have

realised          the s e v e r i t y      of the situation.

The     pressure was               still     increasing          from behind and                      I became aware                  that

the          m a t c h had k i c k e d off.             At    some    point        there was a really big                         surge

and          e v e r y b o d y was    pushed       forward.            I don't          know wnat            caused tne
surge     but. it o b v i o u s l y        can'ie from a a h x n d •

I was     carried         past      the   barrier and nearer                to the -front,                I felt myself

brush agai n s t          the      barrier     on the way           past,       I was      carried down

towards      the      perimeter           fencing      <N7 on the grid),                  I remember seeing a

person       I think         it was       probably a male               lying   on the floor against                        the

•wall by the          perimeter           fence.       1 c o u l d n ’t say whstner              or       not ha would

nave    been dead or alive.                    rsopis wars           screaming ana              Damping           cy      U'"us

time.        It w o u l a ;iava jean            im o o s io ie for anybody                io    rave       helped         cns

man on 'tne floor,

1 enued       ...    i-sd"    Lo try       perimeter        lines and           i wa      as.--, e         mpr;-: up           i,o

the    fence ana          pull      myssif      up   :rn i,u the fence.             oecause          of    tnn wiy          .,na

.oars sloped at              the    top of      une fence          I was    finding         .:.t uifficpj. t                   ge~

ovef,        1 just       rememoer         a P o l i c e m a n snouting          -a„ me     to jump ana                 t nr aw

m yself      forw a r d      onto    him and somehow               1 managed        to do                  ihe

P o l i c e m a n half       caught me ana wa              both half        fell.         1 was       out      cf tne          pen

a n t he     cinder are a           jenmd       the goal          and    i. t ni nk someone           to i d     it;e    ucj ge

onto    the     pitch w n i c h        1 die,        I locked for my mate                             dut      :o ...;.,n' •
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                           ,

s e e ; 1m »

1 got myself           together           a gain and as           I looked around              I saw a ,.a c. *yi rg

on tne       pilcn where            he had been b r o u g h t .             I In:         he was          conscious            out

in a     lot of       oain.         No b o d y a p p e a r e d    to ,..,e with him so together                         with

anot h e r     lad     who      1 don't       Know we      picked nim uo and                carried         rum across

the     Pitch,         We we r e going           to take         him toward.; tne          fuayars          entrance?

but    then on the way acr o s s we were                          told to taKe          mm      to tne far               corner

of    tne    pitch.          This was        by tne N o t t i n g h a m . F o r a s t     end.        The      poiice          had

f ormed a cordon across                    the half way            line ana we had to push our way

through        them.

W h e n we got         to     the other        end I remember             there o a m q        a lot        cf     people

around,        St.     J oh n A m b u y l a n c e ,etc.,          and we    left       this     lad with these

people.         T o g ether        wit h some        other       supporters       I went         over      to tne
                                                                                                                                 ir* A<J£           &
                                                                                                                                 SLd;

hoardings and wa             pulled hoardings                 down and smashed them up io use as

stretchers-

Toget h e r with       the    same       lad,    who had helped me                   carry the               injured

supporter across             the   pitch,        we went towards                   the Lappings Lane

terraces -where         we were           joineo by a i o c >7;o r e s u p p o r                 e t s a n uw e j u s <„

carried       injured    people           across the           pitch to the first aid                                  point which

had c-een set up,             ^ w o u l d think             'Chat i       ns* sso carry a ~ j.©as u o ysuj.ua.

The    last    person    I carried across                    was a ia.a who was                covered                     n v o r;•i

ana naa had a oiasfic                   airway    pu; . -    r u o                                           j.    y   : ;-y               -:   ~


Pac>.; and ha was        unco "is c i j u s      if '.not dsai.               i. can*        r c .vie rriu   ;.v   r           ... '
                                                                                                                                   ■ -air.-u

niiVi t l.- I knew that            if      ns was stiil              ai i ye .''e '-ss-isa            'yen-.,

treatment.        La    shou t e d        across towards                  the Bi,     ..;onn-:v :'eop ■;and                          f^y

t ook niit) c v us anc             dealt w i t h ni?n.

At this       point as       I had haa first aid experience                               .. decided                   Co :--''er ;;vy

nelo with the          injured          people,         1 was         ai rsc,',&a inside            towards                     i-ne

Sports    hall.        The    hail was          split        up      into     three areas            b y netting-                           n-i

I walked       in the first             thing    1 saw was a                j.ire    of    bodies, seme were

being    put    into    body       bags    and    there were P o licemen with the                                        others-

I went    into another             section of ths                 hail and          m i i-i-Si iV ne ^ oec an oty

duty    policeman       to    look after          a lad who was                  injured.           we were                    joined

by an off duty          nurse.

A doctor       came    over    to us ana myself                      ana the        nurse were           directed                      io

he I d somebody        else.        We were       trying             to   csxm      people      uown as                        ;ey

were    being    carried       in and we w ould shout                        for     the doctor               to have                  „.ook

at    them to see       how serious             the     injuries were.                    Ws woa-d assist                            tne

Doctor when he was             trying           io inject            people and we            helped with                        bandaging

people up.       Whilst       we were a d m i n i s t e r i n g             first aid a man was                                brought

in who seemed to be                in a very          Pad      condition.             we snouted                   for          tne

Doctor    who    e x a m i n e d the man ana                immediately             called for some                            oxygen.

The    fire    brigade       brought an oxygen bottle                         over        but wnen             the Doctor
                                                                                                                                                           PAGE         7
                                                                                                                                                           S361

             went        to use         it it was                 empty.

             The way the D o c t o r s were                           organising               the      situation              inside was             very-

             good.         It seemed to be the first                                        time anything               had been org a n i s e d

              proparly at all.                          Certainly             outside          there was              no obvious

             organisation within                             the Police.                    No b o d y had taken charge                         of the

             Police as such,                          and    they din't                seem to be doing anything                                helpful        at

             all.

              I raniember at                 one         point when                  1 was     staying with an                     injured fan             i   saw

              some Police O f f i c e r s                        standing            ar o u n d outsi.de            the sports                nail     drinking



              ■j <; :>      f" "C   r    ■-/ >. -*•   c i ca n        ^ r"i is. n-     uid v    ^ 1 8 r ti?   w-w     -:i j, w ^   ii;c                         w \x


              do.         I a skea a pel iceman                       if there               was anythin;.; i could do                             ne:<t but ha

              s h r u d :Jsd hi s           n o uide r s .            - d e c x g & d i-o ...e a v e                ne g r u u n d s u                wa       eu

              out across            the         pitch ana             went            cut    the way          I had coma              in.

              Outsxos                        met me and took ‘Tie to the                                 coach where                 I saw                 WhO

              was alright.                    I had              not known until                this          point whether                  or not

              and                   were a c t u a 11y o k a y .

              I think        the F .A sh o u l d acept                               the m a j o r i t y of the blame.for wnat

              h a p p e n e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h as                     tnay are           responsible                for         the o r g a n i s a t i o n

              of the ground,

              I would be                prepared                 if nec e s s a r y to attend a Coroners Court                                        or hearing

              for the enquiry.




 S T A T E M E N T TAKEN
                   PLACE :

                   TIME:                                    DATEi

 W I T N E S S TO S I G N A T U R E :

 O F F I C E R S SIGNATURES                            _______

END OF R E P O R T
REPORT Off TOB ETT.TgBQBgPCg FOOTBALL DISASTER BY Kr. g.J. ECCLBSTON (SENIOR NORSE
--------------              ’                                            HAITAGER)
                                            Address:


I arrived at the approach to the Leppings 3oa.fi end of the Hillsborough
Stadium at Hi. 25 hours,     I was accompanied by ray 27 year old son and
a jroung man of 17.     Ve all had a valid ground ticket,     The immediate
approach to the turnstiles, a distance of some 70 yards, was full of
a jostling crowd of ticket holders trying to make their way to the
turnstiles.      There was no semblence of orderly queues, with some kind
of order trying to "be maintained by three smarted police officers.
Despite the lack of organisation and frustration the mood of the fans
remained reasonably co-operative.      To emphasise this, one of the horses
was very close to me and accidentally almost knocked w      spectacles off.
The officer apologised and we e.'.changed smiles and I stroked the horse’s
nose.


The nearer one got to the actual turnstiles the pushing and crushing
became severe.     After approximately ten minutes all three of us were
literally catapulted through the turnstiles.       Over the last ten yards
one had no control whatsoever over our movements.


Once through the^tumstile all three of my party came together.        i- y   son
attempted to remonstrate with a police officer regarding the lack of
 organisation on the approach to the turnstile.     He was warned by a
steward standing alongside the officer to keep quiet because other fans
 who had made similar protests had been forcibly    ejected from the ground.


 Ve then moved away and went to use the toilet situated in front of us
under the stand.      As we came out of the toilet we were directly facing
 the rear of the turnstile area and were immediately aware of the
 opening of one of the gates alongside the turnstiles.       The time was now
 just after lk*kO hours.     Anticipating the ensuing rush I took    my
 companions to the right, aiming to take our place high, up on the terracing
 to the left of the Lepping Road Stand facing the playing area.      The
 previous year’s experience had alerted me that this was a sensible area
 to stand, both from a safety viewpoint and it also provided an excellent
 view.        I have a vivid mental picture, as we hurried past the now
 infamous tunnel leading to the ill-fated sections, of turning my head
 and noticing there was nobody to he seen, either spectator or official.
F R,QM                                                 05.17.1939   12:26                     P. 23




                                             “2-   -




         The high up area we entered was very full, but with no crush..          We

         positioned ourselves within feet of "the blue "boards*         Looking down from

         my h i& . vantage spot I could see the two middle pens immediately ‘behind

         the goal were jammed to ca-oacity with a seething mass of people.         To tnv

         surprise, the pens on the left and right were half empty.           The area on

         the far right around the electronic scoreboard was also half empty.

         The time of thie observation was 14*50 hrs.



         Vi? attention then became diverted when the Liverpool team took to the

         field, followed a couple of minutes later by the opposition.           At the same

         time I was conscious of a few people entering our section behind and

          alongside me.     There was no large influx just 'before the kick-off where

          X was standing.



          The came had been in progress for son;?: five minutes witn Liverpool pressing

          home an attack at the far end, with a comer followed by a shot which hit

          the woodwork.     T believe this   shot to be significant because it meant

          a tremendous surge down the pens behind the Liverpool goal to try and see

          what was happening.    This is the normal reaction on the terracing at any

          football match.        From my vantage point X was then immediately aware

          of fans trying to come over the metal fence behind the goal.           Some had

          been successful and were being led down the touchline by the police.           Others

          were being stopped climbing out of the pens despite their obvious protests.

          At the same time a senior police officer ran from behind the Liverpool goal

          and approached, the referee.    He immediately stopped the game taking both

          teams off the pitch,        By this time a few more fans had managed to

          escape from the pens.      One fan on the field of play appeared to be

          pleading whilst he was being forcibly led to the side of the playing area*

          Behind the goal the two pens were a seething mass of people with little

          or no movement either* backwards or forwards.        A few people were being

          passed from the back of the pens to the front.             The front of the pens
next to the fence seemed to be H a t without i;he usual >'bo'l)birig heads.


Within two minutes of the teams leaving the field I realised something was              - v

very wrong.      On reflection I have come to the conclusion that my alarm was

confirmed due to a combination of medical experience combined with an

intimate knowledge of years of attendance at football matches on the

terracing.


I quickly realised that help would be required on the pitch.         I informed my

son what I was doing and because I was so close to the entrance to the

terracing I had entered I quickly made my way down the stairs to find a

 Steward to get me to the side of the pitch.    I quickly found a Steward who
i
 accepted what I was telling him and he took me through a tunnel under the main

stand where a Police Officer again accepted my explanation of being a trained

nurse and let me on to the pitch.


I raced to the area immediately behind the goal net.        The narrow gate belonging

to the pen behind the net was open with police officers trying to pull flaying

bodies through the narrow opening.        Other officers appeared to be trying to

instruct the fans to push back in the pens.         I helped officers pull people

through the gate.       We were nulling'any part of their body we could get hold

of.   On reflection I realise now because their bodies were level with the

bottom of the gate that they must have been lying on top of people because

the gap between the bottom of the gate to the floor of the terracing was some

three feet.



The first casualties I helped pull throu^i the gate were conscious, but very

shocked.      I attended to them at the back of the goalmouth on the netting.

•Hieir recovery was comparatively quick and simple were moved away from the

immediate area.       Very quickly I was aware that we were pulling out

unconscious bodies.     I can next recall working on a young man who once he

was conscious seemed to have chest injuries.       I looked around the goalmouth

for a stretcher or something to remove him to a place for him to get treatment.
   The scene around me remained completely chaotic with everyone trying to do

   their own thing, fans and police all mingling together. " I eventually found

   a stretcher lying on the pitch with which I quickly returned to the injured man.

   I literally ordered three police officers to help                              m e   lift the patient on tothe

   stretcher.   By this    T im   e   ne was   c o m   p la in in g   a D o u x    xne    p a in   m   m s cnesx.    we

   quickly made our way to the corner of .the field "between the main stand and the

   Kop and took the young man "behind the stand to the St. John’s Ambulance room.

   I then ran back on to the field to the goalmouth.                               In that short interval of

   time a lot more bodies were lying behind the goal.                                   People of all descriptions

   were attempting mouth to mouth resuscitation and cardiac massage.                                        On the right

   hand side of the goal net a young girl was being worked on by a man who stated

   he was a surgeon.     I moved to the body next in line and worked with a young

   police officer until the patient appeared to be starting to come round.                                          I

   then moved on to the next person who was lying unconscious and unattended in

   the goalmouth.      I was working alone in this instance giving both mouth to mouth

   and cardiac massage, an impossible and hopeless situation.                                      The patient started

   vomiting to complicate the issue.              I was conscious of an elderly white haired

   St. John’s Ambulance man working alongside me.                             I requested some swabs to clear

   an airway, all that was forthcoming was a dry sponge.                                     By this time it was

   after 15*30 hours and we still had no equipment of any sort to work with.                                        It

^ ^ w a s just after that that I was conscious of the first ambulances beginning to

   make their way on to the pitch.              Eventually I realised that I had lost the

   battle for this young man’s life.                   I looked around but I could not see anymore

   unattended bodies.      By that time our ranks had been swelled try ambulance crews

   and firemen with some oxygen.

   I next left the field making my way behind the main stand to the gymnasium where

   I understood some of the injured were being taken.                                   Again I found another scene

                The only entrance to the gym was a door of similar dimensions

   to that found in any household room.                   Directly outside this door was the

   St. John’s Ambulance Room.            The space was becoming jammed full of people                                      f;
   with comparatively minor injuries.                  The area was also rapidly filling with

   people presumed dead.
    V.


                               ...........
    I next assisted police to make some sort
.                        >   '                   •               ...     .

    helping and organising the movement of both the
                                         '   '

    seriously injured*             Inside the gymnasium                                       divided

    into two, half for the dead and the rest for the living, with tables set up
            -

    to interview the relatives*                      I began to work with the injured in the

    gymnasium at around 15*55 hours*                      I was conscious of around three doctors in

    attendance, but when I arrived there there was still no medical equipment of

    any sort*       One doctor shouted across the gym for some drugs to treat an

    injured fan who was in obvious pain.                     There was nothing available so I

    volunteered to go to the St. John’s Ambulance room.                            I was informed that

    they were not allowed to carry any drugs*                           I rushed back to the gym asking

    some Senior Police Officer on the way if they could obtain some equipment

    for us*       Quickly three small plastic boxes arrived with medical equipment

    plus an emergency case with drugs in it*                           I began passing out the meagre

    items of equipment to the doctors present.                          There were still only roughly

    a dozen injured in the area.                      I prepared ten intravenous lines ready for the

    Medical Officer to set up, and we commandeered police officers to hold the

    I.V. packs because we had no stands to attach them to.                              By then some

    semblance of order was being maintained in the part of the gymnasium given

    over to the injured.             The other side of the gymnasium was rapidly filling

              A£*?La*w» p fi /£ dead *
    with the P‘                              One of the doctors present had taken one of the

    three stethoscopes available to enable him to declare them clinically dead.


    I next tidied up the medical equipment as most of the injured were being

    rapidly removed to hospital.                     I then began to realise the full extent of

    the disaster for there were already over fifty bodies lying on the floor.
                                                                                                                 , .
    T^r final act in this carnage was to comfort and stay with the husband of the

    young girl whom I had seen attended to behind the goal.                          At least I knew
                                                                             ■■■

    she had had the best of attention that had been available in the

    circumstances.           I stayed with him whilst he ^ v e the necessaiy"details ‘ •'                 ■- '
    to the police, and then a local vicar took over from me.

    When I left the gymnasium, to my amazement
                                     amazem<   it was’still only 16*45 hours* , .
    The longest hour and a half of my life.
. : -


                                         ■             :■ .

                             v:              '

  PERSONAL OBSERVATIONS
           1
                                                                     : ' 'i-                - ..        -.-.v. •, ■
                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                ;v'.-T •
                                                                                                                                       "
  1,     Comparison of the organisation with the previous year.
                                                                 “             ----------------------
         The previous vear I arrived at the same area of admission at 14«!y~ ~
                                                                                                   '■ -c;              'K‘ V:
         with my daughter.         Before we reached the turnstiles at Leppings Lane

         we had to go through a police filter system, whereby it was ascertained

         that we did have the appropriate match tickets.

         This year no sucli system was set up.



   2.    Both years I was delayed 'because of travelling difficulties.                                                The

         appropriate Authorities had decided to initiate roadworks on the M62

         to commence around a week before each game.                                        Surely the matches could

         have been taken into consideration when setting up these roadworks.



    3.   When we came through the turnstiles for the 1988 game we were met by a

         line of stewards and police officers who gently but firmly prevented us

         from entering the tunnel to the middle sections.                                                 It had been decided

         that these sections were already full to capacity.

         This year no such precaution was in operation.



    4.   I can understand the Police Officers at the turnstiles wishing to open

         the gates to relieve pressure and avoid injury to life or limb, but

         in these days of ultra modern and sophisticated personal communications

         surely it could have been               d o n e   in conjunction with-their central police

         control area at the side of the electronic scoreboard.



         Yerv recent national publicity has assured us that surveillance cameras

         at football grounds means that any problems can be dealt with within

         two minutes of their occurrence.
                                  '.■V                     :                   ■

         Surely with the police central control post with all its batteiy of

               monitors available, they should have Tjeen able to ascertain the ■
                                                                                                                                                           :r




                                              ■   :.v..
6.   Observing from the outside it appears to have taken far too long                                                                                  ■

     for the authorities to decide that it was not a security problem and
                                                                                     •
                                                                                 Working  ... and alongside
                                                                                         with
     that the fans genuinely needed help.

     the individual police officers in the immediate disaster area, I

     have tremendous praise and admiration for their efforts.                                                             Overall

     at the scene, however, there appeared to be a lack'of co-ordination

     and genuine leadership.



7.   Pop an extremely long time we were without any form of medical

     equipment of any descriotion.                                       X still cannot understand whythe

     local Health Authority’s Major Medical Disaster Team was not called

     upon.            I understand that all Health Authorities in this country

     have a major disaster policy.                                    It is impossible to accurately

      estimate the difference this would have made in saving life.

      I   d o ,   h o w e v e r ,   b e lie v e   t h a   t   t h e   L iv e r p o o l   f a n s   s h o u ld   h a v e   b e e n




      g iv e n    t h e   c h a n c e .




                                                                                                                                               '■y •       ..

                                                                                                                            ■ ■



                                                                                                    mmm                             '
                                                                                                                                        -V ;
                                        \v^V

                             Vo




                            2 ? APR 1989
Keva Coombes, Esq.,
Leader,
Liverpool City Council,
T o w n Hall,
LIVERPOOL.



Dear Mr. Coombes,                                        19th Aprilj 1989>



                HILLSBOROUGH.


     Although I do not share your political persuasions, I support
you one hundred percent in the stand that you, particularly, are
taking on. the question of the disgraceful claims made by the South
Yorkshire Police.

     I have supported Liverpool since 1961/62 and have been a shareholder
since 1987.

     I am forty-one years of age, and am a Partner in a Birkenhead
based firm of Chartered Accountants.

     I provide this information simply because of the suggestion
that the severe problems outside the ground appear to have been
caused by the late arrival of several hundred 'tirunken Liverpool
yobs". I am not a yob, and I was certainly not under the influence
of drink. I feel sure that the day I had was very similar to the majority
of Liverpool supporters and , in the hope that this may prove of
some assistance, detail the events of the day, from m y point of view.

     I left Prenton,Birkenhead with three friends at 11.00_avm.
Saturday morning, the hope being to arrive at Sheffield at say 1.15
p.m, have lunch and go into the ground at 2.00 p.m.

      Due to the severe traffic problems at Stockport, and thereafter,
we   did not in fact park until 2.00 p.m.

      We were within five minutes walking distance of the ground.
We set off to walk that short distance at 2.15 p.m. I was immediately
aware of the distinct lack of police officers, apart from those undertaking
traffic duty. As Rogan Taylor ( Football Supporters Association )
has pointed out, the first check on tickets therefore were the turnstile
entrances.

                                                     * * * * C o n td . ****
                               -2-

*£*$**   i *   *$**$**$**$*

      During the five minutes walk to the ground, there were certainly
supporters asking for tickets, but no more than at any large game
at Anfield. I certainly did not feel over-powered by such requests .

      O n turning into Leppings Lane, the immediate scene   was one
of total chaos.

      At Anfield, one is conscious of the control exercised by the
police on foot and horseback, with supporters queuing       in an
orderly fashion to enter , particularly the Kop end of the ground.
I have certainly entered that particular part of the ground on many
occasions in the past, and anyone stepping out of line is immediately
spoken to by a police officer.

     What we had here was as if a section of the crowd had been
plucked from the inside, and jammed into a small area of ground.
There were no distinct lines or queues, and very little police control.
There were certainly police horses, but they merely constituted
part of the crowd. I have no doubt whatsoever that that particular
crush had developed from well before 2.00 p.m. and was therefore
a clear indication of inefficiency on someone's part. It would have
been surely, very simple to have police officers on each route to
the ground, checking tickets and further police officers stationed
close to the turnstiles, ensuring that people formed orderly queues
to each entrance.

      T w o of our party decided to try and get into the ground, but
the husband and wife with us decided to wait until the problems
cleared. I joined the queue with m y friend and can honestly say
it was terrifying. The crush was so strong that people within the
queue were certainly in distress. There was a policeman on each
side of the doors standing there, oblivious to the fact that people
were in distress and watching people climb on to walls, and try
ing to get into the ground without tickets.    I fully understand
that those particular policemen would not have been able to do anything
constructive, but under those circumstances, w h y were they in
fact stationed at the entrance? Would it not have been more appropriate
to ensure that instead of policing within the ground, more constables
were placed outside the ground, well in advance of the kick-off to
ensure orderly queues were formed?

     If the police were concerned that somebody was about to be
injured outside the ground, then that situation clearly existed
closer to 2. 00 p.m. as well as, indeed, 3.00 p.m.

        It is for other people to specifically comment on what went
wrong and how it could have been avoided, but for m y part I object
strongly to suggestions that the problems arose out of a crush developing
close to 3. 00 p . m . due to the surge forward of "drunken yobs".
Quite clearly the crush started well before 2. 00 p.m. and it is at
t h a t time that the problems should have been eliminated.
                                                         * ***C ontd . ****
                     -3 -

****Contd.****

     I very much regret that the comments made by the police ,
reference looting, urinating and violence, are no more than a smoke­
screen to distract criticism, well justified, of their efforts outside
the ground.

     As everybody rightly points out, the question of the blame
should be left for the enquiry, but one cannot stand back and let
the South Yorkshire police deflect criticism in such a disgraceful
manner.

     I wish you well during the most difficult months to come.


          Yours sincerely,
( j k & A        ^   1/otrjJ       /• J '    <5Z     J        C           -            J            A         jCk   ^       ^      < J a * ~ J                 //?//- i'<5^ -o

Co      o   H 3* ^      G r o ^                                                                 'fA




 3          -hr&j&Uit*             fa        /-6t-i.i<{ow<i l.                                                                                                     ^,/f                            JZc&fyj

0 ~ J            *oo        o {-     h „       A v , w /( ^                                                                             a ^ j         ^                                 rA        y ^

                       &<L         'fr fc S e t& d                        Cq_s              C X ^d            J)          iJC U        /& J i '      /-& £i<L /^ c /fc tr -d f
trf                    h o * *              cl*          &?/***.                       / o - j r / O                                                        <Js\      ^

 h ) (^ lo < d 'hrf<fl-'<<L                                                                6s-C Z r T l^ U ^ / ou*-*- /^_e(                                               / &s J

^ 0 /£ c ft< /2 z t           /'h trJ & v -z .y           £ j <- t t c d s n e je s *'                                                 ^ o /K S /c & i^ ty C c            /            &*<                   ,


                      Ijt - (L^x'itrCX^ C'X'\- J'Ljl /~fl//S'&GrOuJ^ e^T~e£,-^ CL*                                                                                                 /S • 3 O

 /Lfeet                     6 ^ /                                                               A>                      / & & .        3         c^ W k ?/

             /UUKX          O jf/L .                          ^ //                $ £no^j                    cJ^ ^J£LJ                                       Vz? ^                J 's y x tiM

             '       '^^-s~ /&^2>              l~J6~d i/£sx_^                                           6~)/^-/C. ^O O ^^C -/                        </l^                          &(/ / '    ^ £-OiS/1{

y& tj**? A ^ tu t                                  A A W                                                                    J 6cS,«x' AU a ^ u . A *./'* <$
f t *                                                    /V   o ttj           .                               'T s f f K r G r * .


 < f ? * W             A>                                                                   ^           ” ***,             a^      "       U y ? f r'
                                                                                                                                                    “ - a' ^              MJ,                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                            O'K              &■   <f*V\£CC/

f ^ o ^ a U             r a - c lc O '             /4         U       ^           /K   j,       P jM                a ^ y         c ^ U      te e ^ /     A>     /% *

  asfro*.               / ? - & >             y r u ^ j ^                 * W * ^                       c^          t^             ^             ^                                a * * s f
                                                                                                                                                                                  ’                    G *

 OsbMtr


                             Lie- t^c-eL                   ou/            uJcty             yb               /vr^s-h U j                    c'       g^        /£*.                                j


 /&*-*.                                                           ^               Uhuttj                        C/^ohcJ                     J V v z w W            W


            U*4. U < ^ )           /to        Of                                       &*<-»<**■<%                                      60^                               Cdsfte***/ O^XJ^*.


  £^<yl~ c^ cu/£-A>(*-                             "A s r ^ S h C t                             y                               (dul/L       /=> y e ^'                       ,
                                       ’
                                       {f^U                                            ^    01^ *            J ? Os'1X 1^                   d'a^S         '/*-*>       C^A^z^trf          o/^

    /n x    S ^ c i " O u H f C ^ L .                      /fijL           A/rr\S'/'(^ j                                              ^                            ^       ^£-<ry<£0 ^

     &tl£    ,


                                           /C-w^/.                 y5Ci            ^j-s-Uij                                                          c ^ y    J V o ^         ^           ^

                 /           /£,/•          , 5 t ^ ^ w , « .                  /y<t                              W j e < w                       ^


 #+* J                                              * > * /* * * * s* u « ^                                                                                                       ^

 ^           '*7             ''W           ^    ^        <tf                    ?i>S y & c ^

                                 I *                                   ? a ,-                                        ^                                                                    /Aj.
    C~^.                     £Ofsv^C*.2je~^              £r\       jf .        /           /

    (A/^J*&Ct            //Ia ’
                              ¥iS/r
                                  y%S^iS* /                    ^        A
                                                                        S)                                               si
                                            n f u U j          o   ^    u k        ,                             ^ Q - s r                                                    e       ^

                                                                                                                                            '                          '


                                       A s fo ^                                                                  ^

                                        ^       ^          S?                                                                     fsr>~~*                                         / ^ < 2 ^     '




                         ^                 Ao*                                                       ^



                     ,       ,                                 y           O^JtsCc                  /5te                                                 /^ O s        J>/'


 C ^ M M '                                  ^                                                                                                    / ' ^                            ^
         f                                              AZ/^a/5 / /•*,                      y                    /
 O c u ^ J               ^ y                        ,                                               ‘~ * '       J            ‘~y , U *JL ^

                          / .                                  7                                                                          S*1+  C o s * C 4 A s 6^JCL<_^
                         *-><-          yTaJ'       ^                  ,                                                          7                                      ' '
    ^A,                                                        ^                                                                          &-z%7^z>)er         / £ l *j"5-    ;£?-
                                                                           ^                                                                /V           .           vTS;    />Le


                 <s^/-                 ^                                                                                          ^                           ^                       < = W ^ .

/ 0^                                                               ^                                         /                ^
                 fe' " " u * «                  «^o.//             /to                     <^7                       ,        /_




                                 ^                      jM ^ ^ /                   £            /
U e ^ t          J2&^re.^« s O ^ L y                                           '                                                                                                  ^M^A.
                    ^ - / > r o 6 6 u ^                                                                  ^
/            /                         /            ,                                                                         ^°^y.                  <y/~ * o « v      ^HA-^oj/y^ ^


O t 'X * ^ -«'.J                 A          /                                                                /           X ^ 7 - ^               ^        ^
               /                           />!./>              ^               ^
                   4 U           ^                           ^                                                                                  ^                 ^                          ~     /    ^
    /          ,                 .                                       '                                                                                    '                                  J'Q^LX

r                                            *           o**>                X *          S ' * *                                              r,
                                                     J ,             .        ,           /     ^               '         ^                ^                  f - * ~ ~
                                                     i t         ^            ^               / »           «        ^

                        ^                A        l U         d U                 s                     /

    //L ^ " W ~ o                                ^               ^                        ^                                                                           ^                                 f
a d        ■       a         j       ^        /o                                                                         / ^ W -                n o t         A^/^c^j


<2J*Ae.e/ / U                                                                                                                                       0«*o          ^          /    ^    <

        °'V>X*                   &   T  #
                                 C^£/&^v f A£^\                                   /7 ,                                    /? ^
                                                                                                                                    ^ </*»*-*<
^ **,»,*.                                                                                 *       Z         j       ?         z                                                       ‘" "        '=“— -
    Cu^f? o r r , £ > C L r                                                                                                       ^ z 7                 *^-<r                         fsUs


                ^        ^C^/x/^e^/ ^ y ~ p ^                                      Jf                       /y




& C ^ t) / '            /z       ^               ^ w                                                                                                                                         1 c
                                                     ^           n ^ v i ^ j                        ^               /ftp               '/&£.
/ojT               A /       A                                           ^                                                                                                                 *u><■
                                                                         ^                        SL4L*>r- /"                     y~                                                                             1
                                                     z       ,       ^        .       ,             .           .    ■            A<^                                 J1c^ t —
 ^                                            ^                      .                              > ~ 7                  ^           ^                                  / i -                        O^Lt


I         ’Z        Z
                    '        T           r               •                                                                                                                                              ^        :




                             '                                                                                                         /'/y7j£Z4^/                                /Aj_ /'•-‘‘'*/^<.y'i{ c— ^
h o a M ^ j ,                    &                a^                     ^                    ^                                                     ^                                      7 5 = - ^ /


^       J 'S jf? /P j' ' ' ^ f               < t^ r \         t/} & c * ~ s > / ^ o c - V i^ - v                     z ^ t<                               ^       / ^        /? /d > ^           c ts tS / d o


                                                             /4 o , cj > a s j , s / e ^ c j L .                                   d2v          ^ b^t             c ^ c r ^ W                J? cj'^v/

^<-         o r /T ^ jj^ U ,^                     S & cks^J                       /C i-^O vC y ^                         l A C o v / / - <^1^ -          /& 7 /C + .         As       /n o ^           O iv /-
         K       jl       t ^ y                     /k-                     m                      jV/nLyi-v^        /          szs/iyd-^          <yi^-

£s>/7?tos-^                    O L C ^ o S S /^-C


                           c$t£        ^       6 //c             <&U^jr / y / / ^                             _____ __

    />                                A ^ U ^ S S U S '                                72^


^                                     « *                               ^              ^         ^     W      JK- A U                                             P

    L>Ui*.                Cz>^IO> / Z .                          <*0 f /           /fry                          ,                 -, ■ ,
    U ^ e                                                    •        / n ^ f          0 / 7                ^            7
     ^                                                                                  ^                  / y /v^K          /*>        c - / , ^ /p    C-^U\,/ o     '/^ —<

                           a^tu^i                  o c j u ^ / ^ y > 6-7               o/<t_r              /L/^rufte1T7 s Z u ^ y


                           f 9^            ' ^           /                                                                                         ^        S o - C ^ ,

d        n            ^         J          C         ^            ^                            f r s o . A A s        ^~Jo             * ~ - 7


                 /£*                                                                              c/            /5L.         / i i - ^ j xyi* /S if/r ^ om + fl.


                                                                  ^     f       ./ /   . /?                                        /           /

                           l-JCL-4     /^Vow^jji^^

                                                    /yiASfaj                     <2^.           / /
                                                                                               So^^iy       Ct>^e?{ JL*/Sc>                                       /^tsc^


^        ^                                                                                 ^      jr r o ^       'A * -       r tv ta          cl*




 /?                        /                             /                            C^-^H                   /Zxu^                      / ^c*/        6L C ^ £ > f J S % - <
r '/zA^                   /o J/U^^IC                    A d       <£osn*           , > s

O    ^       d        ^    h      ^    L                                                                             * +                           ^       C ^ c a ^ c
                                               7    0                                                       < y p p ^ o ^ t /y. /o.




                                                                                                              'I^VkXA-       * ' *°^c


                                                                                                                     f - S - P f ,
jS J & b u ^

/1AA~        IaJca/L       jyis^/jfrLA.          ySu


                                                                   (J


         C-O^y- ... LLfL.U'                      _   (3^y'^XA/^y\s\s£i    S^j^'CasU'L-




                 /0    a m a m lm   Jj l a . •

                            a ^ ju ^ ix ^ J s ^ c L



/L^o.                                       X&jl           /vTsrtsjte v . .Z a A je .




G?] a   w   {I                                                                                         <Si<d£__

.^Cc't^SA^p^cy^.         jL^yd.                                          __                                  .fU/g*

J^&zJzcdL                  <2-      -/ O ^cdu^ s<y&-^Qjz£'__

                                                                                sCiAlO

                                                 s CUTA s/A-.

  ________________________________________________________________ ...' Z I S                                                 pih .
4 /                                     ^                          ,d                              /    /         * ^
jJteiLc-JXAsQA*,__
                                             /V


                                                                                               3.^<UZ-c/                       -




<<?££       ges^s^s&^JL-                                                                     j__




£kd     vi^u2-i_>^^-rTX<0^c^fc<3 ^ . ^ c u d ^ ^ J L c A .                -^     ^ -si*Jl<^<~c£~         yt<J&s-^L „

                                                                                         j     <%s6         'Z • 3> O   P /^ l..
                                                                                                                                                                         \
                                     JajSssQ. cot

               W   d / 9 ^ 3 ! ^ U   4   —   -   j   L U Z & L 14. . —                 ___



              v^xx/vx^>^c^e<a                                —        j/l/ll^ y(jj^y^e_,                              ...




                                                         yO^SUce^                            /£d \ ..(AJTOUuij-y- ' 0 U ~ d           *jJGs>ff>__________

    /2^4rV^^jo^CA/J2^ziA,_^                                                                  ,„           _ ___________ ____
                            "-                                                 stUsrTASQ^l                /gist -

                              <ul£A^                        cb^       su         ^o<3^e_                <2^    l^ u   I                             f   xj ^   ^ ^ cA

                            j£ & & 4 zs                 .              ij ,/^Jh^.                   d&*ouy6esc{'                      j2a^   J jL^>

                                         3           j U          J            < 5 U



-                           --- *^-^*9X                     — ^A^d~                           ----- 3 —^ ^ ^ —u4jiL>£s-- /£uu<&y
                                                                           yiZ'CeL^t/E^!^—                                        u£ l<*S=3SX*C

A                                                         — & A S & & - -SLOzZu)

                                                                                       ^6c> _ <^L

                                                                                                            . $ .-Cis^BJA- ____ ^ . .
    p-i/<£^^c<-A<-e.—                                    _

    y\sisxs<^e<a^                                    __

    QgJZLXtSV>~4l/S<l4r                  eisi*-*ib                'S0v-'^U2—



                   axs**&{..-. •&u*4)l/£ J L—                                   < ^ C c ^ Z v ^ i^            _*            JiCOcl.

^>&C^CJlSlA~*Ji*.— -                                                                                                                                               ^

z^l / " ^ o ^ & v ^ ,                - G^^zLes*'                                ~^<s6iji<- j Z & t J o

                                                                       .   j      /l\£^€L\y' /6%JI,                                          ..._



                                                      y1&£s                     ^ ^ L a a ^o        y i ^ > ^ut^n^<Q__ „ $ 4 L < c £ r^ ^ S < - < s £

                                                                                                         k^ 3 U i
                                                                                                                S *W^.

^J&JL-                                                                                 __


    jL   r-                              AS                                ,             yfr                   Q       V y                   .
                                                                                       ../>^J2>.. c ^ ^ ^ r z ? L . ._




                                                                                                                                                                        C g_




                                                                                                                                                                        \ ii_
(X*s&o^     _j ^ s f a ) e > 0 ^                                                                   s$   £   jl >


                                                    ^ e V ^ / £ & * ) -^./9r^dfe_.                          & 4 L ^ L

F&a. yc&jzdj                                                         _

                                                       s<±4JL^           s&£~&<£        y & i & y Q           saxclq
                          1




                                j^-eerj^6 -       ©Vv




            y U - ^ r ^ / 3^e^ y lf e j^          ^ > < £ c J L -s




j^42tds\sC£*?<2_— 'fryfc— /^i&JLs                          ______ ____________

                                              *        '



                                              s^O^el#. ^sOy^£rCrc^




        ^X^CCcJL

        _ -4ufc- - / & £ ,                                                s£j2 s £ p

          ^JAS&4                                                                                            Cu

                                            t-O sC&\~~-relj                            La J~CL*o   a ^ & & - s£b

                                                            tr<-<X-                                                     9




                         ^P&&^€s^                                    /a^yjTSy^-^                        /bsK}

                         *                                                   s^e~                                           ►

                              C ^ ' T X A T g / i L ^ — u-            s&jZ-dUspj
                                                                                                ~*>L^

           ^   iZ^v^                                 _ _ . _ _ ----------— ---- -----— -------------



       p       ^   L   ^        _        J   J   ^                       '   ' '   -

l^Tg   / t y p ^ t ^ w > ^ / __

S Q e m                    ...........           -____________________
HILLSBOROUGH

 15th April, 1989




A Personal Account
  of the Tragedy
This personal account of my experience at Hillsborough is intended to
supplement the statement that I have already submitted to the Judicial Inquiry
into the disaster. Consequently, this report serves to reflect the emotional impact
of what happened to me, as well as recording the facts. My principal objective
here is to reproduce my feelings at the time, rather than to retrospectively
examine what went wrong, although inevitably I do have my own opinions on the
sequence of tragic events, based upon my own experience. I have had to express
some of those opinions in this account, but they are confined to the end so as not
to interfere with my main intention.


Whilst the memory of that day will always be with me, I thank everyone who is
helping me to come to terms with it, particularly my loving family and Linda. I
am also grateful to Dr. Creer, whose invaluable counselling and encouragement
has enabled me to produce this report.


In God’s name, I pray that nobody shall ever have to describe a similar
experience to this one again.




                                                                          May, 1989




                                         1
                                   Introduction


I have prepared this account as someone who has been a regular football
supporter for many years. I have a season ticket for the Spion Kop at Anfield
and, during my three years as a student at Nottingham University, I travelled to
many away matches, particularly in the Midlands and London, to watch Liverpool
F.C. play. I therefore have experience of visiting a number of different football
grounds and, on many of these occasions, they were filled to capacity.


In particular, this year’s F.A. Cup Semi-Final was my third visit to Hillsborough
in twelve months. The other two visits were for the Sheffield Wednesday v.
Liverpool league match in January 1989 and, perhaps more importantly, the 1988
F.A. Cup Semi-Final between the same two teams as the ill-fated match on 15th
April 1989.


At the previous semi-final I had stood in the centre section of the Leppings Lane
terrace, and for the league match I had sat in the West Stand, which is also
reached via the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane End. On 15th April this year, my
ticket was again for the standing area of the Leppings Lane terrace.




                                         2
I had intended to arrive at the ground this year at about 2.00 p.m., as I did at last
year’s semi-final, but a series of traffic hold-ups along the M62 motorway had
meant that the journey from Liverpool had taken longer than anticipated. I was
travelling with a colleague from work, and he suggested a number of diversions
along the way which enabled us to avoid some of the congestion.


When we eventually reached Sheffield, there were still many other people parking
their cars and many coaches just arriving at the same time as us, so I was not too
concerned that we had arrived later than I had hoped. I believe that the time
that we parked was about 2.00 p.m.


For some reason, the recommended route to Hillsborough this year, as detailed
by South Yorkshire Police before the match, was different to the route
recommended by the RAC last year. This may have been due to the fact that
after last year’s match the direct route from Sheffield to Manchester (along the
A616 and the A628) had been so congested that traffic was moving literally at
walking pace for miles and miles. I therefore thought that I would follow the
different route that had been recommended to familiarise myself with it,
particularly for the purpose of avoiding a repeat of the congestion I had
experienced the previous year on the return journey. I had not anticipated such
delays on the way to Sheffield, though.


Furthermore, the different route meant that I had to park in an unfamiliar area
compared with previous visits, so I was not sure how far away the ground was
when I got out of the car. I didn’t think that it could be far, though, because
there were a number of traffic policemen around showing people where to park.


My colleague stopped off for a couple of minutes to buy himself some lunch, but
even so we thought that we still had plenty of time. After all, the ticket itself
recommended taking up a position 15 minutes before kick-off, and I thought that
we would certainly arrive before then. Even with this brief stop, I suppose we
reached the ground between about 2.20 p.m. and 2.30 p.m., which should have
been ample time, albeit later than we had hoped.


                                          3
However, we had not anticipated the confusion that greeted us as we approached
the turnstiles. I searched in my pocket for my ticket to see which of the two
entrances (that led from the street to the actual turnstiles) we needed to use, and
realised that even though we were several yards from the outer blue gates which
lead up to the turnstiles, we in fact needed to move over to our right slightly in
order to approach our allocated turnstiles through Entrance B. There were so
many people approaching the ground that it was difficult to make even this slight
change of direction. Other people to our right had, likewise, realised that they
too were approaching the wrong entrance to the turnstiles, and the result was that
many people were colliding with each other in the road as they tried to get to the
correct place.


I’m sure that at last year’s semi-final there were police and stewards directing
people in the road on the approach to the turnstiles, and so this problem did not
arise then.


Furthermore, this marshalling last year meant that orderly queues had been
formed up at the turnstiles and, as is the case at most grounds I have visited,
these queues were kept apart last year by policemen, some of them mounted,
moving between them and so avoiding the problem of the queues merging into a
solid mass of people outside the ground.


I had read in the press before the game this year that the police were issuing a
warning about pickpockets operating in the queues at the turnstiles, which had
apparently been a problem at last year’s semi-final. I had told my colleague to be
aware of this, and I therefore expected to see an even greater police presence at
the turnstiles this year to combat the problem.


I was, therefore, particularly surprised to see so few policemen actually near the
turnstiles, considering the warning that had been issued, and the fact that there
did not seem to be any attempt being made to form orderly queues. This looked
to me as though any pickpockets around would find the situation even more to
their liking than the previous year. I again warned my colleague to be
particularly careful with his ticket, because the article that I had read mentioned


                                           4
that last year some people had their tickets stolen while they were actually
queuing. If this was indeed the case, it certainly seemed odd that the efficient
marshalling that existed last year was not extended further. In fact, this year it
did not seem to exist at all.


There was a mounted policeman by the blue entrance gates that we were
approaching and he was allowing a few people at a time to pass through.
However, there were no queues in evidence at the turnstiles. There was just a
single mass of people. The only other policemen that I could see were up by the
turnstiles. As far as I could see, there was one mounted policeman further
forward and only a few on foot. There were none between the mounted
policeman at the blue entrance gates and the rear of the mass of people who had
passed through those gates.


The area was certainly very congested when I was allowed past by the mounted
policeman, but I did not think that it was dangerously so, at that time. I was, of
course, at the back of those waiting to go through the turnstiles, though, so it was
difficult for me to tell what the situation was like further forward. The
atmosphere at this time was one of excited anticipation of seeing, what we all
hoped, would be a great match. There was the usual pre-match singing as people
waited to get into the ground, with the added sense of expectation associated with
the prospect of another Wembley Cup Final, should the team win. The
underlying mood was certainly good-humoured and well-behaved. At the same
time, inevitably, people were eager to get inside the ground.


As one would normally expect, I had seen people drinking from cans on the way
to the ground, but I distinctly remember thinking to myself that I had not
personally seen any drunkenness. I remember that because it was conspicuous by
its absence. I’m sure that some people probably were drunk, but I did not see
any evidence of it. Many of the side streets near to the ground were blocked off
by policemen, and they did not seem to be having any trouble with drunken
supporters, as far as I could see.


I’m sure that, like me, those responsible for crowd control had expected people to
have been drinking. The large dustbins that are habitually placed at turnstiles to


                                         5
accept empty cans, and to serve as a reminder that no alcohol is allowed inside
football grounds, certainly suggests that there is an expectation that some people
will be drinking up to that point, otherwise they would not be put there. Having
said that, personally I prefer not to drink before I go to a match. In any case, if I
am driving to an away match, I would not even consider it.


Just after I went through the entrance gates, the mounted policeman moved so as
to hold up the crowd in the street and I could see that, gradually, the number of
people waiting to get past him was building up. There did not appear to be any
other assistance being given to control the number of people still in the street
outside. Again, I thought how much better the situation had been with last year’s
marshalling. After a short pause, more people were let in behind me, but I had
not moved at all because the crowd still in front of me seemed to be in exactly
the same position as it had been when I was allowed through the entrance gates
myself. This meant that I began to feel uneasy as the whole area was becoming
very crowded indeed. Before long, a crush began to develop and people were
then slowly being carried along in the general direction of the turnstiles.


I had earlier put my hand in my pocket to make sure that my ticket was safe, but
within a few minutes, the crush had become so intense that I was unable to move
my arm sufficiently to take my hand out of my pocket again. I could not move in
any direction, other than that in which the crowd was slowly moving - towards the
turnstiles. We seemed to be forced to take a couple of short steps forwards by
the weight of people behind us, and then the crowd would stop for a while.


Because of my height, I was actually able to see where I was going, although I
had no control whatsoever over the way that I was being carried forward.
However, there were many shorter women and children all around me who were
not even able to see where they were, or where they were going. What is more,
because of their size they were in even more discomfort that I was, and I was
becoming very anxious myself. The increasing number of screams, and the frantic
shouting that was going on near me, indicated that I was not alone. However,
further back many people seemed unaware of this and they continued their
singing. I was able to see over most people’s heads in front of me, and it did not
appear as though there was a free-flow of people through the turnstiles at all.


                                          6
Instead, the build-up of people at the front of the worsening crush was hampering
those people who were nearest to the turnstiles, as they tried to get through them.
The reason that the crowd was moving forward did not seem to be because
people were passing through the turnstiles, but rather that the pressure of people
behind us was increasing. Certainly, the further forward I moved, the more
painful the crush became. However, there was nothing that I, or anyone around
me, could do about that because we simply could not move against the crowd.
The only way to get out of the crush seemed to be to wait until we had reached
the front and then had a chance to get through the turnstiles. Clearly, that was
going to take quite some time, but we had no choice.


The mounted policeman near to the turnstiles was shouting very angrily at people
near him to move back, but it was simply impossible for them to move at all.
Those of us further back, towards the middle of the crush, could not move either.
Action was required at the very back of the crush. People needed to be moved
at the back so that the pressure in the middle, and then at the front, could be
alleviated. There was nothing to be gained from directing instructions to those
who were unable to move themselves. Only by sending people backwards,
starting with those already at the back, would there have been any hope of easing
the pressure further forward. However, once we had passed through the outer
blue entrance gates, it was not possible to move back into the street due to the
vast number of people still trying to get through those gates.


There was a brick wall a few feet to my left and many people were being forced
up against it. They were calling out for the crowd to ease back away from them,
but none of us were able to move in order to help them. My colleague had been
standing slightly nearer to the wall than I had, and initially he had been almost
next to me. However, as the crowd edged forwards, it seemed as though the
people nearest to the wall were, in fact, moving at a slightly slower pace than
those nearer to the centre of the crush. This meant that, as I finally neared the
front, I had lost sight of my colleague as he was slightly behind me, as well as to
the side.


As I reached the front, I had a clearer view of the actual turnstiles and I could
see that many people were being forced up against the walls in between the


                                         7
individual turnstiles, as well as into each other. Furthermore, a large blue
concertina gate to my left was causing a lot of pain for those who were being
pushed up against it. Many people in the crowd were calling out for the
concertina gate to be opened in order to provide people with an escape route
from the crush, and also to prevent anyone from being seriously hurt. These calls
had continued for several minutes as I had waited for my own chance to reach
the turnstiles. Even when people were level with a turnstile, it was still extremely
difficult to actually pass through because so many other people were also trying at
the same time. At the front, the crowd was swaying from side to side so that one
minute I was facing a turnstile and the next minute, a brick wall next to it.


I looked across to the far turnstile over to my right, and I noticed that a young
boy was being carried out, on his back, above people’s heads. He was wearing a
Liverpool F.C. tracksuit top. He was passed to a policeman who, I suppose, may
have been on horseback because he was clearly visible above everyone else,
although he was not in the crush himself. He was, in fact, leaning around the end
of the turnstile wall in an attempt to get hold of the boy.


I have since seen television coverage which shows this boy being helped to safety,
so that film would help to indicate the approximate time that I managed to get
into the ground, because it took me a further 2 or 3 minutes to get in. I would
guess that it was about 2.40-2.45, though.


It was a huge relief to get through the turnstile because the situation outside had
been deteriorating all the time. I had to wait another several minutes before my
colleague managed to get through the turnstile himself. I stood in the area
between the turnstiles and the tunnel entrance to the centre terrace waiting for
him.


The calls that I had heard, when I was outside the ground, for the large
concertina gate to be opened because of the danger of people being hurt, were
still audible as I stood waiting inside. A number of fans had actually climbed up
on top of a wall at the side of the crush outside, and had walked along to a ledge
directly above the turnstiles. A number of policemen inside the ground, between
the turnstiles and the entrance to the tunnel, looked concerned at this, so they


                                          8
 went over to stand just below the ledge. I could not hear what was said, but the
 fans held up their still intact tickets and were then allowed to jump down to the
 safety of the area where I was waiting. I do not believe that, under normal
 circumstances, this type of action would have been permitted. I therefore
presume that the policemen who allowed it to happen were sufficiently satisfied
that the situation outside the turnstiles was such that it warranted their use of
discretion as to how best to allow people into the ground. Sending those people
who had climbed over the wall back outside the ground would only have added to
the confusion outside. I believe that this fact was recognised by the police
officers inside the ground.


Then I noticed my colleague come through one of the turnstiles, and we then
proceeded towards the tunnel directly opposite the turnstiles which, I knew from
previous visits, led to the terrace.


I only recall seeing one steward at the start of the tunnel and he was merely
observing those people who were passing through the tunnel. However, there
were two stewards at the foot of the steps to my right, which led to the seating in
the West Stand, and they were checking tickets as people went past them and up
the steps. No check was made of my ticket, or to my knowledge, of anyone else’s
ticket amongst those entering the tunnel.


On each of my previous visits to Hillsborough, I have stood in the area between
the turnstiles and the tunnel for several minutes. Despite having looked around
this area as I have waited each time, I have no recollection of any signs, or
stewards, directing people to the terracing at the sides. This equally applies to
my last visit on 15th April of this year. I have to say that I did not know that
there was another way to gain access to the terracing, other than the way that I
could actually see directly in front of me - namely through the tunnel that led to
the centre section of terracing.


I did not recall there being fencing at the sides actually on the terrace and, even
if I had recalled that from my previous visits, as I could not see an alternative
way onto the terrace, I’m sure I would still have walked through the tunnel I
remember that when I have visited other football grounds, such as Watford and


                                          9
Leicester City, which also have fences across the terraces, gates in them have
been opened to allow people to pass through from one section to another.
Indeed, I recall stewards at other matches using such a system to systematically
fill sections of the terrace as they wanted, before closing certain side gates and
then filling up another section. This prevented any one section from becoming
too over-crowded. Such a system did not exist at Hillsborough. There were no
gates in the side fences, as far as I could see.


The point that I am making is that, despite having seen the ground before, its lay­
out was certainly not clear to me and, in the absence of instructions or directions,
I entered the terrace section by what amounted to the only way I thought was
possible. I had time to survey the area, so I feel sure that someone who is in a
hurry to enter the terracing, unless they were already aware of a route to the
outer edges of the terrace, or were to be directed by someone, would also follow
the route that I took. Of course, this route led to the most crowded part of the
terrace, although from anywhere other than inside the ground it would not be
possible to actually see this. Nevertheless, it is well known by anyone who has
ever been to a football match, that the area directly behind a goal is a
particularly popular place to stand, if that area is, of course, a terrace rather than
a seating area. Consequently, such areas are always more crowded than the
edges of a terrace.


As I started walking through the tunnel, I could see daylight above people’s heads
but I could see that the far end of the tunnel was obstructed by the sheer number
of people congregated around it. Although I thought, at that moment, that this
was only to be expected for such a big match just before kick-off, I remember
thinking when I actually reached the far end of the tunnel, that I was completely
surprised by just how full the area already was.


I found it difficult even getting through this wall of people onto the start of the
terrace, but as I did, I soon realised that it would be best not to try and move
directly towards the goal, because that area was already far too packed. It was
also difficult to move to either side, so the only direction in which I could see any
hope of finding a place to stand, in any degree of comfort, was to move
diagonally forwards. This is what I did. In fact, I moved diagonally to my right


                                          10
and my colleague followed behind me. As I edged my way forward, I could see
that there appeared to be slightly more room nearer the front. In any case, I
wanted to try and get a clearer view as much as anything at this time.


I was already aware that the area that I was standing in was almost certainly
more densely populated than it had been at any stage of last year’s semi-final. I
was particularly worried about this, in view of the fact that I knew how many
people were still trying to get into the ground. I thought that it would just not be
possible to accommodate any more people in the centre section of the terrace. I
reassured myself, however, that there did appear to be far more spaces on the
side sections of the terracing and that, therefore, people still trying to get in
would be directed to those areas, surely. It would be clear, at a glance, for
anyone inside the ground that this centre-section was dangerously overcrowded,
whereas there was still plenty of room on the side section beyond the side fence.
This had not been visible before I had gone through the tunnel, though. I began
to wish that I had been able to stand in the side section myself, but I could not
see any way of getting to it.


With the match due to begin within a matter of minutes, I found myself standing
with a barrier directly in front of me. I know, from past experience of capacity
matches, that it is usually far more comfortable to stand with a barrier just behind
rather than just in front of you. The only direction in which I could move was
forward, so I decided to duck underneath the barrier. A number of other people
did the same thing, and so although I stood up just the other side of the barrier,
the additional people who followed me caused me to be pushed further forward,
and nearer to the perimeter fence. At this stage, however, there still appeared to
be more room where I was standing than where I had previously been standing,
and I was relieved that the barrier was no longer immediately in front of me.
There were no more barriers between me and the perimeter fence - only people.
There is always some crowd movement during a match, and I feared that I would
continually be pushed up against the barrier unless I moved. My colleague had
not ducked under the barrier, though. Instead, he had managed to move
backwards slightly and he was standing about 10 feet behind me.




                                          11
Gradually, I was feeling the pressure of the crowd increasing all around and it
was becoming very uncomfortable. I was now standing about 3 feet away from
the perimeter fence in the centre section of the terrace slightly to the right of the
goal. As I stood there, I was acutely aware that the situation was becoming
rather desperate, and that it was in danger of becoming extremely serious. I had
never experienced anything like it before. There seemed to be no control,
whatsoever, on the number of people being allowed in.


Even before the teams were on the pitch, people all around me, but mainly in
front of me, were calling out for someone to help them. Some were screaming
and some who were able to move themselves were trying to climb out. Their
attempts to escape were seemingly interpreted by the policemen on the other side
of the fence as an attempt to invade the pitch. I could hear fans protesting as
they were being restrained on top of the fences by policemen. Someone actually
called out that he thought that some people at the front, by the fence, were dying,
but he was pushed back off the top of the fence and onto the terrace again.
Clearly, those early warnings were not being heeded, despite the increasingly
widespread pleas for assistance and screams.


At this stage, although I could not move from the spot where I was standing, I
had been able to raise my arms from by my sides to steady myself and so avoid
falling over if the crowd began to sway. At the time, that seemed a natural
reaction, although there were almost certainly too many people already packed in
to enable such a sway to take place. Gradually, however, the situation seemed to
be getting worse and worse, and I could feel that more and more people were
being allowed onto the centre terrace, despite the already dangerous
overcrowding. The crush was getting tighter all the time.


There were now more policemen and some St. John’s Ambulance men gathering
on the other side of the fence obscuring my view of the pitch, so I did not see
when the teams actually came out on the pitch, but I heard a roar from the crowd
which signalled the moment that this did take place.


I remember thinking "God, no. Please don’t bring them out now. Things will
only get worse".


                                          12
Regrettably, that roar from the crowd coincided with an increase in pressure on
the terrace as people who had not, at that time, taken up their positions, would
have been alerted to the fact that the match was about to start, and they would
be rushing so as not to miss anything. Unfortunately, my fears had been realised.


From that moment on, I found myself pressed up against the person in front of
me and both my arms were pinned between other people’s bodies. That then
meant that the only part of my own body that I was capable of moving was my
head.


Although my whole body was in severe discomfort, my left arm, left leg and back
were in the most pain. In particular, a teenage girl who had been standing next
to me had her head twisted round facing me, and the side of her face was being
forced up against the upper part of my left arm. The excruciating pain in my arm
was almost unbearable, and I feared that my arm was simply going to snap under
the pressure. All I could see of the girl was her face, as the rest of her body was
being smothered by other people. She was clearly in a great deal of pain. Her
head was in a vice between my arm and the body of another man behind her. It
was impossible for any of us to move at all.


I could tell that the poor girl was having difficulty breathing and she was
incapable of speaking, because her face was being squeezed so tightly that it was
being contorted. H er expression did not seem to change and her tear-filled eyes
were just staring straight at me, pleading with me to help her. Although her eyes
were full of tears, it was almost as though the pressure being exerted on her head
was preventing those tears from flowing down her face.


As I found myself captivated by this desperate sight next to me, I could feel a
foot tapping on mine, gently at first, but soon it became more agitated, and I felt
sure that it must have belonged to the girl because it had only started when I first
looked at her. I knew that signal meant that she needed help urgently.


I turned my head and saw a policewoman directly in front of me, so I called out
to her. She looked at me as I started shouting, so I know that she heard me. I


                                         13
pleaded with her to do something for the girl next to me, either herself, or to call
for assistance. She simply looked away.


I asked myself why there were so many people on the other side of the fence
looking at the situation, but just standing still and not actually moving? We were
the ones not able to move. We needed to be helped by those who could move.
Then I noticed someone running towards the fence. At last, I thought, someone
was going to help us. As the man reached the fence, he lifted up a camera to his
face and then just walked away in search of another picture!


The pressure of the crowd had been building up gradually to the point where I
could no longer move at all, and I did think that it could not possible increase
any more. However, I do recall a sudden instance when the pain became even
more intense, and the pressure on my body even greater. I remember yelling out
at this moment and many other people, particularly behind me, also called out at
the same time. I believe that the match was still in progress because I could still
hear much of the crowd reacting to the play on the pitch with cheers and
applause, unaware of what was happening all around me. I could not actually see
the players, though, because my view was still obstructed by the motionless
people on the other side of the fence.


I thought because so many other people had called out at the same time as me,
particularly in the area behind me, indicating a widespread increase in the level
of pain being endured, that there must have been a surge at the back and that
even more people were trying to get in. It was the suddenness of that pain and
the simultaneous shouts and screams that I remember vividly.


This did seem to prompt some action on the pitch in front of me. The police
were beginning to look more anxiously towards the back of the terrace, whereas
before their gaze seemed to have been fixed upon those who were suffering at
the front. Some of them actually climbed onto the fence themselves to try and
get a clear view of the rear of the terrace. This then created a gap in my line of
vision, which enabled me to see the pitch and some of the players. They were
standing still. The match appeared to have been halted.




                                          14
There were quite a few people now standing on the touchline and some were also
on the pitch. Some were policemen, some St. John’s Ambulance men and some
spectators who had been able to climb out. They appeared to be arguing with
each other and then they pointed at us.


The players then turned and walked off the pitch and, as this was happening, I
saw a man lying on his back in front of me, just on the edge of the pitch. Some
policemen were kneeling down next to him. Someone had taken off the man’s
shirt and pulled down his trousers, and the policemen were giving him the kiss-of-
life. I am sure that was the first time that I saw someone being attended to on
the pitch, because I remember it having such an impression upon me. It only
served to confirm my fears that people were in real trouble. The man on his
back did not appear to be moving at all. He was a large man, and that showed
me that even size and strength could not save some people from being crushed. I
knew that I had to try and keep my rib-cage above the crush and keep breathing.
In that respect, my height of 6’ 2 V2" was absolutely invaluable.


As attempts to revive the man on his back continued, the number of people
moving onto the pitch steadily increased. Fans, policemen and ambulancemen
alike were carrying limp bodies onto the playing area. Some were pummelling
hearts with their hands, others were giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.


I could see that a very narrow gate in the perimeter fence several yards to the left
of where I was standing had been opened, and policemen were trying to extricate
those nearest to it from the tangle of bodies. Their efforts proved largely
fruitless, because even when they seemed to have hold of people, the sheer
compression that existed at the front of the terrace served only to thwart attempts
to release them.


This was the only gate in the fence that I could see. There were none near to
where I was standing. Only the people nearest to that gate had any chance of
getting through it. Still the only thing that I could move was my head, so I knew
that there was no prospect of being able to reach the gate myself. A number of
people behind me had been able to raise themselves above the crush and they
literally climbed over the heads and shoulders of those still trapped around me


                                          15
until they reached the perim eter fence, and then jumped down on the other side
to safety.


Even at this stage, many policemen were still lined up along the touchline and
were restraining some of those who had been able to free themselves from
encroaching onto the pitch. Those fans would have been aware of what was
happening on the terraces where they had just been standing, and so they seemed
anxious to get onto the pitch to help those who were lying injured.


Gradually, however, many of those policemen began to realise that their help was
needed in trying to evacuate the terrace area, rather than preventing those who
had escaped from walking on the pitch. When this realisation did sink in, the
trickle of people being carried onto the pitch to receive attention soon became a
flood. Unfortunately, though, judging by the number of heads which were being
covered with discarded items of clothing, it was already far too late.


Then I noticed that an ambulance was slowly moving in front of the perimeter
fence until it reached an area just behind the goal, slightly to my left. It was then
forced to stop because there were a number of people lying on the ground in its
path. These people were completely still.


I looked back at the girl standing next to me. H er foot was no longer tapping on
mine, and the grimace on her face had been replaced by a ghastly vacant
expression. I realised that she had died. Not only were people dying up against
the fence, but they were dying next to where I was standing as well. Although the
girl was dead, the pressure being exerted on my arm by her jaw-bone was still
causing me to wince with pain. She was still in exactly the same position that she
had been when she was alive.


The continuing pain in my arm, combined with having to withstand the force
being exerted on the remainder of my body, was necessitating much heavier than
normal breathing and I was beginning to feel quite exhausted. I did not think
that I would be able to cope for much longer with my frightful predicament and I
could see no sign of any forthcoming assistance to ease my plight.




                                         16
I then thought that I too would suffer the same fate as the girl on my arm and
that, before long, I would also be dead.


Knowing that I was totally unable to help myself or, indeed, anyone else around
me, and having seen no signs of encouragement in front of me, I had accepted
the fact that soon my pain and suffering would stop and that I would not feel
anything at all.


At that time, my sense of panic seemed to disappear as it merely seemed futile.
Instead, my thoughts turned to my family and my girlfriend. I could see their
faces in my mind, but the images were blurred. I felt desperately sad as I thought
of how distraught they would be. I just wanted to be with them again, so that I
could say goodbye "properly". I tried to bring their images into focus so that I
could be with them in spirit, but they merely faded.


Somehow I was becoming oblivious of the situation I was in, and strangely I was
distancing myself from it as if I had played my part in it, but that it was about to
come to an end.


I began to feel that I was merely a bystander watching a rather shocking film that
I could turn off anytime I wanted. However, I looked up at the top of the stand
to my right and saw a row of television cameras which were pointed towards us.
I then came out of the trance that I had allowed myself to fall into, and realised
that I was very much part of the horror that was going on all around. I had
kidded myself that I was looking through a camera at the terrible scenes in front
of me, but in fact they were trained on me as well.


There were, by now, large numbers of people on the pitch clustered in small
groups attending to an ever-increasing number of casualties. Many advertisement
hoardings had been ripped down and were being used as makeshift stretchers to
carry those who were injured. Most of these "stretchers" that I saw were being
carried by spectators rather than ambulancemen, and their faces showed clear
signs of strain as they ran towards the area below the television gantry on the
right-hand side of the pitch as I looked, before returning to carry other injured
fans.


                                           17
There were many bodies lying covered all over the place, but still some of the
injured were receiving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and still people were using
their bare hands to try and force hearts to beat again.


Eventually, I noticed that the crush seemed to be easing slightly behind me, and I
was able to move my arms for the first time since the initial surge had rendered
them useless. Then whoever had been forced up against my back moved away
from me slightly, and I was able to stand upright. Gaps started appearing in the
terrace and I was able to take a step backwards. At that moment, I looked down
at my feet and I noticed two bodies face down, one lying across the other, at
almost the exact spot where I had been standing all that time.


A man came over towards me and he helped me to lift up a young boy. We
turned him over and then I felt ill. The boy’s face was blue and his mouth was a
dark shade of purple. He must have been dead for some time. He had probably
been lying on the ground ever since the crush began, unknown to everyone, not
that anybody would have been able to pick him up even if they had known he
was lying there. He was probably in his mid-teens with dark hair and, I think,
wearing a dark blue anorak. This is the body that was lying on top of the other
one. I had to just help the man lift his body onto the perim eter fence and two
other men took him from us.


During the time that I was in a trance, my recollection of events is somewhat
vague and by the time that I had come out of that trance, and was able to move
slightly, I do not recall seeing the girl that had died on my arm.


There was now space to move almost right up to the fence, although there were
many bodies lined up against it, and people were beginning to lift them too. I
managed to lift one more child’s body over the fence, although I am unable to
describe this child because, although I did lift the body, I have absolutely no
recollection of any physical features whatsoever. I seem to recall almost seeing a
mere outline of this person in my mind, and no more. I had been so shocked by
the sight of the young boy, that it was almost as though my mind refused to
accept any more punishment for the time being.


                                         18
The effects of the crush on my arm made the grim task physically very difficult.
The other men that were helping in the lifting operation could see that I had
been hurt, and there was no way that I would have been able to lift heavier
bodies than those that I had already struggled with, so they insisted that I was
helped out of the centre terrace section myself. However, I could not get over
the perim eter fence at the front, because its height meant that, even with
assistance, I would have needed to pull myself up and over in order to get onto
the pitch, which I would not have been able to do with my injury. So instead,
someone helped me over the lower fence at the side which led to the sparsely
populated side terrace section. Even though this fence was lower than the one at
the front, I had difficulty negotiating it because of my arm and also because the
sheer exhaustion caused by the crush had made me feel giddy.


Because I felt unsteady on the top of the fence, I did not want to jump over until
I felt that I could land safely on my feet, because the terrace was obviously solid
concrete. The man who still had hold of me called to two men on the side
terrace for help, and they came over to try and catch me. They told me to jump
but, unfortunately, they only succeeded in breaking my fall, and I actually landed
on my left knee.


They checked that I was not too badly injured and helped me to stand up. The
red stain on my trouser leg betrayed the fact that my knee was bleeding. I was
able to stand, though, and although it certainly hurt, at least I thought that meant
that I had not broken anything.


The two men then went off to see who else they could help as I leaned against a
barrier and just tried to catch my breath and compose myself as best I could. My
nose was also bleeding, but I was just so relieved to have got out alive. I really
had not thought that I was going to.


I looked around at the stunned faces on the terrace. Many were crying
unashamedly. After a few minutes, I managed to get my nose-bleed under
control, and I limped back to the side fence that I had escaped over. By this
time, the front of the area where I had been trapped had been virtually cleared.


                                         19
However, a few yards further back there were still many people congregated in
the centre section of the terrace, but they were able to move freely by now. I
could not see any remaining injured fans in this area and the danger appeared to
have passed. As I began to reflect upon what had happened, I stared at the
nearly-empty front section of the terrace and found that I could no longer hold
back my own tears. Yes - it really had happened.


Then I looked towards the back of the right-hand side section of terrace that I
was standing in, and noticed that the people at the front of the stand above were
ripping down the advertisement hoardings just in front of their seats, and were
passing them down onto the terrace. I had earlier seen the use to which similar
hoardings had been put while I was still trapped myself, so I thought that more
"stretchers" were needed on the pitch.


There were not many people standing near the side fence (that I had escaped
over) but this is where the hoardings were being passed to. I, and three others,
got hold of one of the hoardings and carried it above our heads, a short way up
to the perimeter fence. I was careful to take the weight mainly with my right
arm, being mindful of the injury that I had sustained to my other arm. As we
were passing the hoarding over the fence, some people just behind were waiting
to pass another one to us. At the same time, some other hoardings were being
passed over the side fence into the centre section of the terrace.


Since the events at Hillsborough, I have seen a photograph in the Liverpool Echo
which showed what, I am certain, is this very moment. Although the camera is
too far away for it to be possible to positively identify myself, the number and
position of the hoardings is just how I remember them. The official ground clock,
clearly visible in the photograph, shows the time as 15.37. From this, I am able
to deduce that I was probably trapped on the centre terrace until about 1530, or
thereabouts.


Having passed the hoardings over the fence, my thoughts turned to my colleague
who I had become separated from even before the teams had come onto the
pitch. The last time that I had seen him, he was about 10 feet behind me and I


                                         20
felt sure that he would not have been in the same danger that I had been in,
because the worst part of the crush seemed to have been concentrated along the
length of the perimeter fence, and back just as far as the first set of barriers
which were nearest to it. This had at least seemed the case when I had been
trapped, because some people behind me had been able to climb out over the top
of those of us at the front.


Nevertheless, I was naturally concerned to find him, in view of what I had seen
happening to other people. I stood and scanned the centre terrace section to see
if he was still amongst those who had remained in that part of the ground, and
then likewise around the side section of the terrace where I was standing myself,
but to no avail.


I then hobbled down towards a gate in the perim eter fence and a policeman on
the other side helped to lift me through it and onto the pitch. He asked if I
needed my leg seeing to, but as that was not of immediate concern to me, I
replied that I would be all right.


I started looking round at people on the pitch in an attempt to reunite myself
with my colleague. By this time, most people were standing around and it
appeared that most of the injured fans had already been taken care of. There
were still a few injured people receiving attention, but for most people on the
pitch there did not seem to be any further assistance that they could give. As I
walked across the pitch, grown men who had been reunited with their friends
were standing with their arms round each other, crying on each other’s shoulders.
Everyone around knew just how they felt and shared in their sense of relief at
finding each other, but at the same time there was an atmosphere of numbness at
the shock of seeing so many who had suffered so much.


Despite having earlier convinced myself that my colleague would have been safe
where he was standing, I began to feel anxious that maybe something had
happened to him. I looked back at the terraces behind the goal and walked
along the touchline to try and catch sight of him, but there was no sign of him
anywhere.



                                          21
I walked around the perim eter of the pitch in front of the stands and then
backwards and forwards across the pitch, but still nothing.


Then I also remembered that the media were covering the match, and feared that
my family and my girlfriend would be sitting at home aware of the tragedy that
had just occurred, and would be fearing for my safety. I thought that I would
have to let them know that I was all right as soon as I possibly could, to stop
them worrying about me. I thought about trying to get to a telephone outside,
but nobody appeared to be leaving the ground and, indeed, there had been an
announcement over the public address system requesting that people did not
leave the ground in order to avoid causing congestion in the streets around the
stadium, which needed to be kept clear to allow ambulances to gain access. So I
thought that I would have to stay where I was. I knew that I had to get in touch
with those at home soon - but how could I?


I wandered around not knowing what to do, and I was getting increasingly
worried about not being able to allay the fears of my loved ones. Then I noticed
that the Nottingham Forest manager had come onto the pitch, and was being
interviewed by a television crew. There was a cordon of police across the width
of the pitch between me and the impromptu gathering of newsmen by the players’
tunnel entrance, but I thought that here was my chance to pass my message
home, so I casually walked through the police line, expecting to be questioned,
but I was allowed to pass through unchallenged. I was confused as to why it had
been deemed necessary for there to be such a line there anyway at this time. I
then went over towards the group of people who had converged around Brian
Clough and noticed that there was another hand-held television camera on the
pitch nearer to me, filming two fans who had escaped the crush. Out of
desperation, I walked up behind them and put my head between theirs in an
attempt to get myself seen on television and show everyone at home that I was
alive. I just mouthed the words "I’m all right. I’m all right" as if I was talking
directly to my family and the cameraman was providing a link-up service. Then I
realised, however, that any pictures were probably being recorded and edited, so
the chances were, that idea would not have had the desired effect, so I frantically
tried to think of something else.




                                         22
Then I noticed a ground official nearby with a portable telephone. I thought that
my prayers had been answered, so I walked over to where he was standing and
gave him my ’phone number and pleaded with him to ring it for me. He dialled
the first half of the number and then the screen just went blank. The battery had
gone because he had ’phoned for so many other people before I had reached
him. I was becoming increasingly perturbed over the fact that the nightmare that
I thought had ended when I managed to escape from the crush, was continuing
for different reasons.


I then walked back to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, where I had
originally been trapped. The centre section of the terracing was now occupied by
a number of policemen who were sitting down with their helmets in their hands,
looking just as dazed and shocked as everyone else. Some of them were crying as
they reflected upon the awfulness of what they had witnessed.


I could not decide what to do next. Should I stay in the ground and try and find
my colleague, or should I try and leave and look for a public telephone to ’phone
home? I again reassured myself that my colleague would have been in a far
better position than me, and, as I had survived, so I felt sure that no harm would
have come to him. In any case, when we had first arrived we had agreed to meet
back at the car if we were separated for any reason, although obviously at that
time we did not envisage the circumstances which were to lead to that becoming
a reality. That’s it, I thought. He’ll be back at the car wondering where I am.


I went over to the corner of the pitch, where I saw someone going through a gate
back onto the terrace. I asked a policeman who was standing by the gate
whether it was possible to get out of the ground, even though the vast majority of
people were still in their places. He directed me down a side passage which led
away from the side section of the terrace, having told me that it led to the exit.
This was the first time that I had realised that there was another entrance/exit
leading to the terrace, other than the tunnel by which I had gained access to the
terrace myself.




                                         23
Half-way along the passage, I came across a supporter who was walking in the
opposite direction, back towards the terrace. He actually asked me if I knew
whether the match was still going to be played or not! I just hope that he had
not been aware of the scale of what had happened if he was able to ask such a
question. He could not possibly have seen the sort of scenes that I had
witnessed, surely. I half looked at him and muttered "I sincerely hope not",
before continuing along the passage to the exit.


The game was over as far as I was concerned. How could they possibly play a
match now? I thought of the young victims that I had seen crushed to death. It
wasn’t just their ages and the number of bodies that I had seen that distressed
me, it was the way they had died which was so terrible. They had known what
was happening to them, just as I had known what was happening to me. The only
difference was that I still knew, and always would - but they knew no more.


Match. What match?


I walked out into the street and saw that other people had already left the
ground. A man was banging his hand on the side of a police car which had
parked on the other side of the road, directly opposite the Leppings Lane
turnstiles. He was shouting at the driver. No attempt was made by other police
officers around to restrain the man. He was not being aggressive or threatening,
he was rather expressing his anger and frustration. Whilst I would not wish to
condone his actions in any way, I could understand that an experience such as
that endured by so many people that day, and maybe also by the man I saw in
front of me, could quite easily provoke such an unbalanced response. Although I
could understand his emotion, I did not agree with what he was doing and I could
not see it achieving anything. However, I do think that his state of despair was
responsible for his behaviour.


I believe that this was also recognised by those people around the man who were
calmly trying to diffuse the situation, and so prevent it from becoming
confrontational. Although I did not wait to see if there were any further
developments, I would not consider what I saw to be interpretable as a criminal
offence.


                                         24
I would stress, most strongly, that the incident that I have just described was the
only time during the whole afternoon that I had personally seen any action which
I would describe as "disagreeable". Prior to that, every action of the fans that I
had seen had been totally admirable, beyond reproach and, at times, quite heroic.
From the time that I was trapped on the terrace, until I actually left the ground,
the impression that I had was that most of the initiative was being shown by fans
themselves who had been aware of the scale of the problem far sooner than those
people who had been on the other side of the fence from the beginning.


As I walked away from the ground, my immediate problem was to find a
telephone. Having turned left and walked up a hill, the first public telephone
that I came to had a queue of about a dozen or more people waiting to use it. I
realised that I needed to ’phone as quickly as possible, so I went in search of
another one. Regrettably, I found a similar situation at the next one also. Many
of the shops nearby were closed, but I came across one which was open and I
asked the assistant if there was a ’phone that I could use. She showed me to the
back room and I joined a short queue of fans waiting to use it. Recognising
everyone’s sense of urgency, all calls were kept as brief as possible and, for the
benefit of those behind me in the queue, I asked my father to ring my girlfriend
for me when I eventually reached the front of the queue. Everyone else seemed
to be making just one call and listing other people that should be contacted on
their behalf. It was only fair.


Having left the shop, I still felt that I wanted to speak to my girlfriend myself, so
that I would know whether or not the message had been passed on, in order to
ease my mind. I carried on walking, but each queue in the little shops seemed to
be getting longer and longer. Everyone seemed to have had the same idea.


I noticed some residents had come out into their front gardens and were chatting
to each other over their fences. They seemed to be aware that something was
going on, so I asked a lady whether I could use her ’phone. She kindly allowed
me to, and I was able to speak to my girlfriend. After expressing my gratitude to
the lady, I then realised that my plea for help had prompted others to follow, and
a queue had already formed in her hallway. I hope that she did not mind. She


                                          25
did not seem to, fortunately. I think that she could see the relief on my face and
no doubt on those who ’phoned after me. I had just made the two most precious
’phone calls of my life.


That was one great weight off my mind, but now I had to try and get back to the
car and check that my colleague was there. I did not know exactly where I was,
because I had approached the ground from a totally different direction to the way
that I had walked in search of a telephone. I decided that the best thing to do
was to walk back to the ground and then I knew that I would be able to find my
way back from there.


After about five minutes, I arrived back at the ground and by this time people
had clearly been asked to leave the stadium and many people were filing out into
the streets.


It took me about another 20 minutes to walk back to the car, and when I finally
reached it there was no sign of anyone waiting there. A family were standing in
their driveway nearby, so I gave them a brief description of my colleague and
asked if they had seen anybody waiting by the car, and they confirmed that
somebody had been, but that he had walked back in the direction that he had
come from after a few minutes. The family could see that I was very upset and
that I had been injured, so they took me into their house. Fortunately, one of
them was a nurse and she looked at my injured arm for me. She thought that the
injury was not too serious, although since the full extent of crush injuries are not
visible, she could not give a full diagnosis. She did, however, put some cream on
it for me, which she said would help until I was able to have a proper
examination.


The time must have been about 4.40-4.45, because the television was on in the
house and the football scores were being shown on BBC1. I could not believe
that these were deemed to have been of any significance whatsoever, considering
what had just happened, but then I did not know what coverage, if any, had
already been given to the scenes at Hillsborough that I had witnessed. I did not
have to wait long, as the programme switched to a scene which was already
indelibly etched in my mind. The talk was of at least 50 fatalities and over 100
injured. At the very least, I thought.


                                          26
 Someone in the house tried to ring the emergency number on the screen to
 enquire about my colleague, to reassure me that he had not been hurt, and to
 convince me that it was quite likely that he had been the man that they had seen
earlier by the car. Inevitably, the line was engaged each time they tried.


After 10 minutes or so, there was a call from the road outside to say that the man
they had seen earlier had returned. I looked out of the wincow. Yes - it was
him. Thank God.


Fortunately, my colleague did not appear to have been injured or too badly
affected by what he had witnessed either. However, at that time, neither of us
were aware of each other’s circumstances in the crush, and it did not seem an
appropriate time to begin a discussion to establish such details. Personally, I felt
that I had seen far too much to be able to describe events with any degree of
clarity so soon afterwards.


My overriding priority was to get myself home as soon as possible to show my
family that I really was all right. The car that I had driven to Sheffield was not
insured for any other driver, so I knew that I would have to drive myself. I felt
that I was physically capable of doing so, despite my injuries, and I made sure
that I felt sufficiently composed in my mind as well, before setting off. Naturally,
I avoided talking about my experience on the return journey, for I knew that if I
began recalling the horrendous scenes that I had witnessed, I would break down
emotionally and would not be able to continue driving. In any case, I deliberately
stopped the car and had a walk round a number of times along the way, to make
sure that I was able to continue.


Looking back, I am amazed myself that I was able to drive home under the
circumstances and, perhaps, had I been more rational about my dilemma, I may
have acted differently. However, after such an experience, how could anyone
have made a rational decision? Fortunately, we both got back safely and I felt
that I, and everyone who was concerned about me, could best cope with what had
happened with me at home.




                                        27
                                  Some Final Thoughts


In conclusion, I would agree that the opening of the large concertina gates
adjacent to the turnstiles was understandable in view of the circumstances outside
the ground and the danger that existed up at the turnstiles, and the need to deal
with that danger. However, the efficient crowd control on the approach to those
turnstiles, which had been much in evidence at the 1988 F.A. Cup Semi-Final at
Hillsborough, was sadly lacking on this occasion. In my opinion, the need to
open the concertina gates stemmed directly from the inability to control the vast
number of people outside the ground in the same way as the previous year.


Furthermore, from inside the ground, it would have been clear, at a glance, that
the centre section of terracing at the Leppings Lane End was dangerously
overcrowded, even before those gates were opened, and therefore, that any
sudden influx of people into the ground would certainly have to be directed away
from that area, otherwise safety would be severely compromised. I believe that,
had better communication existed between all parties, then the decision to allow
a rush of fans through the gates would only have been taken in the knowledge
that those people were then to be directed away from the centre tunnel. It would
appear that the consequences of opening the gates without such directions were
not fully understood by the person who took the decision. Therefore, whilst I
would not wish to directly criticise the decision to open the gates, errors of
judgement were certainly made as to what action was needed once the gates
were, indeed, to be opened. For instance, apparently last year stewards directed
people away from the tunnel once the centre section was full. This shows that
the need to avoid overcrowding on that section of terracing was recognised last
year. Why was the situation different this year? Last year, I had actually taken
my place on the terrace before the need to direct people away from the centre
section arose.


The counters that register the number of people that have actually passed
through the turnstiles do not, to my knowledge, indicate the precise area on the
terrace where those people have subsequently gone to stand. However, by
actually looking at the terraces, one would have gained a good impression of their
distribution, almost instantly.


                                          28
The situations both inside and outside the ground had deteriorated gradually over
a period of time, and so the need to take action to avert the danger did not arise
suddenly, by any means.


However well-intentioned the opening of the concertina gates may have been, the
consequences of doing so were not sufficiently considered. I therefore have to
disagree, most strongly, with the senior police officer from South Yorkshire who,
at a press conference shortly after the disaster, expressed his opinion that the
opening of the gates had not been a contributory factor in the deaths. Although I
have stated that I acknowledge the need to have opened those gates, I feel
certain that the surge of people through them, once opened, towards an already
overcrowded terrace, certainly did contribute to very many of the deaths that day.


Certainly, the overall organisation of the event, both before and after the main
crush on the terrace, was woefully inadequate. I have mentioned, in particular,
the different measures that were used at last year’s semi-final, because they show
that, on that occasion, consideration had, rightly, been given to the problems of
dealing with a large crowd at Hillsborough. Clearly, last year those measures
suggested that the event demanded efficient organisation if everything was to run
smoothly. Those of us who were at that match, though, will remember that even
then there was room for improvement. However, to abandon so much of that
strategy suggests to me that there was a degree of unjustified complacency
surrounding this year’s match, on the part of the organisers. Hillsborough only
attracts capacity crowds when it is used as a venue for F.A. Cup Semi-Finals, so it
would seem sensible to refer to experience gained from the previous such match.


I welcome the comments from the Home Secretary who was keen to stress that
hooliganism was not a factor in this disaster. That is something which all of us
who were unfortunate enough to have been caught up in the events at
Hillsborough are fully aware of. Indeed, I would further suggest that, but for the
miraculous response of many of the supporters, and the life-saving action that
they took, the effects of the crush would certainly have been far worse. Those
who were not so well informed, would have done well to have borne that in mind
before they tried to prejudge events based solely upon their pre-conceived notions
of those who support football.


                                         29
Those of us who enjoy watching the sport deplore the behaviour of those who do
seek to spoil spectators’ enjoyment as much as anybody else does but, on this
occasion, it is important to realise that the central issue is one of safety and not
one of hooliganism.




In this account, I have tried to describe some of the emotions that I went through
that day. No words, whether written or spoken, can possibly fully convey the
sheer horror of the experience that I or, indeed, anyone else went through.
Whilst I have produced this report to the best of my ability, inevitably I feel that
it is incomplete insofar as it does not portray a full picture of what it was really
like. For instance, obviously I have not been able to incorporate all the different
sounds that, when combined with the visual images as well as the desperate
sensation of being crushed myself, and the feeling of utter helplessness with
regard to my own safety and the safety of those others around me, served to
accentuate the awfulness of the situation.


However, I do accept that only I will really ever know what happened to me, but
by recording these details, and by talking about them, I shall gradually come to
terms with them.




                                          30
W hen you walk through a storm

Hold your head up high

And don’t be afraid of the dark.

A t the end of the road there’s a golden sky

And the sweet silver song of a lark.

Walk on through the wind,

Walk on through the rain,

Though your dreams be tossed and blown;

Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart

And you’ll never walk alone.

You’ll never walk alone.




                                   To the girl who died on my arm

                                   and all those others who suffered,

                                   - Rest In Peace



                                   You’ll Never Walk Alone.
