Metropolitan Borough of S E F T O N
Director of Legal & Administrative Services
Michael Scott, LL.B., Solicitor


Your ref.                                                            Town Hall
Our ref.                          RJW/AJ                            Lord Street
Date                              8th June 1989                      Southport
Tel ext.                          2008                                P R 8 1 DA
                                                    Telephone: Southport 33133
Please contact:                   Mr. Whitrow                   (S.T.D. - 0704)
                                                                 Fax. Ext. 2256

           Dear Sir,

           Video Tape Recording of The Hillsborough Disaster

           I have been asked to contact you by the Social Work Team
           who are providing counselling with those Sefton residents
           who were either bereaved or traumatised as a result of the
           Hillsborough Disaster.

           Those who are providing this service have come to the view
           that it would be very helpful to them if they could employ
           the video recording which I believe was available to the
           Hearing and certain parts of which have now been broadcast
           on the television.

           The Social Workers feel that if this video were available
           to them it would be a very useful tool in assisting
           individuals to work through their problems and to be
           counselled by members of the Team in so doing.

           I appreciate that this matter is, of course, still before
           the Tribunal and that under normal circumstances it would
           perhaps be unusual to release any evidence of this nature.

           I wonder, fibweveir, whether given the very special
           circumstances of this case it would be possible for a copy
           of the recording to'be released for the purposes outlined
           above.  I would be very much obliged if you could advise
           me of your views on this matter.

           Yours faithfully,




           DIRECTOR OF LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

           FIRST CLASS
           The Treasury Solicitor,
           Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry,
           Town Hall,
           SHEFFIELD,
           SI 2HH.
