                                             TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                             HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                             TOWN HALL
                                             SHEFFIELD
                                             SI 2HH

                                             Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                             FAX       0742-736900

                                             Ref: L89/2117/PIOW

                                             20th June, 1989




Dear Sir,

    Thank you for your letter of 9th June,

    I have replied to your Member of Parliament regarding this matter and
enclose a copy of my reply.

                                  Yours faithfully,




                                  for the Treasury Solicitor
                                                   From-. Robert Atkins, M.R


                                                       HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                                        LONDON SW1A OAA




                                                   16th June,   1989.


Dear Sir,

       I enclose copies of letters from my Constituent,

of ]                      who lost his wife at Hillsborough.

       I am most concerned that his views are not to be sought by

the inquiry and would wish to know why.        Surely he must be

able to contribute useful information,      for, as he says, you

cannot be aware of what he wishes to add to the sum total of

comment about the disaster.




                              Yours faithfully,




Treasury Solicitor,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry,
Town Hall,
Sheffield,
SI 2 H H .




                 Secretary • (Garstang) 09952 - 2225
                Constituency (Leyland) 0772-435835
   9/6/89



Dear Mr Atkins,
                Thank you for your letter 5/6/89. As you may
see from the enclosed letterl have already requested to give
verbal evidence at the Hillsboro* Inquiry, As you can see
I have been denied the oppertunity of stating my case as
it womld not contain anything new according to the Counsel
to the Inquiry.
                I don't know how you see things,Mr Atkins,
but it strikes me that unless Counsel has developed psychic
powers he cannot conceivably<now how relevant my evidence

        *      The evidence I gave to Police At Sheffield
was given within a few hours of the trauma Isuffered and
involved only facts related to my VifesC death.Other than
condemning Police for failing to open perimeter fences on to
the pitch it does not even begin to tellthe story of their
crass incomptence and indiffereence.
                 However it seems the Inquiry are only
interested in saving the face of S. Yorks Constabulary
instead of the truth,Ihave however despatched a two page
document to Mr Brummell leaving him in no doubt as to where
I allocate the blame,
              I thank you for your concern in this matter.

                            Yours sincerely.
                                          TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                          HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                          TOWN HALL
                                          SHEFFIELD
                                          SI 2HH

                                          Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                          FAX       0742-736900

                                           Gth June, 1989




Dear I

                              Hillsborough Inquiry

    Mr. Whalley, the Secretary to the Inquiry, has passed to me the exchange of
correspondence which he has had with you. May I first of all extend to you on
behalf of all members of the Inquiry team our very deepest sympathy.

    We are very grateful to you for the sLalenient you have already provided.
However, as you may know, a number of supporters have already given oral
evidence to the Inquiry. Counsel to the Inquiry considers that, whilst your
statement provides very useful corroboration of evidence already given, it does
not in fact contain any material which has not already been given in oral
evidence by other witnesses.

    If there are any specific points of criticism which you have to make of
South Yorkshire Police actions, then might I suggest that you let me have a note
of these. You may rest assured that any such comnents will be fully taken into
account in the Public Inquiry.

    Finally, it may assist you to know that the bereaved and injured are in fact
collectively represented as a party to this Inquiry by their own Counsel, who
are instructed by a consortium of Liverpool Solicitors. It may be that you will
wish to contact this group. If you do, I would suggest that you get in touch
with Mrs. Elizabeth Steele of Messrs. Cuffe, Roberts, North, Kirk, Solicitors,
25 Castle Street, Liverpool, L2 4TA (Tel. 051-274181).

    If there is anything which is not clear, please do not hesitate to contact
me, and please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

                                  Yours sincerely,




                                  D. Brummell
                                  Assistant Treasury Solicitor
