                                                     TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                          HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                          TOWN HALL
                                          SHEFFIELD
                                          SI 2HH

                                          Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                          FAX       0742-736900

                                           7th June, 1989


J. Mervyn Jones, Esq., MSc.
Assistant Chief Constable,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN.



   /I*®-!*r
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

    Thank you for your letter of today's date, which we have already discussed.

    The main difference between the initial and final versions of the South
Yorkshire Police Officers' statements is that any expressions of opinion were
(as I understand it, on the advice of Mr. Woodward) removed from the final
version. As I understand it, Andrew Collins' view is that there is absolutely
no reason for excluding such expressions of opinion when they touch on matters
relevant to the Public Inquiry and that, in the circumstances, there is no
objection in principle to written statements containing such opinions being
submitted to the Inquiry.

    Clearly, in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be
appropriate to use the original statement for the purposes of the Inquiry when
this has been superseded by a subsequent statement. However, what I understand
may have happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is
that the original unamended statement was circulated because of the need to
circulate statements to all parties as much in advance of the calling of the
relevant witnesses as possible and because at the time of circulation of the
relevant batch of witness statements the revised, final version of the
statement in question had not yet been received. I understand that in total
there are three cases where this has been necessary: P.C.s Best, Huckstepp and
Illingworth. However, in such cases only the final, revised version of the
statement was given to the press.

    I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

    I have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police, but am naturally happy for you to do so.
