FIRE SERU I C E S I N S P E C T OR A T E /F E U   8 6 ,1 6 , 1 9 3 9 11:45   HO, 5   P, 3


        NOTE FOR THE INQUIRY


        1   *       Management at the Club

                    There is not much evidence so far of a coherent management
                    structure.  The Board is responsible for all legal,
                    financial and operational,activities, and would be expected,
                    in the normal way, to delegate execution of its policies to
                    designated officers.  It is.not clear how this has been

    6>:             done.  An organisational chart, extending down to stewards,
                    would be useful.  And perhaps the accounts presented to the
                    Annual General meeting would shed some light.

        2.          Responsibilities for Safety

                    The central body appears to be the" Officers Working Party.
                    It is composed of representatives from the City Council,


                /
                    the South Yorkshire Police, the South Yorkshire County Fire
                    Service, the South Yorkshire County Council all taken from
                    Minutes, 1985);  sometimes representatives of the Club are
                    present,  it does not seem to have an appointed Chairman,
                    and it is not clear to whom it is accountable.

                    Page 27 (Club file) sets out the delegations made by "Area
                    Officer Working Parties" in 1976.   Page 29 records a letter
                    from the Chief Executive, County Council, to the Chief
                    Constable delegating "its responsibilities under the (1975)
                    Act to the Fire Service Committee."   There must be a serious
                    question as to the effectiveness of the various
                    relationships involved.

                    Procedures for granting Safety Certificates do not seem to
                    work very well, if at all.  It is preposterous that there
                    should be a delay of three years (so far) in amending the
                    original after the first notice of inadequacy made by the
                    City on 5 June 1986.

        3.          The Ground

                    Evidence has identified many deficiencies, including the
                    physical arrangement of turnstiles and their relationship to
                    public roads on the one hand and viewing areas on the other,
                    signposting, communications, emergency equipment of various
                    kinds and, most obviously, emergency evacuation from
                    restricted Pens.

                    The lay-out of crush barriers departs from the Green Guide
                    in only a few areas, but they are critical, and the margins
                    of safety in the older barriers are suspect (HSE tests to
                    follow).

                    Crowd Control

                    The principal deficiencies include limited preparation for
                    the management of crowds assembling outside the Leppings
                    Lane turnstiles (particularly inside the boundary fence);
                    virtually no control inside the turnstiles, lack of police-
FROM F TRE SERV I C E S IHSPECTORflTE/FEU        {j6 . i 6 . i y B y   ir.45   Nl j . D   4



                   steward co-ordination;  inadequate use of CCTV and direct
                   surveillance of crowds (influenced not only by conditioning
                   for hooliganism but also by the genuine difficulty of
                   detecting local disturbances in a large, excited crowd);
                   and weak direction from the police Control Box.

                   Individual efforts by police officers were of the highest
                   order.  Many fans and stey/ards also showed great courage.

           5.      Supporters' Behaviour

                   It is likely that a proportion of supporters behaved
                   irresponsibly.   But it is virtually impossible to quantify
                   this effect.   The arrival of large, late influxes - probably
                   containing a higher proportion of trouble-makers - should be
                   less surprising in the future.

           6.      The Combined Effect

                   If any one of the major sources of the disaster had been
                   suppressed, the result would probably have been very
                   different.  But the combination could not be contained.




                                                             LM
                                                             14 June 1989
        1
¥


    t
