9/ 6/ 89 .




Dear Sir,
         Thank you for your letter 6/6/89. I am
disappointed that I was not given the ojpertunity
to give verbal evidence. Unless Counsel to The
Inquiry is a clairvoyant he can not know what my
evidence is going to be so how can he judge it
relevant or otherwise ? My statement to South
Jorks Police was given while I was obviously in
a state of shock and by no means tells even half
the story.
           I am aware that a number of fans have
already given evidence,I am also aware that many
Police Officers have been given ample oppertunity
to bluff and perjure their way out of trouble.
 Duckinfield ,Marshall Jackson et al,
          I enclose a list of point in respect to
the Policing and organisatipn at Hillsboro' which
I think provide food for thought ,They will probably
end up filed in the paper shredder as I dont think
the Inquiiy is interested in the truth. What it is
concerned with is saving the careers of a number of
Senior Police Officers,who in any right minded society
would never hold office again and perpetuating the myth
that we were all a crowd of drunken animals who deserved
what we g o t.

                      Yours sincerely
|[ . ? Hillsboro' as a suitable venue.
 This in itself is an interesting point. Although we did not attend the 1988 F.A. Cup S. ,
 I have been told by people who did that it only by good fortune that a catastrophe did
 not result on that occasion due to the same problems encountered on 15/4/89.
 Why were lessons not learned? To allocate Liverpool the inadequate Leppxngs Lane
 terrace knowing they have a vast and fanatical following was an act of lunacy.
 This is equalled in stupidity only by the allocation of tickets. The poorly
 supported Nottingham Forest F.C. being given 6,000 more tickets despite the fact that ^
 their average home gate is less than half that of Liverpool F.C. This truly defies belief.
 Incidently many of K.F.FC. 's allocation ended up in the hands of touts and were on sale
 on the day to Liverpool fans.So much for seggregation 1
  If we accept the Police argument that it was geographically impossible to bring
  the northbound supporters, on to Leppings Lane without inducing W.W. Ill,then Hillsboro'
  was clearly inadequate to stage the game. However are the Police actually even at that
  stage ‘~admitting    that they do not think they are capable of providing adequate
 crowd control ?

 2. Body searches.                                                       .           ,
 I was body searched on entering the B gate of Leppings Lane, to be precise I was ordered
 to turn out my f   ing pockets by the Officer on duty.WHY?
 Not only was this mans ’ attitude needlessly high handed and offensive his actions were ^
 pointless. With only L.F.C. fans in that section is it likely I',would be carrying ofiensive
 weapons to use on my own people ? What he actually achieved in doing was delaying,ans
 getting in to the ground and in turn probably contributed to the eventual congestion
 outside the gate,

 3. Lack of adequate stewarding,
 "iy Wife and I were on the terrace almost one hour before the start of the game.As ± am
 unfamiliar with the layout of the ground We had gone through the first entrance we had
 s^-en on to the terrace .assuming that it was possible to fan out to a suitable vantage
 point This did not prove to be the case as we found the terrace subdivided by partition­
 ing fences in to a number of 'pens' ( This design did in fact contribute to the
 hieh death toll as once the crush began there was nowhere to go other than forward.)
 The particular 'pen ’              and I went in was already quite full even at this stage
  and became increasingly so as time went on, while the adjacent 'pens were rela ive y
  sparsely populated. My point is then this.Why did Sheffield Wednesday F.C. not provide
  stewards to filter incoming far s on to these half empty enclosures ? For this reason
  alone the club stand condemned of negligence as I am convinced it was a contributing
  factor in the recipe for subsequent disaster,

  4. The actions of Mr Roger Marshall.
  I understand thnt Counsel to the Inquiry has already absolved ,.;r Karshall of all gu
  and blame 'Nobody could hold you responsible for what happened, Counsel pontificates.
  Well unlike Counsel I do not claim to speak for the entire population,I can only spea
  for myself and I blame this man ENTIRELY for the carnage. Anybody who nannot equate the
  o Z n L of a gate ,the sudden influx of a large number of people m to an already packed
  enclosure and subsequent loss of 0 5 lives has no right to be any party to a suppose ly

  Marshalls’Iactira*in ordering the opening of the gate is based! on the story of ’drunken’
  Liverpool fans ’hell bent’ on getting* to the g r o u n d . This may or may not be the case
  but I put it to you that you will find drunjjeness and unruly benaviour at any .ootball
  ground on any Saturday and yet we do not find 95 deaths.This then is not the cru-ial
   factor.
             cont .
4. The actions of I'.'r Roger Marshall cont.
The bottom line is this .Kr Marshall is a Senior Police Officer who is paidby tax -
payers like me to keep law and order.It thesCore matters notif Atilla the    Hun
and the barbarian hordes were coming down. Leppings Lane, Marshall is responsible
for controlling them It was HIS duty to control the crowd,the fact that he failed to do
so is a condemnation of him rather than them.
         He simply lost his head,wanted tWa problem off his patch A.S.A.P and gave
the order to open the gate . In doing bo he simply transferred the problem to a situation
in which, there was no hone of controlling it. (What did he imagine would happen when
these people got inside- »oy does his ability to think ahead not stretch that far? )


5. The actions of the Police during the disaster.
As 1 have already stated in my Statement,the Police response      to thecrushwasslow
and indifferent Despite repeated calls from myself and others to open the perimeter
gate to relieve the pressure we were ignored this depite the fact that aPolice Officer
walked directly in front of the fence and could not have failed to see our distress.
How many of us would be here now had this man acted lir>.e a human being?
Even when fens tried to scale the fence in order to escape the crush,Police made matters
worse by pushing them back among us.
  In short had I not been present I would not have believed that an institution
supposedly there for our safety was so uncaring and incompetent . Their actions
were a disgrace. The decision to string a Police cordon across the centre circle
  to prevent a non existent pitch invasion was pathetic. These men could and should
have been deployed in helping i.'  ’ \r     _ the dying and injured.
 These stories of Police heroics are ’total mythology and make me want to heave.

 6. The conduct of ' r David Buckinfield.
Clearly not content with 95 deaths S. Yorks Police then decide to slander countless
others bv stating the crush was initiated by L . F . C . fans storming the gate.
iThey follow this up with a scurrilous smear campaign in the gutter press.
 They said we robbed our dead and assaulted ’gallant 1 Police in the course of their duty.
 If Hillsboro’ were not so bloody tragic this would be laughable,
 What I did see Liverpool fans doing is trying to resucitate the dying and helping
 our injured while t e Police did little or nothings Indeed althougi Ihave no interest
 in Football now,I was in spite of my own grief,very proud to be a Liverpudlian,

  7. Conclusions.
 Disasters such as Hillsboro’ are not like f a m i n e s , floods or earthquakes.
 They happen because somebody down, the line cocks it up. Hillsboro' was cocked up
 before, during and after the disaster . It is being cocked up even now.
 In short it was totally avoidable. No death is 'inevitable' ,nto quote Fir Marshall
 if people get it right. lest Hillsboro’ should only be remembered in terms of
 statistics,we should recall that each of the 95 was loved and mourned,
 For their sake we should not brush this under the carnet. I air, however prepared
 for one of the grossest misscariages of justice ever seen in an English Court,
 Don't forget where you read it first.
