    J MERVYN JONES MSc                                               FURNIVAL HOUSE
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        Furnival Gate
     H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M                    Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                          SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
    PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                           Liverpool L7 3PR
    Colmore Circus Queensway                                         Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
    Birmingham B4 6NQ
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                  Your Ref:
    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
    Fowler Street                                                    Our Ref:                JMJ/DH
    Birmingham B7 5DA
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                  Date:                   14 June 1989




    Treasury Solicitors
    c/o Town Hall
    Surrey Street
    SHEFFIELD
^   S1 2HH




    I forward herewith the procedures adopted by S.G.S. Inspection Services Ltd
    in respect of mechanical barrier testing. The documentation represents
    extracts from their Procedure Manual.

    I have also asked for other companies to be contacted to see what their
    procedures are and I will write again in due course.




       PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T                 ^ e f fie ld
          19S9-0G-14          14! 06        S.O.S HftTERlfCS TESTING          021 236 2726    P. 3:




                                                      SGS Inspection Services Ltd.
           9                                       'ITMtlngDlvMen                    Rav. 0
                                                                                      Ndvenfctfr '97
                                                                                      Part B
                                                                          •          Sectiarj 2
                                                                     ^~              Chapter* 3
                                                                                      Page 4d
                                          MECHANICAL BARRIER H*XfcDUKES

                            2.27          Crush Barrier ■Pasting
                                  1. Scope            ■
                                          Ohe soope of thia document is to detail the Quality ard
                                          Testing prooedures employed by SGS M.T.D. in the
                                          examination and testing of Crush barriers and associated
                                          equipwrifc in Sports and Jtaareation Grounds.
                                  2. Aim

                                          The aim is to ensure that all personnel involved in the
                                          testing and examination of sports ground barriers ax?
                                          fully award of all the requixonents and carry out tha
                                          work in a responsible and professional manner.
                                          It is tha aim of SGS M.T.D. to be as constructive and
                                          helpful as possible in tha ev<snt of any non conformities
                                          being identified during the testing or inspection.

                                  3. parrfor Jdsntlfis<>U9n Ersprtw?
                              3.1         sdetinq Q zwlm s
                                           Where architectural or engineering drawings are available
                                           the barriers and handrails will be identified in
                                           accordance with the existing nunbering system.
                               3.2         ffo Existing prawlma
                                           Where no drawings exist the watering system adopted fcy
                                           SGS M.T.D. will make as Much use of natural divisions In
                                           tha ground as follows:-
                             3 .2 .1 , Standing in the centre of the pitch and facing the aain
                                           stand, or tome other well identified area, the arefe to
                                           the left will be designated Area l, the area behind, Area
                                           2 (or if a natural divide exists Area 2 and Area 3). and
                                           the area to the right Area 3 (or Area 4). A drawing will
                                    -      be appewted to the report if this is necessary.
                             3.2.2. Nunberindf will be by use of felt tip pen or similar
                                    permanent marking and will be at two positions on the
                                    barrier areas Which, while identifiable, are sheltered
                                    from weathering or spectator remcwnl or abuse.


                   TO:                      fa tT7>*3— f P V - 4 T
   F A X
FAX NO:     * 3 5 ^ -------------------      PACE:            —*
ATTENTION OF:-- ^                         "1r> *t~0           ^
PftOM:                               DATE:----
                        TEL:     0 2 1 3 5 9 6 7 }5        14,06.89    14:1c- No. 004 P.O
iSjy-tJb-14        14! US     5.G.S MATERIALS TEST IMG           021 236 2726   P .02




                                                                       MT/Qft. Manual
                                    $0$ Inspection Servlets Ltd.       I8SUB 1
                                    testing Division                   Rev. 1
                                                                       February 1968
                                                                       Start B
                                                                       Section 2
                                                                       Chapter 2
                                                                       Page 4?


      3.2.3.                The rjunfcwring sequenoa in each area will be as
                            follows:

   3.2.3.1.                 Standing at the rear of the terracing and facing the
                            pitch the barrier at the bOttcm left hand aide will be
                            identified as barrier 1. Sequential nunfeerUig will than
                            take place along this vcxr, then returning to behind
                            barrier l for the start of the next row.

                            Note “ Snake type numbering sequence is not allowed.
                            Each of tha areas should be numbered by this sequence
   3.2.3.2.                 Where dividing fenoee, handrails, perimeter fences and
                            walls exist these will be clearly identified in relation
                            to specified areas.
              4.            yjpval EftrolmUsa
        4.1.                100% visual examination will be carried out on barriers,
                            handrails, dividing fence* and associated equipment,
                            dimensions noted and a record kept of the results
                            together with any relevant oomaenta, or recamendationa.

        4.2.                visual examination must be carried out under good
                            lighting conditions and with the aid of a magnifying
                            glass (If required)» the use of tools, such a* a hassror
                            and chisel, is encouraged as this will aid the detection
                            of oearrtoeicn etc.

         4.3.               Any bartier which does not meet the visual requirement
                            shall be deemed to have failed and ahall not be subjected
                            to mecfchnical testing until remedial work has been
                            carried1out.


                            Mechanical
                                   t
                                       T^-Lr^ Qf Barrier
                            Egulty^Tt
                            The equipment used by SGS MID is of a portable nature
                            oorislsting of a ram Uhit and punp, a testing head,
                            telescopic struts and a deflection measuring device.
                            Ihe ram unit will be calibrated annually and a
                            calibration sticker attached to the gauge unit.
                            A current calibration Certificate will be taken to site
                            each ti&e testing Is carried cut and shown to
                            napresetttatives of the club or local region if roguired.
            i * i u ‘|ww S .b ^ in m b R lA L S TESTING          021 236 2726   P .03
  »c< 4*




      C 5 jT & jC B SGS Inspection Services Ltd. 2ssSe ^lnual
%§*   lt H i l H P l M i ,T<itiii|DMefon                               R«v, 1
                                                                        February '88
                                                                        Bart B
                                              •••-■!•= • •   -          Sectien 2
                                                ^- -                   Chaptatf 2
                                                           ftige 48
           5.1.2 The testing head unit has bean tested and found to be
                 rigid In eocoess of_th® loads required.

           5.1.3 the telescopic struts have been tested and found to b>
                 rigid in exoess of the tast loads required.
             5.2 I^SL-ECCeSdUEB
           5.2.1. it It the policy of SGS M.T.D. to ensure maximum safety.

                    The load range required for each barrier unit will be
                    ccnpubod fremt-
               (a) The average terrace gradient, determined by taKing the
                   step width i step rise ratio at not less than three
                   points on the terrace.
               (b) Th« horizontal distanoe between barriers as outlined in
                   the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" graph i.
                     Tha specific load ranges v barrier dimensions are given
                     in tablets Tl and Ti2and will always he betwaen 290 and
                     400 lbs/ft which is classed as 'peak viewing'.
           5.2.2. The distance between the verticals will be aeasured using
                  a steel tape rule and the central point on the horizontal
                  marked with felt tip pen.

           5.2.3. The distance between the verticals will be used to
                  confute the required loading on the individual battler
                  taenfeers, that is the end verticals, middle verticals and
                  hotizontals. The basis of tha calculation is that end
                  verticles will be tested at 50% of specified load, centre
                  verticals at 100t specified load and horizontals at 70%
                  specified load.
                     This will ensure that each individual member of the
                     barrier unit meets the loading rsquiranerit of the total
                     structure. It is flgfc allowable to test only esie WBnber
                     of the unit,

            5.2.4. The test rig will be placed in position on the end
                   vertical with the test head at 45° to horizontal and
                   ensurim via the spirit level that the ram unit/st*uts
                   are horizontal. Deviation t r m horizontal must be
                   minimal to avoid offset loading*
            5.2.5. The deflection measuring device will then be placed cn
                   the opposite aide of tbe_barrier, ensuring that the
                   tripod lags are well removed from any area which sdght be
                   si&joct to movement during the testing, lhe tripod will
                   be levelled, the measuring ruler brought into contact
                   with the barrier and tee fcero position noted.
                                              ^ c-m   x.«   P. 04




              SGS Inspection Services Ltd.                *a n ia l
              Vetting DMtk*                       Rev. j
                                                  February '60
                                                  Part B
                                                  Seotion 2
                                                  Chapter 2
                                         .        Page 49
5.2.6. lha reqpdred loading to the nenber will then be applied
       in equal incresnants until tha desired loading ic raacfced
       and the deflection noted to the nearest 0.05", Tha load
       will toe maintained for a period of 5 minutes, the unit
       then unloaded and deflection noted. It will then ba
       reloaded as quickly as possible and the above repeated so
       that 3 x 5 suns loading is obtained..
       During the loaded period a close visual examination
       ehould be carried out of the manbar under stress and at
       its fixing point to the concrete terracing, and any
       results noted.
       At the end of the period the final total deflection will
       be notei.
5.2.7. the above procedure will be used on each turf every member
       of the barrier except that when horizontal member® bib
       tested the head it swung to apply tha loading over the
       central 2 ' of the amber,

5.2.8. Where recovery of the individual wenibers is at least 75%
       then the barrier is deemed satisfactory. Where recovery
       is greater than 50% but lees than 75% then testing should
       be repeated and if, cn retest, the recovery is greater
       than 75% then the barrier is deetnad satisfactory.
       If recovery is less than Sot on initial testing or less
       than 75% after retest the barrier has failed. If total
       deflection is 2" or greater at any time then the barrier
       has foiled'

   6. Ereauanay <?t Testing
       A minimum of 25% of each type of barrier ehcxild be tested
       annually. If for any reason dtxfcts exist then this
       testing frequency suet be increased to a level at which
       confidence £n the strength of the barrlexB is restored,
   7. Reporting and Statement of Results

 7.1   The report must be dear, concise and contain all the
       results of the visual examination and mechanical
       testing. If any pxxfelont have been identified then these
       should be highlighted and where possible, remedial action
       suggested. With each report a copy of the current
       calibration certificate will be appended.
                 SGS Inspection Service* Ltd.       ^ ^ 1Manual
*                Twtfog OlvWon                     Rav. i
                                                    Februaiy 'S9
                                                    to r t B '
                                                    Section 2
                                 .                 Chapter 2
                               - -                 Fags 50
          Units of measurement will Always be quoted in tha units
          measured and, if required, conversions placed in brackets
          afterwards,



          An internal quality audit will be carried out on the
          barrier Testing Procedure 2.27 twice per year, this being
          conducted by a responsible parson who is not involved in
          the operation of the equipment. The results of this
          audit will be recorded.
     S.   Control of Qpfrmtlcrg
    $.1   Ihe QCM shall therefore contain, or refer to,
          documentation corxseirning the foilwing:-

      (a) an up-to-date register of sites.

      (b) details of type of testing undertaken an site, e.g. NOT,
          noise measurement.
      (c) a statement of the quality policy for testing on site -
          this shall include a statement that a standard of service
          consistent with the requirtmants of the NKXTA3 Standard
          and f&egulaticns shall be provided at all times for the
          KATiAS aowedited teats.
      (d) a separate Schedule listing tests performed on site.


    9.2   U tb QCX shall also contain details of how the quality
          system is Applied to site testing, and in particulart
      (a) an organisational chart for the permanent laboratory
          showing lines of raeponsiblity for site testing.
      (b) the arragewants for the supervision of site testing in
          particular where the site is controlled by a third party.
      (c) the responsibilities of staff nominated for control of
          all technical and quality natters concerned with site
          testing; there shall be a direct link between nominated
          staff aid the Technical and Quality Managers for the
          permanent laboratory.
