Image © The Margaret Thatcher Archive Trust
   & content C; the copyright owner. 2010
                                                                   3 April 1989
PRIME MINISTER


MIN      EVENTS

House of Lords reassembles
Electrical Power Engineers' Association annual delegates’ conference, York (to
5 April)
National Union of Journalists annua! delegates’ meeting, Glasgow (to 7 Aprii)
Western European Union Ministerial meeting, QEfi Conference Centre, London
(to 4 April)
GM Ballot announcements of Claremont High School, Harrow, Brent
Confiscation of Assets Provisions of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 comes into
force
New TV Licence Fee comes Into force (£66)___________________________________
STATISTICS
DTI:        Retail sales (Feb-final)
DTI:        Credit business (Feb)


PARLIAMENT
Leids:      Starred Questions
            Official Secrets Bill: Committee {1st Day)
_______     City of London (Sokaifields Market) Bill: Second Reading


mimistbhs               See Annex
                                                3 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Death toll in border clashes in Namibia put at 140.

You persuaded Pik Botha to give UN a chance.

Express says diplomatic and UN sources in Windhoek say they feared
that without your visit South Africa would have over-reacted.
Telegraph says UN sources find nothing to dispute South African
claims of SWAPO attacks.

Much coverage of the "Shamrock and Sickle Summit" in Shannon with
Gorbachev taking Guinness, Black & Tan or was it Irish Coffee with
Haughey.

British scientist will visit Soviet space lab in 1991 under an
agreement between a private UK company and Glavcosroos. The
general contract is due to be signed during the Gorbachev visit
(   11)
      *




You are to tell Gorbachev to cut down on wave of KGB agents
entering Britain.

In Panorama TV programme tonight Foreign Secretary says the
Russian bear still threatens Europe.

Mail leads with ”Maggie fury at Lonrho affair” - you deliver stern
"cool it” call to senior Ministers.

Al-Fayed says only God could take Harrods store from him;     he'll
never give it up.

Two BBC journalists get IHA death threat; they are among
witnesses due to give evidence at trial tomorrow of men accused of
killing soldiers who became trapped at funeral.

Threat of Tory backbench rebellion over electricity privatisation.
Sir Trevor Skeet amendment seeks to eliminate the nuclear
industry from the sale {Independent).

G7 agrees to pursue scaled-down formula for using State funds
channelled through the IMF and World Bank to cut the debts of
Latin American countries {Times).

SIBA claims Kent could be swasnped with 40 ton lorries if 8R does
not improve proposals for freight movements {Independent).
                                3.              3 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Alliance and Leicester Building Society will offer more than
£100million for Girobank early this week (FT).

Beeehams planning £9billion merger with US pharmaceutical firm
(Times).

Department of Transport under renewed pressure to name ’’unsafe”
ferries (Times).

Significant shift in Labour Party’s attitude to public ownership .
Only British Telecom would be taken back while gas, electricity
and water would be subjected to a tighter regulatory framework
(Times),

United Newspapers plans to expand into Continental Europe and may
launch a national daily newspaper (FT).

Researchers find even low exposure to lead can impair children and
cause aggression, especially in boys,

Labour Party spending £3-400,000 on a campaign to try to combat
publicity associated with your 10th anniversary (Guardian).

Fresh demands for Scottish home rule but Mail says they are
unlikely to impress you. But, it adds, Government showed crass
insensitivity introducing the community charge a year earlier in
Scotland. Government should show more tact.

Independent leader of Scottish nationalist revival says hatred of
you is not a sufficient basis for changing constitutional
ax'rangements.

CND describe Kinnock5s attempt to revise Labour defence policy as
"high falutin fudge".

Gallup finds a large majority of Britans support membership of
NATO and 66% are in favour of maintaining independent deterrent.

Lambeth Council said to find "ploughman *s lunch” sexist;   should
be "ploughperson”.

Labour Party places single retirement age of 60 after transitional
period of annual reductions.

Unprecedented proposal to open up social workers’ secret files on
alleged child abuse cases at public hearings has been made to
Yorkshire parents {Times).
                               4.              3 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Royal College of Nursing to mount campaign to warn public that NHS
review will undermine principles of the Service.

Telegraph leader suggests medical profession campaign against NHS
reforms looks like a massive confidence trick on the public,

Polytechnic directors accuse funding body responsible for their
finances of being committed to nationalising rather than
privatising the sector (Times).

Report claims that Newham children are being held back by teachers
who underestimate their potential and place union activities
before their pupils (Times}.

Seven police injured in disorder at Harrow Hoad police station,
North London, last night;  8 people charged. Confrontation after
death of motorcyclist.

Probation Officers' Association says the parole system should be
abolished and replaced with shorter sentences and remission for
good behaviour {Times).

Penal reformers welcome apparent changes of heart by Government
on reform of the parole and penal system which would enable
serious offenders to apply for early release. Home Office
believed to be preparing White Paper based on Carlisle Committee
recommendations with a view to legislation in 1990/91
{Independen t }.

Spycatcher affair returns to court tomorrow as the Attorney
General seeks to fine the editors of the Independent, Evening
Standard and the now defunct London Daily News for alleged


WorId in Action will urge a parliamentary inquiry into police
corruption following the conviction of Roy Garner in Britain’s
biggest drug smuggling case. Tonight’s programme will show tapes
of the drug gang boasting of having a man in the Yard


Sun critical of Roy Hattersley for warning that we must not risk
upsetting Moslems in Britain because he has been having
constituency problems. Hattersley says he would let Moslems set
up separate schools,

Hugo Young starts serialisation of his book on your first 10 years
in Guardian.
                                5.              3 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Pameila Bordes scars her face in motor cycle crash on holidav in
Bali; she denies prostitution with politicians.

David Mudd, Conservative MP for Falmouth, to retire at next
election.

Search for drunken skipper of ecological disaster oil tanker in
Alaska intensifies as he goes on the run. Today leader says
directors of Exxon as well as skipper must be held responsible.
And Express says the buck stops with the company.

Arafat appointed president of self-declared state of Palestine -
Foreign Secretary says he is ready to meet him to help achieve
peace.

British Embassy car wrecked and British Council building damaged
in two bomb attacks last night in Ankara.

Coup attempt in Haiti foiled.

Beirut rocked by artillery bombardment.

YOUR TOOK

Star records your return and then devotes 2 pages to the truth
about Nelson Mandela.

Sun page 2 - Africa battle rocks Maggie peace bid.

Mirror page 7 - 120 rebels killed in flare up, Five battles
raging in border. Sitter disappointment for you,

Today page 2 - 8 0 rebels killed in Namibia clashes.

Express - Cool Thatcher’s Namibia lifeline as the toll rises.
Leader says you are embarking upon your most adventurous and least
predictable foreign policy initiative of recent years.  It proves
the correctness of your determination to resist sanctions. The
initiatives now under way are a lot more likely to succeed with
your committed support than without it.

Hail ~ 142 die in clashes as guerrillas invade Namibia.

Telegraph page 1 lead - Namibia peace plan threatened as fighting
rages.
                                               3 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Times - South African troops engaged in heavy fighting in Namibia
with reports that 122 guerrillas and 20 South Africans had bean
killed in the last two daysj Leader says your flying visit to
Namibia was doubtless intended as a brilliant piece of diplomatic
stagecraft designed to dramatise your commitment to the peace
agreement which is both the cause and the exemplar of your hopes
for Southern Africa. In the event your presence went far beyond
symbolism.

Independent - Namibian independence in danger of collapse with
heavy fighting between South African police and SWAPO guerillas,
1000 of whom according to security police have infiltrated from
Angola since Friday.   122 have been shot - a further 20 security
police are also dead (Independent).

FT - Namibia proves a minefield for Thatcher tour. Saturday will
have proved a salutory experience for you, and it may ensure that
you keep an especially close eye on the transition process.

Guardian page 1 lead - 142 die in Namibian fighting - UN
frantically trying to hold together independent plan.

GORBACHEV in Ireland etc

Star picture of him drinking Guinness with Haughey.

Sun says Gorbachev caused a storm in Ireland by saying there may
have been a miscarriage of justice over the Birmingham and
Guildford pub bombings. Terry Dicks MP tells him to keep his nose
out of our affairs. Leader says Gorbachev will visit Britain
recognising your stature as the most experienced world leader.
And you have a secure and permanent place in the hearts and minds
of the British people.

In another leader the Sun says Kremlin's objection to Foreign
Secretary calling for democratic government in Afghanistan is
cheeky, bearing in mind they occupied the country for 9 years.

Mirror leader describes Gorbachev as "A Man for Europe” after
saying Europe can succeed only with the involvement of all
European countries, You must take up his initiative in your talks
with him.

Today page 2 - Too many KGB spies spoil our glasnost.   You will
demand he pull KGB out of Britain.
                                               3 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Express page 4 - Haughey shares a drink of Irish coffee with
Gorbachev. He also claims Gorbachev supports him on Guildford and
Birmingham bombers.

Hail page 2 - Gorbachev calls for peace in Ulster.

Telegraph - Gorbachev diplomatic in Ulster ~ but did not wish to
be drawn into controversies.   Inside report says you are to raise
Romanian human rights with Gorbachev.

Times page 1 - You will tell Mr Gorbachev later this week that KGB
spying activities in Britain must be cut. You will also press him
on chemical weapons. The report adds that Anglo-Soviet relations
are the best since the Second World War.

500,000 called up for Mr Gorbachev’s welcome to Cuba with
theatrical bear hugs and back slapping from Castro {Times).

Times also reports Mr and Mrs Gorbachev's visit to Ireland where
the Soviet leader was careful not to be drawn too deeply into
Anglo-Irish relations at a Press Conference.

Separate story in Times says you will seek to boost trade with
Moscow when you meet Mr Gorbachev.

Independent - Front page picture of Gorbachev and Haughey sharing
an Irish coffee after talks at Shannon airport.  "Ryvita" Raisa a
hit with the locals.

FT - Gorbachev will raise issue of Birmingham Six and Guildford
pub bombers when he meets you later this week. Soviet officials
predict a sharp exchange of views on disarmament and arms control.

Guardian - Gorbachev urges new era in East-West trade.

BfiBRQBS/LONRHO

Little coverage in Sun, Daily Star, and Mirror other than Al-Fayed
saying only God can take Harrods away from him.

Today leader says you need to wield your axe in this matter
ruthlessly if Lord Young refuses to publish report.
                               8.              3 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Mail leader headed "Why this is not another Spycatcher’' says Lord
Young is in danger of making himself look silly. He should have
trusted his own good sense when his initial reaction to the
Harrods report was to publish it soon. But he then bowed to the
lawyers. But if the Government have any sense of proportion it
isn *t another Spycatcher-

Telegraph - Thatcher cools row on Harrods.

Times says you acted yesterday to quell the growing political
controversy surrounding the House of Fraser takeover amid
Ministerial fears that it could damage the Government.

Independent - Government will resist intense parliamentary
pressure to publish DTI inquiry into A1-Fayed takeover of Harrods.
Lord Young's preference is to publish but he believes it is
improper to do so until the SFO has completed inquiries into the
takeover. Your meeting yesterday postponed - in part because law
officers advised waiting for the outcome of High Court proceedings
tod ay {Independent}.

?! ~ Young expected to brief Thatcher on Harrods row, Plans for
you to meet Lord Young were dropped after your return from Africa,
The move was seen as an attempt by Downing Street to play down the
political importance of the affair.
                                                                              ANNEX


MINISTERS (UK VISITS. SPEECHES ETO
DH:        Mr Clarke     addresses    the   Royal College of Nursing Congress.
           Blackpool
DTI:       Lord Young chairs conference on Management Charter Initiative,
           Rovai Horseguards Hotel, London
FCO:       Sir Geoffrey Howe chairs Western European Union meeting, Queen
            Elizabeth II Conference Centre, London (and 4 April)
DEM:       Mr Cope launches Loan Guarantee Scheme extension, London
DEM:       Mr Lee opens new office of Montrose Technical Recruitment at
           London Wall, City of London

DH:        Mr Mellor meets the National Osteoporosis Society, London
DH:        Mr Freeman visits Mersey Regional Health Authority
DOE:       Mr Trippier visits Lichfield and opens Sheltered Housing Scheme in
           Chapel Street and visits Fradley Industrial Estate
MAFF:      Baroness Trumpington addresses Dri Crops ’89 Congress, Churchill
           College, Cambridge
ODA:       Mr Patten hosts reception for Scottish voluntary organisations at
           East Kilbride
SO:        Lord James Douglas-Hamiiton opens New Generation Housing Society
           Development, Castle View, Edinburgh
WO:        Mr Grist addresses launch of Housing for Wales, Cardiff   ______________
MINISTERS (OVERSEAS VISITS^
HMT:       Mr Lawson addresses Interim Committee of the IMF, Washington

MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS)
FCO:       Sir Geoffrey Howe appears on BBC TV’s ‘Panorama’ programme (pre­
           recorded interview)
DBS:       Mr Jackson interviewed for "Shout”, Liverpool Polytechnic’s student
           union magazine

TV AND RADIO
'The Education Programme”: BBC 2 (19.40) looks at how children are being
equipped to cope wiih~a time of environmental crises
"Horizon": BBC 2 (20.10) on the successes of fringe medicine
"Panorama": BBC 1 (2130) Vivian White reports on how Mikhail Gorbachev's
offer of unilateral troop cuts has left NATO in turmoil
                                                           4 April 1989
PRIME MINISTER


m a n   events

The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh visit Reading and Maidenhead, Berkshire

House of Commons reassembles

Spycatcher Case - Independent , Evening Standard, the former London
Daily News in High Court contempt hearings

40th Anniversary of NATO

Trial opens of men accused of murder of 2 soldiers at Belfast funeral




BOE:         Capital issues and redemptions (Mar)
HMT:         UK official reserves (Mar) ____________                —----------------------
PUBLICATIONS
DEM;         White Paper on the 74thMaritime Session of the International
             Labour Conference
DES:         HMf Report on improving urban primary schools: A report on an
             Education Support Grant
 DES:         HMI Report on a survey           of sandwich experience in polytechnic
              engineering and NND courses
 DES:        HMI Report on a survey of aspects of engineering research and
             consultancy in selected polytechnics
 DSS:        National Insurance Fund Account
 DSS:        Social Fund Account 87/88


 PARLIAMENT
 Commons
 Questions:        Education and Science; Defence; Prime Minister
 ttnpfwss;         10 Minute Rule Bill:     Re-enfranchisement of the People.        (Mr
                    Harry Barnes)
                    Water Bill: (Third allotted day)
                    Supplementary !Vfoney and Ways and Means Resolutions relating
                    to the Electricity Bill
                                                2.                   April 4, 1989




FARUAMENT (conrtfi
Admnmmrnt Debates:           Government policy towards the role              friendly
                             societies encouraging saving (Mr A Coombs)
         Committees:         Not available at time of diary completion
Lords:       Starred Questions
             Official Secrets Bill: Committee (2nd Day)




MINISTERS              See Annex
                                 3,            4 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

NATO’s 40th anniversary today.

Fears that interest rates could go higher after Chancellor speaks
in Washington and retail sales show there is still some power in
the boom.

IMF warns that without strong action to cut US domestic demand,
the world could face a drop in the dollar’s value and a sharp rise
in US interest rates (FT).

Foreign Secretary warns West to keep its guard up against Russians
as Gorbachev visits Cuba.

400,000 Jews seeking to leave Soviet Union as anti-semitism grows
{Independent).

FCO trying to secure Gordlevsky’s wife’s freedom to come to West
with children.

Running battles in Namibia, as UN confirms incursion by SWAPO,
though apparently without offensive intent.

Telegraph leader says a major responsibility for the incident must
rest on the UN force.

Guardian suggests crisis arose from SWAPO misinterpretation of
peace agreement.

Almost 5,000 men are now engaged in an elusive, senseless battle
which has become an unrelenting slaughter in northern Namibia says
the Times.

Independent leader says UN cannot be expected to fight major
engagements. It is in Namibia to oversee and police agreement*
If Mr Njoms, SWAPO*s President, were not himself little more than
a figurehead he should be bringing SWAPO's local commanders to
book, not engaging in an implausible hunt for scapegoats.

Independent - UN blamed for fighting in Namibia. Serious
weaknesses have been revealed In their deployment and their
ability to act quickly and decisively. Nearly 150 killed, mostly
SWAPO„
                               4.              4 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Lord Young flatly rejects demands to publish Harrods report.

FT leader headed "Flustered by Lonrho", claims that failure to
publish the DTI report points to a remarkable failure of political
judgment by both you and Lord Young, The Government, it argues,
has got its priorities wrong: the public interest would be better
served by early publication.

Howland and Du Cann could be brought before courts over leak.

Edward Du Cann says he does not need to be told his duty by a
comparatively junior appointee and Bryan Gould says the argument
that publication would impede a fair trial is bogus.

Guardian leader thinks it ludicrous that Lord Young, facing
humiliation by a thousand leaks, should now embark on a grotesque
exercise in pretending people should not be told what they already
know.

USA announces new world wide security precautions in wake of
Lockerbie disaster after President Bush meets relatives of
victims -

Bush will consider relatives’ request for a single unified
Inquiry into disaster.

Objections by Boeing Helicopters to a review board report into the
crash of a Chinook in the North Sea in 1986 have led D/Transport
to defer publication of the report pending legal advice on
Boeing's comp1aint {Independent}.

Channel Tunnel completion date put back a month to June 15, 1993.

Rolls-Royce wins Elbillion order for 20 Airbuses for Cathay
Pacific.

Mail sees the Airbus project taking off and says our engineers,
designers and craftsmen are in the superleague.

Cargo levels on Thames at highest for 12 years (Independent ).

Two more petrol companies - Esso and BP - put up price of 4~star
by 8.Bp. Mail leader says it is utterly incredible that the oil
giants all put up their prices by the same amount.

Threat of strike on Underground tomorrow to support demand for
extra pay for drivers without guards; LRT threatens in turn to go
to court.
                               5.               4 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


CBI says significant operational changes to the TEC scheme are
needed or it will fail to attract senior businessmen (Times).

Four leading pressure groups join forces to condemn electricity
privatisation saying the Bill fails to do anything about the
industry being the biggest polluter in Britain {Times).

Sealink names 4 ferries which D/Transport says do not comply with
new stability standards.

33-mile traffic jam on Western side of M25 after change in layout.

Express
  Z»__  says M25 is an example of our besetting' sin - thinking
                                                              -3
small. Ministers must start thinking big and develop a grand
strategic transport plan.

Mirror claims British Rail has banned the words "signal failure"
from public announcements.

British Telecom threatens to send in bailiffs over unpaid chatline
bills.

Peter Morgan, director of IBM, becomes Director General of
Institute of Directors in succession to John Hoskyns.

SQC have accused government of failing to meet the growing need
for pre-school child care {Independent).

Kinnock pledges top tax rate of 50% and lowest below 20%. But he
says earnings limit on NI contributions will go and Today says
this will wipe out tax gains for middle income earners.

FT leader on Scottish devolution argues that the Scots should be
given another opportunity to decide upon their preferred form of
government.

John Prescott tells Jean Rook in Express he can’t help being a
bully boy.

Kenneth Clarke tells RCN conference they should not be in any
doubt NHS reforms will be carried through.   Don’t waste money on
campaign against reforms, he urges.

Law Society criticises barristers for greatly exaggerating the
threat posed to the Bar by law reform Green Paper {Times).
                                6.              4 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Staff at University of East Anglia warned that if they continue
their industrial action their pay will be clocked by 20%.

Kenneth Baker says parents should make children finish homework
before TV is switched on.

If elected Labour will abolish ?A ’ levels and the YTS will provide
grants for 6th formers and introduce a 4-year apprentice style
programme (Times ).

Two amusement arcade workers burned alive by raiders in Soho; two
others seriously injured. Police examining security videos for
clues to attackers who stole £5-7,000,  Star wants killers hanged.
£100,000 reward announced.

Barclays Bank accounces closure of suburban branch because of 3
armed hold ups - further evidence, Express says, Britain is
becoming an increasingly violent society.

Buckingham Palace confirms Mark Phillips met Parnella Bordes at
Glensagles and that she had stayed at a house on his
Gloucestershire estate. He says he had no liaison with her.
Today says Palace has changed its story after 2 weeks, having
previously claimed there was no connection.

Home Office refuses Channel 4 permission to screen live the House
of Lords debate on Friday on law reforms as 20 year old rule
stipulates that live debates cannot be interrupted by advertising
breaks {Times).

Select Committee will call today for financial safety net for
Channel 4 so that it can continute to provide innovative and
minority interest TV after deregulation (Times).

BBC pulls out 2 journalists from Northern Ireland after death
threat on eve of major murder trial.

Jimmy Held, in Sun, hates to say it but you dance rings round
everyone else in foreign affairs.

Labour peers accused government of attempting to blackmail and
bully football clubs into co-operating with national ID card
scheme {Independent).

Random dope tests to be imposed on athletes (Independent}.

Edwins Currie back in limelight in opening Book Fair;   Mail says
.she ’s wasted on Backbenches.
                                 7-              4 April 1989

                            PRESS DIGEST


Eight of the 20 of the ugliest cities in Europe, named yesterday,
are in Britain - Birmingham, Hull, Sheffield, Newcastle, Glasgow,
Belfast, Sunderland, Liverpool.

Britain appears to have moved back into strong contention to
supply Canada with nuclear submarines, following indications that
Canada may be allowed greater access to sensitive technology {FT ).

Servicemen based in Gibraltar warned to be on special alert after
threatening telephone call by man with Irish accent {Times).

Mafia's £50million EC fraud is "the tip of the iceberg”
(Independent).

GORBACHEV

Sun ~ Gorbachev hints at aid blow to Castro. Soviets cannot
afford it. Leader on Haughey’s meeting with Gorbachev says he was
cheeky in claiming Gorbachev shares his misgivings over Birmingham
Six and Guildford 4. Besides, Russia still has its "Minsk
millions” of detainees.

Times ~ The advance guard of the Gorbachev roadshow came to London
yesterday with the opening of the Soviet Press Centre and the
arrival of a panel of glasnost gurus fresh from the Moscow
election campaign; Leader says your decision to give chemical
weapons a prime place on the agenda for your talks with Mr
Gorbachev is sensible for two reasons.  First, need for a ban has
grown more urgent. Second, it is an area of arms control in which
Britain has always played a leading role. It would thus give the
talks an important East-West dimension.

FT ~ In talks with   Shevardnadze, Sir Geoffrey Howe will call for a
wider human rights   forum with the Soviet Union. In his BBC
Panorama interview   last night the Foreign Secretary gave a chilly
advance welcome to   Mr Gorbachev.

N&MXBX&

Mirror claims you "boobed" by blaming SWAPG for incursion when
evidence is growing they were ambushed by South African forces.
                                                                               ANWSX

 jmmEB&jm ymm.smEcmsm:Q
 DH:     Mr Clarke meets the United Kingdom Central Connell for Nursing,
         M idw ifery and H ealth V isiting; la te r a tten d s the Royal
         Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain dinner, London
 DOE:    Mr Ridley addresses        Countryside   Sport      standing   conference on
         "Water1*
 DU:     Lord Young gives welcoming address at conference on ‘US Economy:
         Agenda for the next few years1, Lancaster House, London
 LCD:    Lord Mackay swears in new QCs
 CO:     Mr Luce addresses opening of Operation Raleigh exhibition, National
         Army Museum, London
 DEM:    Mr Cope hosts launch of BBC Radio 4’s ‘Small Business Competition’,
         House of Commons
 DES:    Mrs Rumbold visits schools in Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire
• DH:    Mr Mellor visits the Central Council for Education and Training in
         Social Work
 DOE:    Mr Trippier meets Andy Coombes MP and delegation from Hereford
         and Worcester, about gypsy sites
 DOE:    Mr Chope visits Project 1046 at MOD Main Building, London
 DU:     Mr Forth presents Design against Crime awards, London
 DTp:    Mr Bottomley visits Traffex conference, Brighton
 DTp:    Mr Portillo attends London Chamber of Commerce seminar on
         Central London Rail Study, London
 HO:     Mr Patten attends conference on the Green Paper: Punishment and
         Custody and the Community, London School of Economics
 MAFFi   Mr Thompson visits CSD, Guildford
 OAL:    Mr Luce addresses opening of Operation Raleigh Exhibition, National
         Army Museum, London
 ODA:    Mr Patten opens new premises for Scottish Catholic International
         Aid Fund, Glasgow      _____________ ______________________
 MINISTERS (OVERSEAS VISITS^

DEM:     Mr Cope attends formal          Labour    and      Social   Affairs   Councils,
         Luxembourg (to 5 April)
DTI:     Mr Maude visits Germany (to 5 April)
                                                                    AHNEX




MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS)

DH:       Mr Freeman records interview for BBC TV’s special ‘That’s Life’
          programme on mental health




TV AND RADIO

"Open Space": BBC 2 (20,00) the triends of John McCarthy criticise the lack
ot serious effort to secure his release

■[After Dread and Anger": BBC Radio 4 (20.30) one of six documentaries on the
State and race relations

Taking liberties'': BBC 2 (21,45) looks at three cases of people dying in police
aistody
                                                                       5 April 1989
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS


Visit of General Secretary Gorbachev and Mrs Gorbacheva to
United Kingdom (to April 7}

Outcome of Scrutiny of Government Economic Statistics

Malcolm SifJcind receives petition in support of Glasgow
Veterinary School

EC:      Social Affairs Council, Luxembourg (prov)

EC:      Political Committee Meeting, Madrid (to April 6}

STATISTICS
DEM:        Detailed analysis of employment,unemployment,            earnings, prices and
            other indicators
DEN:        Advance energy statistics (Feb)_____________________________
PUBLICATIONS
HO:         Research and Planning Unit Drinking and Disorderpublication__
PARLIAMENT
Commons
Questions: Scotland: Foreign and Commonwealth; Trade and Industry
Business:         10 Minute Rule Bill: Unprescribed Spectacles (Health Warnings)
                  (Miss Ann Widdicombe)
                 Electricity Bill: Progress on Remaining Stages {1st day)
AdjQQ.mjBent Debates:       G eneral practitioners      in   rural    areas   of   Wales
                            (Mr G Wardell)
Select Committees:          Not available at time of diary completion
Lords:      Starred Questions
            Short Debate to call attention to the White Paper 'The Road User
            and the Law"
            Short Debate to call attention to the changcs which Her Majesty’s
            Government are seeking to effect in this country's attitude to
            training
UQ to ask HMG whether they will establish a General Teaching Council for
England and Wales
                               2.              5 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main Hews

MORI poll in Times shows that in the British public’s mind threat
posed by Soviet Union has diminished significantly since Mr
Gorbachev took over as leader," leader says when Mr Gorbachev
arrives in London tonight, the excitement that has accompanied his
previous two visits is likely to be subdued. The reason will be
not just the nocturnal hour of his arrival, nor the fact that this
will be his third visit. Rather there is a sense that the sojourn
in London has beenn overtaken by events. There is something
second hand about it - and, despite progress in many areas, a
return to old issues.

200 MPs sign a full page advertisement in Times on eve of
Gorbachev's visit in protest against abuses of human rights in
Russia.

Guardian leads with a report that Gorbachev is to try to persuade
Europe to re-think its strategy of flexible response and to cancel
its modernisation plans.

Havana police arrest 7 human rights leaders in demo at Soviet
Embassy during Gorbachev*s visit.

Soviet scientist being allowed to come to London for cancer
treatment.

Romania*s ambassador to London has "taken" himself off to
Bucharest in a state of high dudgeon” - in a farewell move to the
Foreign Office he said Britain was pursuing an anti-Romania policy
{Independent}.

George Bush to visit UK after NATO summit at end of May.

Dennis Skinner claims Harrods report shows fraud and deceipt.

Speculation that Harrods5 directors face sack after Lord Young
says the report showed ’’wrongdoing".

You condemn SWAPO guerrilas as death toll in Namibia fighting tops
180.

Rinnock calls for big increase in UN force there.

P K Botha warns UN Secretary General South Africa may suspend its
participation in peace initiative unless UN takes active measures
very quickly.
                              2.               5 April 1989

                         PRESS DIGEST

Main News

MORI poll in Times shows that in the British public's mind threat
posed by Soviet Union has diminished significantly since Mr
Gorbachev took over as leader; leader says when Mr Gorbachev
arrives in London tonight, the excitement that has accompanied his
previous two visits is likely to be subdued. The reason will be
not just the nocturnal hour of his arrival, nor the fact that this
will be his third visit. Rather there is a sense that the sojourn
in London has been overtaken by events. There is something
second hand about it - and, despite progress in many areas, a
return to old issues.

200 MPs sign a full page advertisement in Times on eve of
Gorbachev's visit in protest against abuses of human rights in
Russia.

Guardian leads with a report that Gorbachev is to try to persuade
Europe to re-think its strategy of flexible response and to cancel
its modernisation plans.

Havana police arrest 7 human rights leaders in demo at Soviet
Embassy during Gorbachev’s visit.

Soviet scientist being allowed to come to London for cancer
treatment.

Romania’s ambassador to London has "taken" himself off to
Bucharest in a state of high dudgeon" - in a farewell move to the
Foreign Office he said Britain was pursuing an anti-Romania policy
{Independent),

George Bush to visit UK after NATO summit at end of May.

Dennis Skinner claims Harrods report shows fraud and deceit,

Speculation that Harrods? directors face sack after Lord Young
says the report showed ’’wrongdoing” .

You condemn SWAPQ guerrilas as death toll in Namibia fighting tops
180.

Kinnock calls for big increase in UN force there.

Pik Botha warns UN Secretary General South Africa may suspend its
participation in peace initiative unless UN takes active measures
very quickly.
                               3.              5 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Your concern about level of inflation fuels further speculation
about a further rise in interest rates.

Britain’s reserves shrank by S4,72billion last month by the
largest amount since you came to power, showing the extent to
which the authorities have had to intervene in the markets to
support the pound {Times).

Hail says Channel 4 TV programme, featuring Sir Leon Brittan, is
going to make life extremely uncomfortable for Charles Powell and
Bernard Ingham.

Bruce Anderson, in Telegraph, argues you need to find a
replacement for Lord Whitelaw and that the man for the job is Sir
Geoffrey Howe.

Consgold unveil innovative final bid for Minorco (Independent).

Royal College of Nursing rejects Kenneth Clarke’s warnings and
votes to support a campaign against NHS reforms.

Unions recommend 8.5% pay settlement for water workers.

Bill Jordan, AEU, to offer Toyota a no-strike deal if they site
their plant in Britain.

Militant Tube drivers try to intimidate others into striking today
over extra pay for those who drive without guards.

Widow of King’s Cross fireman who lost his life in disaster wins
£250,000 compensation.

US Government is to ask Paul Channon to order British airlines
which fly to the US to introduce new bomb detection machines
capable of spotting Semtex (Independent).

Ian Syatt appointed as director general of water services as 5
Tory ?4Ps vote against Water Bill (Times).

British Rail pension fund sells Impressionist paintings for
£38million.

Circuit Judge Lawrence strongly attacks standards at the Bar and
accuses it of failing to propose or bring about any changes in the
legal profession (Times).

More than 40 millionaires have been created in the advertising and
marketing business during the Thatcher years.
                                4.               5 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST


High Court refuses to prevent Northern Regional Health Authority
from disciplining Dr Marietta Higgs over Cleveland child abuse
case.

Kinnock launches Labour campaign against community charge but says
he will not support non-payment.

Kinnock hires Julie Hall, ITH political correspondent, as his
Press a Broadcasting Officer.

Express says Kinnock has not yet tumbled to the benefits of tax
cutting - he would still clobber high earners with 50% tax, plus
bigger NX contributions.

Mail says millions would be worse off if Labour came to office for
this reason.

Loyalist killers shoot dead Catholic father of 4, aged 29, while
he is in bed with wife.

Labour controlled Sheffield Council calls off invitation to Gerry
Adams, Sinn Fein, to give lecture after petition from ratepayers.

Prominent historians mounted sharp attack in Lords last night
against Government; plans to place a virtual ban on the publication
of memoirs by present or former members of the security and
intelligence services (Independent).

Paddy Ashdown has written to you asking for an investigation into
allegations that Ml5 commissioned a private security firm to
monitor the activities of Sizewell nuclear power protestors


People who drink more than 7 pints of beer a week are three times
is?ore likely to contract cancer of the pancreas and those who smoke
are even more at risk, according to Imperial Cancer Research Fund.

Independent leader says Ken Baker should recognise that funding a
rigid national pay agreement is incompatible with his philosophy,
Instead, individual universities should receive generous grants
towards wage costs, which they would be free to allocate as local
market conditions and the objectives of particular institutions
dictate.

Officer, in book to be published this week, says Guardsmen killed
and maimed when Sir Galahad was at anchor in Falklands could
easily have been saved from bombing.
                                5.               5 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Home Affairs Select Consul.ttee yesterday recommended Channel 4 must
remain a non-profit making body with a minimum income guaranteed
by the ITV companies (Independent).

Half of the 12,000 applications for 79 teaching places at
Birmingham Polytechnic are from people in executive positions in
industry or commerce (Times).

Today runs a leader on David Shaw MP, the man in the Bordes case,
for attacking one of its photographers "badly injuring her hand";
he is the "vilest MP in Britain", He complains to Press Council
abut harassment.

Ministers are planning to advise UEFA to re-admit English clubs to
continental competition in the 1990/91 season. Home Office
Ministers are also to seek bilateral agreements with European
governments that hooligans arrested abroad, should where possible,
be returned for prosecution in Britain {Independent).

HARRODS/LONRHO

Sun says directors of Harrods could be sacked; their
interpretation of Lord Young’s remarks about wrongdoing.

Mirror - Harrods bosses face axe.

Today - Harrods board may be stripped of jobs.

Mail leader says Lord Young has impaled himself on his own
injunction.  It warned Lord Young that he risked rendering himself
ridiculous if he did not publish the wretched report.

Telegraph leader shows impatience over the time being taken to
conduct inquiries into the case and says the delay seems as unfair
to the Fayeds as to all the other parties.

Independent leader says Lord Young has failed to control either
his mouth or his Department. Lord Young is a businessman. He
must know that British business requires and is entitled to a
better regulatory performance.   He could regain some credit by
striving to provide it.
                               6.              5 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Times page 1 - Harrods' directors could face ban if found to be
unfit for such office but DTI stress no consideration will be
given to this until decision is taken as to whether prosecutions
should take place. Edward Du Cann denounces his fellow
Conservative privy Counsellor for being foolish, politically
unwise in not publishing the report and accuses Lord Young of
misleading Parliament.

FT - Young admits Harrods report shows evidence of wrong-doing,
increasing pressure for publication.

GORBACHEV

Sun - Maggie to be tough on Mik - you warn him in Commons that
good intentions are not enough to convince the world that Russia
wants peace. You want action on KGB, chemical weapons and
conventional arms. Leader welcomes Gorbachev in Russian and hopes
we can get down to the real business of living together.

Lord Bethe11 says in Sim feature that Gorbachev still has a long
way to go in Moscow before he is safe.

Mirror - Gorby heads for No 10 showdown. Thatcher ready to talk
tough. He faces a class of hard bargaining.

Express - High hopes on Summit. Leader on "The Two Faces of
Gorbachev” says he is assured of a friendly welcome but not all
will be sweetness and light - arms control, KGB and chemical
weapons are Western worries. A few firm frank words from you will
be further encouragement to shift resources from military to
civilian use.

Hail - Soviets set to roll out red carpet for visit by Queen.     Her
acceptance of invitation to visit Russia is being forecast in
diplomatic circles.

Telegraph story says Gorbachev is seeking to "soften” the Iron
Lady. Although you differ on arms, human rights and ideology
there are no obvious bug bears to spoil the visit; nor any clear
cut concrete gains.

Fresh Soviet policy initiative expected in Gorbachev’s Guildhall
speech {Independent).

As for Invitation to the Queen to visit Moscow - British officials
refused to say what advice Her Majesty had been given as to her
response if an invitation is offered {Independent ),
                                7.              5 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

FT - Surprise at Gorbachev’s selection for factory visit. Feature
on the visit suggests he is growing increasingly impatient with
your hardline position on ttiodernisation of short-range weapons.
The Guildhall speech could be the opportunity to launch a Soviet
arms control initiative designed to cut the ground from beneath
your position. Leader believes it would be wrong to make too much
of your personal rapport with Gorbachev: Western leaders should
bear in mind that he is pursuing his own diplomatic strategy.

      - Mr Gorbachev rebuffs American calls for a signal of
willingness to curb Soviet backing for Nicaragua and attacks Vice
President Quayle for stating that the region was America’s
backyard.

Soviet Union made a number of human rights concessions yesterday
as a sweetner on the eve of Gorbachev's visit including allowing
Georgy Samoilovich to come to London for cancer treatment
{Independent). A number of others granted visas. Officials in
London said to be "delighted".

NAMIBIA

Sun - Mrs T raps rebels - you attack SWAPO for causing new
fighting.

Mail, leader says the first days of UN peacekeeping in Namibia have
been a bloody shambles. Everybody has been seen at his worst and
the UN has begun by confirming its impotence in the face of force.
A beefing up of its peace keeping capacity is urgently needed,

          - Thatcher condemns SWAPG.   Namibian death toll rises as
UN blunders are blamed for crisis.

Guardian - Thatcher rounds on SWAPO over clashes.

      “ UN investigation confirm big incursion into Namibia by
SWAPO guerrillas, but say it was without hostile intent, say
diplomats,

Times - South Africa threatens to suspend UN peace plan for
Namibia unless .it curbs guerrilla action within the next few
hours.

FT - Pretoria issues Namibia ultimatum to UN in a move seemed
designed to push the issue of Southern Africa high up the agenda
for your talks with Gorbachev.
                              8.              5 April 1989

                         PRESS DIGEST

Independent - SWAPO leader Sam Mujoma believed to have ordered
infiltration of Namibia by his guerrillas and in breach of UN
Resolution 438 and written undertakings he had given. Last night
Pik Botha delivered ultimatum to the UN to curb SWAPO or South
Africa would suspend the peace plan for the territory. UNTAG
batallion will not reach war zone until April 20,
                                                                           ANNEX
 MBfiSTBRS (IJK VISITS, SPEECHES F T P

 DEM:    M l b S T o w ^ l J i . d o ? 0^   EC°n0miC Devd°Pmem Coundi

 DTI;    Lord Young meets Mr Nils Wilhjelxn, Danish Minister for Trade and
          liiOuSirv

 LCD:   Lord Mackay opens Middlesex Guildhall Courts
 DEM:   Mr Lee visits North Devon (tourism) and officially opens ‘Bis Sheen5
         educational tarm m Abbotsham

 DEN:    Mr Morrison addresses Scottish Offehore Achievement Awards dinner
         Aberdeen

DBS:    Mrs Rumbold launches Work Experience video, BAFTA, London
DES:    Mr Jackson gives address at Humberside College of Hieher
         Education^ later gives address at Standing Conference of Information
         Officers, King s College, London
DH:      Mr Mellor addresses Pulse Roadshow

DOE.    Lord Caithness attends UKCEED press conference on Research                 on
         Environmental Policy, IBM, South Bank, London
DOE;    Mr Trippier visits Herefordshire
DOE:    Mrs Bottomley attends Careful Croydon litter launch, Croydon
DTI:    Mr Atkins visits Hampshire
DU:     Mr Forth visits Birmingham

DTp:    Mr Portillo presents King’s Cross Bravery Certificates, London
HO,     Mr Patten attends Crime Concern conference, House of Commons




MMISIEESrOVERSEAS YfSiTSI
MOD:    Mr Hamilton visits NATO/SHAPE (to 6 April)
SO:     Lord Sanderson undertakes British Tourist Authority engagement             in
         Amsterdam

:Mmimms{FEsssmTERvmws)
DBS:    Mr Baker interviewed on ’TSdticatioti on the Radio* programme (prov)
FCO:    Sir Geoffirey Howe appears on ABC TVs "Good Morning America"
        #rD£nini£3!€
                                                                        ANNEX


TV AND RADIO
"Breakfast Time": BBC 1 (07.00) presents assessments from London and Moscow
of the importance of the Soviet President’s visit
"Dispatches": Ch 4 (20.30)
"Q.EJX”: BBC 1 (2130) on the struggle of Falkland’s hero Simon Weston
 PRIME MINISTER                                             6 April 1989


H&XN EVENTS

 President Gorbachev visits

 EC:     Internal Market Council, Brussels




 HO:        Long term trends in prison population to 1997
HO:         Prison population 1988
OPCS:       Mortality Statistics: Accidents and Violence 1986 (prov)

PUBLICATIONS



PARLIAMENT
Cnmmnns
-  iifi

QngSBfllMk Treasury; Horae Office; Prime Minister

.SMSmgsg.     Electricity Bill: Progress on Remaining Stages. (2nd day)

                             Delay in     tonsillectomies in North        Devon   (Mr T
                             Speller)

                             Not available at time of diary completion
Lards:      Starred Questions
            Companies Bill (HL): Report (2nd Day)
            European Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Regulations 1989;
            Motion for Approval                                &
            Representation of the People (Variation of lim its of Candidates’
            Election Expenses) Order 1989: Motion for Approval




MIHXSTERS       ~    See Annex
                                                6 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Extensive coverage of Mr Gorbachev's visit and arrival with
pictures - looks good. He arrives with invitation to Queen in his
pocket and a Libyan order for bombers supplied.

Tass says you are the power behind the East-West thaw.

Row over sale of Russian bombers to Libya.   You are said to be
concerned.

Express says you should ask Gorbachev to explain himself for
supplying the aircraft.

Labour call for you to make Commons statement on Leon Brittan’s
new remarks on Westland affair.

Nujamo refuses to withdraw SWAPO fighters from border areas of
Namibia. UN prepares to airlift troops in to try to end the
fighting which has cxaimed 200 lives. Hopes recede for ceasefire,
though South Africa offers SWAPO guerrillas safe passage from
Namibia back to their bases in Southern Angola (Times}.

Labour Party attack you for your one-sided condemnation of SWAPO.

MORI poll commissioned by Greens shows 70% think a party's
environmental policies would be an important consideration in the
Euro elections.

Nuclear fusion in a test-tube has now been confirmed
{Independent}.

Mail feature on why private water will be so good for us all - 10
pluses for privatisation.

Large companies are reluctant to take part in Employment Training,
according to an unpublished report commissioned by DE (FT).

GATT close to agreeing terms for negotiating reform of world trade
in agriculture (FT).

European Commission proposes tougher limits on car exhaust
pollution from January 1993 (FT).

Japan to extend for another year voluntary curbs on car exports to
the EC in order to avoid trade friction (FT)*
                                3.                 6 April 1939

                           P&ESS DIGEST

Underground raiImen to vote on all-out strike after 24 hour
stoppage yesterday which caused two-thirds of trains to be
cancelled.

Air traffic controllers threatening to hold flights to Europe
unless demands for more staff are met.

D/Transport annual survey shows that roads are in a worse
condition than in 1977 (Times).

Statistical office to be five times larger, after radical
re-organisation (FT).

90% of people believe they have been ripped off by estate agents.
Express says they may be a necessary evil but need they foe such an
expensive one.

RCN supports its leaders by resisting proposals to introduce
regional pay (Times).

Thousands of family doctors say they will quit if the NHS reforms
go ahead and 90% say that patients would suffer, according to GP
newspaper survey.

David Mellor receives a cool response from 700 GPs when he says
the debate on the future of the NHS should not deteriorate into a
propaganda battle between the Government and the professions.
(Times}.

Telegraph, leader says the Bar isay close its ranks against the Lord
Chancellor’s proposals but its senior members know well enough
that the main criticisms are valid.

Former adviser to Lord Chancellor’s advisory committee on legal
aid attacks Government for allowing the number of people eligible
for legal aid to drop by between 10 and 13 million since it came
to office (Times}.

    says it is absurd for universities and polytechnics to be
blackmailed by staff when there are 12,000 applicants for 79 staff
vacancies at Birmingham Poly.

Police Complaints Authority is to call for new powers to ensure
that police officers do not by-pass disciplinary action by taking
early retirement on medical grounds (Independent),

Police calling for 4 day week to relieve stress.
                                4-               6 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

 Probation service must refocus its activities and develop new
 skills, Audit Commission says in report out today (FT).

Sun leader wants to know how Labour would finance its programme
with a top rate of tax of 50%. Mail says Kinnock is trying to
hide his real tax intentions but there can be no doubt his gut
instinct is to substitute reaction for reform.

Man being questioned about death of two men doused with petrol and
set alight in raid in amusement arcade in Soho,

Home Office reveals further measures to cut down rural lager
louts.

Solidarity and Polish Government sign pact which paves way for
first democratic elections since War.

Skipper of supertanker which ran aground in Alaska and has caused
an ecological disaster charged with being drunk in charge of a
ship, recklessness and negligence.

Home Office to call for non-governmental review of press law to
counter criticism of government's failure to act against press
abuse but will remain hostile to right of reply bill
{Independent).

Meanwhile the International Federation of Journalists claim
Government attacks on journalists have harmed Britain’s standing
abroad and bolstered the case for a written constitution
enshrining "the right to know” {Independent),

A half page advertisement signed by a variety of people appears in
the Times as an open letter about press freedom, secret police,
freedom of religion, disarmament, human rights and democracy, with
a PS asking if the same could, appear in Pravda.

Richard Attenborough says senior broadcasters should be prepared
to resign in protest against the Government’s plans for
de-regulating TV.

Sun receives 4 stolen letters from Princess Anne, taken from
inside Buckingham Palace, but does not print contents; hands them
over to Yard,

Jock Bruce-Gardyrse in Telegraph says that because Lord Young does
not have a pol3.ti.cal background he is in danger of being shot down
by his own side.
                                                6 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

 Nigel Lawson firmly expected to stay as Chancellor beyond your
 next reshuffle {Times).

Today says a coat of arms Is being prepared by the Royal College
of Arms for when you become Countess of Finchley.

Swede, 42, to be charged with murder of Clof Palme.

Vietnam will withdraw all its troops from Cambodia by September
(Independent).

GORBACHEV

Star - Corby brings Siberia to Britain with him - But Thatcher
gives him a warm smile.

Sun - Gorby jets in with invite for Queen to visit Russia. it's
up to Maggie. Leader says there is nothing to stop the Queen
rubbing shoulders with the Bolsheviks*

Mirror - Gorby flies in to Libya jets storm. Leader says
Gorbachev has a great opportunity and on one issue there should be
total agreement and co-operation - trade.

Today - Queen says yes to a tour of Russia.

Express leads with Gorbachev’s bombers for Libya.     Feature - Enter
Mr G: the greatest showman on earth.

Mail also leads with Russian super jets for Libya - Gorbachev
faces clash with you over deal.

Telegraph. - Russians revive plan for visit by Queenj   15 Soviet
bombers for Gaddafi.

Telegraph leader says the frequency of Gorbachev’s visits is a
measure of the easing of East-West tension and of your success in
establishing Britain in the international areas.

Guardian page 1 - Gorbachev invite for Queen.  Thatcher doubts
will be overcome - greatest tribute yet to perestroika. Leader,
which is snide, says the ability of you and Gorbachev to influence
events is constrained.  The move it suggests lies with you in view
of the movements mad© by Gorbachev.
                                                5 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

 FT - Gorbachev seeks stronger links with Western Europe; and is
 looking for your support to accelerate negotiations on
 conventional arms. He may come up with proposals for the creation
 of some kind of institutional link between East and West. You
 began your talks last night by underlining your concern of the
 need to work together on Namibia.

 FT - US expresses concern at Soviet sale of fighter bombers to
 Libya.

Soviets end fraught Cuba trip with sigh of relief {IndependentS.

Britain will rebuild one of the schools flattened in the Armenian
earthquake (Independent),

Whitehall is said to be waiting with "trepidation" for the
Gorbachev show {Independent). No-one knows what Gorbachev will
say at the Guildhall.

         fit leader says when you meet Gorbachev today you will be
in the enviable position of being the first Western leader to hear
from the architect of the astonishing changes in progress in the
Soviet Union. Caution must be your watchword - and for the moment
judicious expansion of trade, generous technical assistance and
the promotion of wider cultural exchanges are the appropriate
responses to Mr Gorbachev's outstretched hand.

Tiraes page 1 - Mr Gorbachev jokes about the weather as he receives
a warm welcome at Heathrow. The stage appears set for the most
encouraging Anglo-Soviet summit since before the Cold War era, and
there are strong hints being dropped about Queen being invited to
Moscow,

      ~ Moscow gives in to British pressure to free 9 of the 14
Soviet prisoners of conscience.

      " Mikhail Shatrov, the Soviet playwright who is visiting
Britain, dismisses yesterday’s advertisement in the Times about
human rights saying "you are whipping a dead horse, You are
trying to break down an open door”.




Star ignore the issue.

Stm page 2 ~ Leon starts new Westland storm.
                                 ''               6 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

    ox page I   Britt an turns trai tor and reveals you didn1t tell
the truth. Leader headed "Time for the truth” says Brittan's
allegation is of the utmost gravity and cannot be ignored. The
Government has developed a habit of telling lies.

Today page 2 - Brittan stirs up Westland scandal.

Express page 2 - Leon Brittan takes his revenge over No 10
Westland affair leak.

Mail page 9 - Westland returns to haunt Maggie.

Telegraph page 1 - Brittan reopens Westland affair.   Suggestions
that C Powell, B Ingham and Lord Armstrong will be called before
Defence Select (wOnunittee. George Jones feature on Messrs Powell
and Ingham.

FT page 10 - Brittan points finger at top aides.

Independent - Sir Leon Brittan has accused No 10 of giving
"express approval” for Westland leak in Channel 4 programme on
your 10 years in office to be broadcast on Friday. He later
claimed he went no further in the interview than he has said
before,

      ~ keen Brittan claims he had express approval from Downing
Street to leak the Solicitor General’s confidential letter in the
Westland affair.

         pags 1 ~ Brittan blaznes Pri,m.e Minister's snen for Westland
leak.
                                                                          ANNEX

 MMTOSRS (UK VISITS. SPEECHES BTC)
 DH:     Mr Clarke visits the Audit Commission

 HMT:    Mr Major      addresses    the    Top    Management     Programme.       Fleet
         Hampshire                                                                        ’

 CO:     Mr Luce addresses Arts Council ‘Mass Carib’ press launch,              Hacknev
         empire, London

 DEM:    Mr Nichoils opens new training unit in Coventry
 DES.    Mrs Rumbold visits Cavendish Secondary School and Kings Landey
         Isiants School in St Albans, Hertfordshire
DES:     Mr Jackson addresses Pickup conference, Oxford Polytechnic
DH:      Mr Mellor visits Moomelds Eye Hospital

         Mstreereeman     V*S*tS          £-enIra* Blood   Laboratories      Authorities,

DOE:     | ^ ncjQQ0^e ac^ resses            Planning Officers Society on "Planning”,

HMT:    Mr Lillev addresses the Finance Houses Association             annual     lunch
        London

MAFF:   Mr Ryder addresses Careers conference, Reading
MAFF:   Mr Thompson addresses             Royal   Pharm aceutical Society,        Aston
        University, Birxmngnam

ODA:    Mr Patten addresses London Diplomatic Group, London
SO:     Mr Lang visits Dumfries and Galloway with Prince of Wales




DTI:    Mr Newton attends informal Industry CoimdL Bilbao (to 9 April)
FCO:    Mr Eggar visits Nice and Paris (to 7 April)


MHflS3ERS.(FRESS INTERVrBWsn
DES:    Mr Baiter interviewed on Radio 4’s ‘Woman’s Hour’, about Teacher
        Shortage

WO:     Mr Walker imemewed by Vincent Kaae of BBC Wales re the NHS in
        Wales
                                                              AHMEX




TV AND RADIO

The Sharp End": Ch 4 (18.30) looks at the changes in the workplace and
employment issues

 Hard JNews’: Ch 4 (20.00) Raymond Snoddy of the Financial Times examines
how tacts are distorted and stories sensationalised by the British press.
Readers get the chance to complain                   '              ‘
This Week”: Thames (2030)

"Question _Time”: BBC 1 (22.00) with Edwina Currie, Sir Nicholas Henderson,
Dennis Skinner and Ruth Wishart
PRIME MINISTER
                                                               7 April 1989


MAIN EVENTS


 President Gorbachev addresses Guildhall, and lunches with The Queen

 The Duke of Edinburgh represents The Queen at the Sovereign* s Parade,
 Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, Surrey

 EC:       Informal Industry Ministers meetingr San Sebastian (to April 8}


 SJCAU SEES
 DOE: Housing starts and completions (Feb)
 DTI: Finished steel consumption and stock changes (4th qtr-fmal)

 PARLIAMENT
 Commoss
 Barness:          PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS
                  Parking Bill: Remaining Stages (Mr Timothy Kirkhope)
                  International Parliamentary Organisations         (Registration)   Bill:
                  Committee Stage (Mr Michael Marshall)
                  Common Land (Rectification of Registers) Bill:             Committee
                  Stage (Mr Tony Faveii)
 Admnmmem Debates:          Relations with Malta (Mr H Barnes)
 Sefert Committees:         Not available at time of diary completion

- Lords:      Starred Questions
              Debate to take note of the consultation papers "The Work and
              Organisation of the Legal Profession” (Cm 570), “Contingency Fees”
              (Cm 571) and "Conveyancing by Authorised Practitioners” (Cm 572)


 MIHXST2RS        ~   See Annex
                               2,              7 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


GORBACHEV

An excellent press and massive coverage in which warmth and
special relationship shine through differences.

Star page i - Maggie and Gorby make historic pact; Lest’s Save
the World {for grandchildren}. Summit atmosphere almost electric.
Britain presents a school to Armenia.  Two pages of pictures and
features on the day.

Cartoon of you and Gorbachev talking in study over caption:     "Of
course, unlike the UK we Russians now have elections with a
serious opposition".

Sun page 1 picture is Mr Thatcher receiving Mrs Gorbachev with a
kiss of the hand - "Denis’s smacker for regal Raisa''. Two pages
inside headed "It"s Mikl Mania”. Everyone falls for his charm.

Sion leader says SAS should be sent to Libya to blow up the jets
supplied by Russians.

Mirror page 1 - Red Stars - Gorby and Raisa deliver the goods.
Turn their charm offensive on Britain and win hearts and
admiration. Meanwhile in talks you and Gorbachev agreed on a
shared aim of making the world a safer place.

Mirror leader says they came, they saw, they conquered.   The
brought glasnost to Britain.

Today page 1 lead - Maggie’s marathon talk-in for a safer world.
"I couldn't shut her up” - its main headline puts words into Mr
Gorbachev's mouth. Inside coverage of Gorbachev’s walkabout and
visit to factory. Elsewhere 2 pages of picture/feature coverage
of Mrs Gorbachev.

Express page 1 lead with picture f,So happy together”. Mr G gave a
new word to the language "blizost" - togetherness.   Inside 2 pages
of picture feature ’’It’s Raisa the Red Star” and another under
the heading "We will build a much better world for our
grandchi Idr e n .

Express leader headed ”& relationship of high regard" says if
personal chemistry could soothe away East-West tension the world
would certainly be breathing more easily now. Yesterday
demonstrated the extraordinary rapport between the two of you,
notwithstanding differences.
                               3.              7 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Hail page 1 lead - The toast is togetherness.  Inside 2 pages
headed "The day of glasnost and old style charm”. No disguising
immense regard Mr Gorbachev has for you as a Western voice of
authority. Two pages of pictures in centrefold headed "I’ve got a
crush on you".

Mail leader headed "Making the best of Gorbachev” says he is a
notable improvement on his predecessors, It goes on to consider
trade and says our poor performance partly reflects a lack of
Soviet hard currency, but also a certain lack of zest among
British exporters.

Morning Star page I - Double triumph for Gorbachev:   friendly
talks and an enthusiastic public welcome.

Telegraph the only newspaper not to lead with Gorbachev.  Their
second lead is a picture of Mrs Gorbachev with Kenneth Baker over
”Crowds cheer Gorbachevs" alongside ”Russians seek ban on atom
weapons". Inside 2 pages report the visit extensively with
pictures.

Guardian page 1 lead - Prime Ministers hails ”peaceful
revolution". Thatcher tells Gorbachev: We want you to succeed”.
Claims that leak of supply of aircraft to Libya came from Bush
team to counter ’’Gorby factor". Inside 2 pages of coverage of
all aspects of the visit and lots of pictures.

Independent page 1 lead - Summit seals Anglo-Soviet rapport.
Thatcher-Gorbachev talks surmount differences over jets to Libya
and nuclear weapons: A day of talks, diplomacy and mutual
admiration, which marked a new era in Anglo-Soviet relations
culminated with your giving effusive praise to Mr Gorbachev's
’’peaceful revolution" at a Downing Street dinner last night.
Front page picture outside Westminster Abbey.

Independent - Lord Gowrie will present Mrs Gorbachev with the
manuscript of Turgenev’s "Fathers and Sons" which the Russians
have bought from Sothebys.

FT - Prime Minister praises Soviet ’revolution’. You and Mr
Gorbachev agree that Anglo-Soviet relations have entered & new era
of stability and trust but acknowledge that you continue to
disagree fundamentally on nuclear disarmament, Your effusive
welcome was combined with an unflinching reaffirmation of your
determination to preserve the West*s nuclear defences.

FT adds that officials and economists in Estonia propose radical
programme for self-government in challenge to Moscow.
                                4.              7 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST


OTHER NEWS


Gallup in Telegraph gives Labour 2.5% lead - 40/37.5/SLD 10/S0F 8.

National dock strike likely over abolition of Dock Labour Schema
but Cabinet believes it can defeat it. Dockers leaders expected
to meet today.

UN tables plan for ceasefire in Namibia. SWAPO guerillas will be
offered 2 choices - hand in weapons to UNTAG and stay in Namibia
as citizens or keep their weapons and be escorted back into Angola
(Independent}.

President Botha gives notice of elections by first week of
September, signalling his retirement in favour of F W de Klerk.

Shakir offers no concessions on Niddle East peace process to
President Bush *

City economists voice concern at threat posed to independence of
CSG by its transfer to the Treasury {FT}.

Governor of Bank tells TCSC that jury is still out on whether
current monetary policy is working ( F T ).

David Slunkett has called on a future Labour Government to
confiscate shares bought in privatised water companies
iIndependent)-

National Council for Civil Liberties calls for public judicial
enquiry into Gibraltar shootings.

High Court judgement on leaked Lonrho report due today.

Channon tightens airport security.   New rules will restrict access
to aircraft parking areas.

You are planning to axe Department: of Energy and merge ,it with DTI
later this year,

Royal Ordnance to shed 2S0 jobs {F T ).

Britain’s major airports must install computerised systems for
checking passes within the next year and must strictly control
access to restricted areas {Independent 1.
                               5.              7 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

There is no evidence of radioactive and toxic: chemical pollution
at Piper Alpha (Independent).

British Tourist Authority warns that tourism could be hit if
cities are not cleaned up,

FT ~ Consumers' Association attacks Bar Council's campaign against
reform of legal system. Leader, welcoming proposals, says release
of market forces will diminish significance of patronage which
{Sovernment can exercise by appointment of Queen’s Counsel and
judges.

House buyers have been hit by 62% rise in costs in past 12 months,
according to Reward Group Survey (FT).

Paddy Ashdown predicts a net loss of no more than 100 for
Democrats in local government elections.

Many routine cases will go to lower courts in a plan to speec up


Roger Birch, Chief Constable of Sussex, claimed failure to share
in
the 1992 vision of co-operative policing in a border-free Europe
could be disastrous for British police, isolating them in the
fight against international crime {Independent).

British scientists have won backing from WHO to develop a dried
polio vaccine which could be used in the developing world without
refrigeration (Independent},

BBC and Channel 4 fear that the BSC is preparing for a two-tier
set of programme standard codes which would allow satellite and
cable channels greater freedom to screen sex and violence in
imported Aaerican material {Independent),
                                                                          AilNEX


MINISTERS (I IK VISITS . SPEECHES ETC)

DH:        Mr Clark visits Manchester to promote the NHS White Paper
DOE:       Mr Ridley opens sewage sludge incineration plant, Bradford
HMT:       Mr Major addresses the            University Centre   Business Club     lunch.
           Cambridge
HO:        Mr Hurd opens Wiltshire Sound, Swindon; later visits Thames Valley
           Police
MAFF:      Mr MacGregor addresses Breekland Prim Ltd, Norfolk on opening of
           extension
DEM:       Mr Cope addresses Business in the Coramunity/Sheil conference for
           enterprise agency chairmen, Sheffield University
DES:       Mr Butcher visits Hereward College, Coventry
DH:        Mr Me Her attends Guild of Catholic Doctors 1989 symposium and
           AGM; later attends Royal College of GPs spring meeting, Sussex
           University
DOE:       Mr Gummer visits Wolverhampton and Dudley Councils (community
           charge)
DOE:       Mr Trippier visits New Line Engineering Group in Bacup, Lancs
DU:        Mr Clarklunches with Sir Peter Parker and               UK and Japanese
           Businessmen, Savoy Hotel, London
HMT:        Mr Brooke addresses      the Institution of Fiscal Studies on        indirect
           tax, Oxford
HO:         Mr Hogg     visits Her Majesty's Young Offender Institution,         Hindlev,
           Lancs
WO;        Mr Roberts opens new offices of the MRM Partnership, Cardiff
WO:        Mr Grist    addresses     Council      for   Protection of   North      Wales,
           Aberystwyth




DTI: Lord Young visits China (to 16 April)
                                                                          &NNEX




TV AND RADIO
"Breakfast Time'; BBC 1 (07.00) with an analysis of the achievements or the
Soviet President's visit
’The Time: The Place": Thames <10-00) with a live satellite link to the USSR
"Gorbachev at the Guildhall”: SBC 1 (1L00) David Dimblebv with live coverage
of the speech
“Any Questions?": BBC Radio 4 (20,05) with Douglas Hurd, Paddy Ashdown,
Tony Bean and Brenda Dean
 PRIMS MINISTER                                                      10 April 1989


 MAIH EVENTS




 The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh attend the premiere                     performance    of
 "Aspects of Love", Prince of Wales Theatre* Piccadilly,
                                                      * London

 EC; European Parliament Plenary, Strasbourg (to 14 April)

 EC: Consumer Affairs Council Luxembourg

 EC: iniomial Fisheries' Ministers meeting, Galicia (to 11 April)

National Association of Licensed House Managers annual conference, Blackpool
(to 13 April)

Visit oi Mr Vasily Zakharov, Soviet Minister of Culture to Britain (to I? April)

Social Security benefits up-rated

Housing Benefit replaces Board and Lodge Payments



D l l: Producer price index numbers (Mar)

HQi....Thne taken to process criminal cases in Magistrates' Courts (OctSS)
PARLIAMENT



Qiiesdons; Energy; Social Security; Transport

Business;        Electricity Bill (3rd Day); Conclusion of Remaining Stages
                 Motion on the Lord Chancellor’s Salary Order
                 Motion on the Medicines (Fixing of Fees Relating to Medical
                 Products for Human Use)

A4liMMMM^0&ha|es;            The operation of Section 46 of the              Housing arid
                             Planning Act 1986 (Mr P Thurnham)
                                   2.                 10 April 1989



m m A M m ncm m
                         PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                         Subject' Commonwealth Development Corporation
                         Witness: J Caines, C8, Permanent Secretary, Overseas
                         Development Administration
                        TREASURY AND CIVIL SERVICE
                        Subject: .1989 Budget
                        Witness: The Ri Hon Nigel Lawson MP, Chancellor of
                        the Exchequer

                        ENVIRONMENT
                        Subject: Department of the Environment's Main
                        Estimates, 1989-90
                        Witnesses; Department of the Environment Officials
       Starred Questions
       football Spectators Bill (HL); Report
       i-0 rd Chancellor s Sasary Order      Motion for Approval




MINISTERS         See attached
                                                10 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Gorbachev goes home to trouble - loss of nuclear submarine and 42
sailors; and bloody riots in Titolisi in which 16 die.

Bush signals USA will, hold to a steady course in approach and
policy towards USSR. He is considering visit to Poland.

Cecil Parkinson will underline Britain's determination to achieve
a 40% increase in Anglo-Soviet trade during his visit to Russia
this week {Times}.

Poland about to acquire a considerable measure of Western style
democracy courtesy Gorbachev (Telegraph) - Walesa can properly be
labelled a father of his people.

Scottish Church leaders call on you to stop perpetuating ’’balance
o£ terror” and scrap Trident - Gorbachev’s visit reinforces their
view that you are wrong in believing nuclear weapons have kept the
peace.

Wilfried Martens says NATO should begin negotiations with Warsaw
Pact to reduce short range tactical nuclear weapons in Europe. He
does not spell out whether he is in favour of modernisation, but
the latest development underlines the difficulty you may face in
winning support before the NATO summit {Times).

You make clear in TV-ftM interview CTelegraph} that you intend to
maintain your campaign to modernise nuclear defences.

You will stress need to update nuclear weapons when you see
Chancellor Kohl later this month (FT).

FT leader argues that nuclear deterrence may not be dependent on
land-based tactical missiles. Some experts believe that air and
sea-launched missiles could fill the gap between strategic nuclear
and conventional forces.

Tass claims there is no risk of confcamination from sunken nuclear
submarine North of Horway,

Georgi Samoilovich, Jewish scientist, arrives in London for cancer
treatment,

You want a Boya1 visit to Moscow in 1991 - after Mr Gorbachev’s
commitment to disarmament has been tested in renewed negotiations
                                4.              10 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Deal for the withdrawal of 3WAF0 guerrillas from Namibia agreed.

Nelson Mandela thanks you for statement in his support and British
aid for townships.

High interest rates,, high inflation and a large trade deficit will
be main characteristics of UK economy this year, with little
improvement in 1990, according to FT survey of forecasts by 23
groups (FT).

Catholics furious with Kinnack for referring to you as the
’’immaculate conception" at launch of his 10 week campaign, Chris
Patten MP says their campaign comes down to blasphemy- Meeting
described by opponents as Second Hand Rose Rally.

Mail describes Xinnoek’s speech as carefully scripted waffle
wrapped up in raszle dazzle.

Edwina Currie says women are deserting the Conservative Party
because of its failure to promote its work on women’s issues.

West Germans alleged to have sold high level missile technology to
Argentina according to Panorama tonight.

Serious Fraud Office in change of srsind on Fayed probe. Inspectors
originally decided not to prosecute but were overruled by one of
SFO ’s five assistant directors. Scotland Yard Inquiry underway in
Egypt {FT}„

Lonrho threatens to sue Government Ministers (Independent).

2 out of 3 companies are experiencing serious recruitment
problems, according to survey by Blue Arrow {FT),

D/Employment-commissioned report, the most damning indictment so
far, on the Government *s Training Agency , says Government training
schemes costing more than £1,Sbi11ion are being snubbed by many
employers {Times },

Bouse prices set to rise 10% this ye ax'.

Consultants at 5 of 6 ”flagship” hospitals regarded as prime
contenders tor solf-government say they do not wish to be
considered for this new status.

Peter talker expected to finalise deal with German firm Bosch to
build 1,000 job car components factor at Mid™Glamorgan,
                                5.              10 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Government determined to weather and defeat a dock strike,*     TGWO
meets -today. Plans to beat any dispute well laid.

Mirror says dockers are in danger of falling into a carefully
prepared Government trap just as the miners did. Going on strike
w o n ’t save the scheme or help the dockers. TGWU should negotiate.

Mail says misplaced notions of tribal loyalty cost miners,
printers and ferrymen dear. Dockers should learn. Fatal Johnson
finds dockers and lawyers have much in common,

Keith Waterhouse, in Mail, suggests we appoint a token registered
docker rather on the lines of the Warden of the Cinque Ports.

FT leader on dock labour says scheme needs to be tackled but
Government must ensure that dispute does not become a costly
diversion. Creative destruction of the scheme should be
encouraged, with a lasting settlement to promote modernisation,

Independent leader says dockers have few supporters - their
isolation stakes the glee with which Tory MPs welcomed last week's
anno spacement all the more odious ~ but abolition is undoubtedly
the right course, A point tacitly recognised by Kinncok, He must
distance himself if the TGWU is unwilling or unable to contain its
dock members. Best of all would be for the union to demonstrate
it can bow to the realities of a changed world and show
constructive restraint In the face of whatever provocation.

Port employers planning to change working practices in docks
dramatically if dockers take industrial action {Times}.

Disability Alliance claims living standards of 1million has fallen
because of changes in social security.

Toz'y peers are joining the attack on privatisation of water.
Ministers are considering amendments for greater safeguards on
public access to land owned by water companies in an attempt to
defuse hostility. A further possibility under consideration is to
invest a small amonnt from the sale receipts in environmental
clean-up schemes for reservoirs, rivers and canals {Independent),

Chairman of Materford Glass resigns in controversy over accounting
irregularities.

British Coal pay £60 a week to get a key miner to work by taxi
after drunk driving conviction.
                                                10 April 1989

                           PKESS DIGEST

Express says you have set up a Ministerial task force to change
the face of the countryside.

Car manufacturers may put pressure on Government to resist
European exhaust emission regulations as they could increase cost
of new models (Times).

Sun reporter claims to havs found loophole in Pan Am security at
Heathrow by turning up early for work as baggage handler and
escaping security checks. Paul Channon orders inquiry; Sun says
Mr Channon should be sacked.

Times MORI poll shows that public confidence in the police has
declined dramatically throughout the1980s.   Only 58% are now
satisfied with the way their local area is policed compared with
75% in 1981.

Pressure to reform the police is growing as MPs and senior police
offers warn the police are "woefully inefficient” and unprepared


Salisbury find Heinz baby food poisoned on shelves of store at
Rayleigh,. Essex,

Boy of 3   in hospital, seriously ill, after being set on fire by
two boys   aged 7 and 9 in Kennington,

Government: to introduce shortly legislation to outlaw organ sales
for transplant.

Demand for satellite TV dishes still slow, according to FT
monitor {FT}.

Sir John Pope Hennessey, writing about the V&A, castigates you in
an article in the Hew York Review of Books for a quite
extraordinary lack of comprehension about art - which must be
bound up with the decision to equip the museum with a board on
which no member has a vestigial knowledge of works of art
(independent} ,

Independent leader says Deputy Commissioner John Dellow5s idea of
an informal corps of civic volunteers .merits investigation.

Much gossip about the Hoyal Equerry’s letters to Princess Anne
leaked to the Sun and returned to the Palace unpublished.
Equerry* it is said, is to leave; others say he is due to be
replaced in autumn*
                                                10 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

And speculation about the state of Princess Anne's marriage -
divorce forecast.

Mirror says she has visited the Equerry’s home at least six times.

Tan? Daiyell says Sir Leon Brittan’s disclosures show that Messrs
Powell and Ingham are not fit to remain in office*

Your Ten Years

Joe Haines starts series "others dare not print”.

Thatcher decade - special feature looks at social change over last
10 years {Independent).

Under the heading ”From Despair to hope ,   the catalyst of
Change" the Times has two pages in the first of its five-day
series looking at your 10 years as Prime Minister, Today’s
feature looks at attempts to regenerate areas of the country
blighted by the withering of old industries, asking if you were
justified in your belief that small businesses provide the
answers.

Death of 2 horses in Grand National brings new calls to make race
safer,

60 football supporters arrested at yesterday's Littlewoods Cup
Final at Wembley.

Mick Faldo wins OS Masters Golf tournament,

Takeshita is defiantly resisting pressure to resign over the
Recruit affair {Independent)„

Islamic leaders in Britain fail to convince young Pakistani girls
that they should shun British society (Times9.

SO8B&CHE¥

Express leader says troubles in Georgia are a reminder to
Westerners who are too ready to confuse promises with facts.
Dissent is still being met by brutal repression.
                                 8.                10 April 1989

                            PRESS DIGEST


L&BOUR PftRTY

Express leader says we have seen the campaign before. Kinnock
P its r * i s a picture of Britain most voters would not recognise.

Mail ~ Kinnock's Labour is going for a song. Left set for
showdown over latest ”nsw look". Bob Cryer says new approach is
"tactically inept”*

Telegraph - Confident Kinnock on offensive.

      ~ Kinnock at “Red Hose Rally” launches one of Labour's roost
critical campaigns with the confident assertion that the party has
reformed itself, if Labour cannot establish a clear lead at the
mid-term stage its chances of ending a series of General Election
defeats would appear reraote.

         ~ labour airiss to sour Prime Minister’s anniversary.
                                                                            PJMEX
  MINISTERS (UK VISITS. SPEECHES E T O

           Mr 8a.?»e! receives courtcsy      cad    from    Professor   Ruboriu,     Indian
           Science Minister, London

  MOD:     Mr Younger meets Mr Coeme, Belgian Defence Minister, London

  WO:      Mr Walker and Mr Grist attend memorial service for Sir Ravmo nd
           Gower, London

 DEM.      Mr Lee launches report on Management Development needs of the
           voluntary sector, London

 DEM.    Mr cope attends Greater Harrow Chamber of Commerce annua!
          luners; later addresses Blackwater Valiev Enterprise Trust annual
          generai meeting, Camherley

 DEM;    Mr Nicholls launches      British   Telecom       leaflet   "Alcohol   Jn   the
          worxpiace”, London

                 ^ e^ or addresses Institute of Health Service Management
          ? ^ ? re,n c e . on the 'NHS Review* London; later meets the Soeletv of
          FPCs, London

 DH:     Mr Freeman visits Resource Management Pilot Scheme, Winchester
          and jjmnches Wessex Drugs Misu.se Campaign
 DOE:    Lord Caithness visits National Home Improvement Council, London;
          later receives William Wilkinson from Nature Conservancy Council
          with delegation, on Green Issues

DOB:      Mr Gummer visits Islington Council {community charge)

DOE:     • Mr Howard visits South West Water in Plymouth

DOE;     Mr Trippjer visits urban regeneration projects in South Tyneside and
         lunches with Tyne and Wear Development Corporation

DOE:     Mr Chape meets Chief Executive from Somerset County Council on
         planning

DOE:     Mr Moynihan meets Jim Lector MF and delegation from Water Supply
         Industry Group; later meets Foreign P ress' Association re Football
         National Membership Scheme, London

DTI;     Mr Maude visits Manchester

D ip ;   Lord Bnahazon attends AMA conference on Channel Tunnel, Festival
         Hall, London; later addresses the Aberdeen Harbour Board dinner,
         Aberdeen

DTp:     Mr Bottornley opens Federation of Civil Engineering                Contractors
         ■'Optimum Resources: Planning for Major Road Works”                conference,
           -end on

HO;      Lord Ferrers opens      International     Fire    and   Security   exhibition*
          Olympia, London

HO:      Mr Renton addresses the Royal Society of Arts seminar on 'The
         future of UK radio for better or for worse", House of Commons

ODA;     Mr Patten attends Commonwealth Development Corporation dinner,
         London
                                                                             AHNEX




 DEN;       Mr Parkinson visit Moscow {to 14 April)

DH:         Mr Clarke visits Poland (to 12 April)
DTI:        Mr Forth meets Lord Plumb in Strasbourg

MAFF;       Mr Thompson attends Informal Fisheries Council, Vigo, Spain {to 11
            April)




DES;        Mr Butcher on BBCl's "Daytime Live" programme, about Croydon
            CCTA



TV AND RADIO

'’Trading Places; Denmark”; Thames (19.00) Paul Hciney on how Denmark may
be threatened by the 1992 Single Market

"The Education Programme"; BBC 2 (19,40) looks at the marketing of schools
and colleges to potential customers

"Honson": BBC 2 (20,10)         examines    the     threat   to   the   Panama   Canal   of
disaoneanna
    *
    ..    •„>rain forests

' World in Action”: Thames (20.30) Current Affairs

Tauorarna : BBC i (21.30) Gavin Hewitt reports on the failure to bring about
polideal change in Czechoslovakia
                                                                     12 April 1989
PRIMS MINISTER


MAI*? EVENTS


Prise 'Minister gives interview to Radio -iarsden

The Princess of Wales attends national premier of film
*Earning Secret18, Cannon Cinema, London

DTI announce Japanese investment in North East

Lonxho appeal ruling


STATISTICS

BOB:        Quarterly analysis of bank advances ( Feb)


PUBLICATIONS
HO:         Metropolitan Police Fund Estimates (1989-90)

PARLIAMENT
Commons
                 Foreign and Commonwealth: Trade and Industry: Environment
Business:        10 Minute Rule Bill: Abolition of Welsh County Council
                 sCreadon of Unitary Local Authorities) (Mr Nicholas Bennett)
                 Debate on a Government Motion on the Fennell Report on cne
                 Investigation into the King's Cross Underground Fire
                 Motions relating to the National Health Service Regulations,
                 Details will be given in the Official Report
Adjournment Debates:         The effects on unemployment of unauthorised
                             subsidisation of industry bv 'European member states
                             (Mr T Hayes I
                       PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONER FOR ADMINISTRATION
                       Subiect: Reports of the Health Service Commissioner tor
                       193%88
                       Witnesses: Officials of the Department of Health, Scottish
                       Home and Health Department: ants Welsh Office
                       WELSH AFFAIRS
                       Subfect: The Channel Tunnel: Implications for Wales
                       Witness: British Rail
                                   2*                      12 April 1989




Select Committees fConfd)
                     AGRICULTURE
                     Subject: Land-Use and Forestry
                     W itnesses: Council for the P ro te c tio n of Rural
                     England/Council for the Protection of Rural Wales:
                     Worldwide Fund fo r Nature; Institute of Chartered
                     Foresters
                     TRADE AND INDUSTRY
                     Subject: Financial Services and the Single European
                     Market
                     Witnesses: Mr M ichael Butt, Chairm an and Chler
                     Executive, Eagle Star Insurance, Mr Joe Palmer. Chiec
                     Executive. Legal and General

                     DEFENCE
                     Subject: Decommissioning of Nuclear Submarines
                     Witnesses; UK NIREX Ltd; Ministry of Defence

                     ENERGY
                     Subject: Energy Policy' Implications of the Greenhouse
                     Effect
                     Witness: United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority

                     EDUCATION. SCIENCE AND ARTS
                     Subject: The Suoply of Teachers for the 1990s
                     Witnesses: Rt Hon Kenneth Baker MP. Secretary of State
                     tor Education and Science and otticsats trom :ne
                     Department
                     EMPLOYMENT
                     Subject: m e Employment Effects ot Lr&ait Development
                     Corporations
                     Witnesses; Rt Hon Nicholas Ridley, Secretary ot state tor
                     •he Environment. Rt Hon John Cope. Minister ot State tor
                     Employment
                     HOME AFFAIRS
                     Subject: Expenditure and Estimates
                     Witness: Home Office
                     SOCIAL SERVICES
                     Subject: Resourcing the NHS; The Governments White
                     Paper: Working for Patienis
                     Witness: Dr R Gruen National Association or Hey;:;;
                     Authorities
                                   3.                   12 April 1989




                   TRANSPORT
                   Subject; Roads for the Future               .
                   Witnesses; Middlesex _Polytechnic (4.15) O ^ord Polyxecmuc
                   (4.45) Railway Conversion Campaign (5.13)
                   COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE BILLS
                   Unopposed
                   1, Hyme Marina VIIlags (Southampton i Wavescreen
                   2, Penzance Albert Pier Extension
                   3, Wesleyan Assurance Society

Lords:   Starred Questions                          .........................
         Debate to call attention to the problems ot higher education
         Schizophrenia After-Care Bill {HU (L Mottistone); Second Reaping
         UQ to ask HMG whether in view of the increasing number ot stray
         doss and the abolition of the dog licence, they will introduce a
         national scheme ot dog registration
                                4,               12 April 1989

                           PRESS SXSSST

Main News

Son Todd and TGKU officials at odds with TGW3 docks committee ove
ballot for strike - he wants talks with employers but doesn’t get
his way.  Union Executive meets on Friday to consider strike
ballot call.

Mirror says Todd told officials yesterday he would not support a
strike.

You set up a Cabinet Committee to monitor situation and plan
•w
 ivCVN
  M
     £,‘
       ~« -VJ
            '"'O'*

Judges are to hold a meeting in protest against Government’s
proposed reforms in court time on Monday; Terry Dicks HP says
“It ’s madne ss ”.

Mail leader says the action confirms they are no better than the
unions. Why couldn’t they meet outside court hours? They will
lose the respect of ordinary citizens.

Conservatives angry at Peter Walker’s speech, Sir William Clark
M? says he must decide whether he wants to stay in the Cabinet,
Express savs he faces the sack.

Stm feature says Mr Walker stakes it clear privately that he would
not mind at all if you sacked him; it is even more astonishing
you have not done so. Sun leader says he sits in Cabinet as a
reminder of the bad old days.

Guardian says Kinnock did not raise issue because he felt there
were enough loyalist quotes in speech for you to beck him.

Vale of Glamorgan writ expected to be moved today.

Christopher Hawkins HP, High Peak, SI, to stand down at next
election on medical advice.

Tony Banks HP, in House Magazine, canvasses "violent overthrow of
Society” as alternative to fund assent:aI change in despairing about
achieving socialism through Parliamentary system.

All party report tells fellow MFs to clean up their hooligan act
before cameras are admitted to House. Today says the sooner
television gets into the House and exposes offenders the better.
Mail says if things have got a hit our of hand lately it is
because the Speaker, nice chap, is not firs? enough-
                                  5,            12 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Express, referring to Duke of Norfolk’s rebuke of Kinnock in Times
for describing you as the ”immaculate misconception”, says Kinnock
should be more careful - such references are not merely vulgar but
profoundly offensive to Catholics.

500 arrested in Georgia crisis.

Foreign Secretary sharply criticises Britain's European allies for
substituting wishful thinking and rhetoric for the realities of
meeting security requirements in a powerful plea for greater
European defence co-operation {independent).

Peter Jenkins, in the Independent, says there is a growing
expectation that before too long the Treasury may mount a new bid
to change your mind about British membership of the SMS exchange
rate mechanism. He sees this as the best means of heading off EC
moves towards economic and monetary union.

Delors Committee meeting in Basle tries to reconcile deep-seated
differences between The Twelve over moves towards economic and
monetary union (FT).

Fujitsu to announce new £.90million plant for North East today.

Toyota to set up £70Qmiilion car plant in Derbyshire.

Bosch invited by Peter Walker to set up car components plant at
Liantrissant,

UK car manufacturers halve jobs since 1979 but lift productivity
by 66% over last 8 years <Times )*

DAF to transfer additional truck production from Holland to its
Leyland plant in North West England (F T).

Law lord© will decide today whether Lonrho is guilty of contempt.
Meanwhile, controversy smrrounds disagreement among 3FG lawyers
over whether investigation should continue.  Scotland Yard
detectives stranded in Cairo awaiting vital legal documentation
from the Egyptian authorities (Times).

Paul Channon says (in Ada;;; Smith Institute Heport) handing over
the railway infrastructure to a national track authority would
allow competition in train services (FT).

Parliamentary apace committee set up to broaden debate about
Britain*s role in space and to promote scientific research
                               6.                12 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Abbey National savers and borrowers vote to become a public
company by 90% majority*

US Environmental Protection Agency to ban chemical used for
spraying apples because it s?ay cause cancer - Guardian wants to
know what MAFF is doing.

Health Ministers considering concessions over NHS White Paper
though none shifts the principle that money should follow the
patient in a market of competing public and private hospitals
(Independent )*

West midlands Regional Health Authority discloses plana to
reorganise Birmingham’s health services which involve the closure
of IS hospitals and the loss of thousands of beds (Independent i.
Mirror says the Health Authority is to spend £90,000 promoting the
change despite shortage of beds for sick children.

Four leading Oxford hospitals are likely to foe pnt forward as a
single unit for self-governing status {Times)■>

SBC makes 'final' 7% pay offer to staff who want 16% - fears of a
blackout,

You hint in Commons that British press should put its house in
order - or run the risk of being forced to.

Hostse Office ministers are being forced to rethink their opposition
to right of privacy and right of reply Bills. Tim Renton is
understood to be proposing a wide review by an independent
committee of libel and slander laws {Tiroes}.

Euro Court rules that price fixing deals between airlines are
illegal-, Today suggests fares will be cut by 20%.

Government produces a child car® charter for mothers jExpress)-

Judgment reserved for three weeks in Spycatoher hearing
£Independent)*

Douglas Hurd urges the police to recruit more Special Constables
to help fight street crime.

14% rise in number of registered drag addicts.
                              7.               12 April 1989

                         PRESS DIGEST

Your 10 Years; Joe Haines, in Mirror, continues his attempt to
rubbish them by examining the Sara Keays affair and your treatment
of Hess1tine.

Environmental pressure group, Ark, predicts greenhouse effect will
put Hull, Grimsby, Glasgow, Portsmouth and Belfast under water by
2G5Q.

UEFA readmits English football clubs for the 1990-91 season,
provided British Government supports this and subject to behaviour
of supporters at World Cup next year- Mirror says Colin Moynihan
should be working for England’s return instead of carping.

Some concern that the decision leaves Mr Moynihan in a position to
veto English clubs’ return.

16 arrested after investigation into organised violence among
Bolton soccer fans.

More speculation about Princess Anne's marriage; she gives
Equerry job as trustee of her private charity {Mirror)♦

Star says Pamella Sardes helped win Tornado contract for Saudi
Arabia.

Gorbachev invites Pope to Russia.

Barbara Bush to undergo radiactive iodine therapy for a diseased
gland.

DOCKS

              Unions split over docks strike ballot. Todd denies
his declaration that action would toe unlawful was prompted by
considerations for the electoral chances of Labour and Kinnock’s
possible discomfiture.

Times - Dockworkers’ leaders disregard Ron Todd’s advice and vote
to proceed with national strike ballot. Committee of senior
ministers formed by you to respond to any strike met at Downing
Street yesterday. British companies have been engaged in secret
talks with Irish port authorities as part of plans to overcome a
national dock strike.

PETER WALKER

Today - "Walker escapes wrath of Maggie” ~ because of Vale of
Glamorgan by-election. But he is living on borrowed time.
                               8.              12 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Express feature says he has handed you the perfect 10th
anniversary present ~ his head- The licensed court jester stopped
being funny yesterday.

Independent leader says Peter Walker is right to underline the
importance of public sector investment, but it says what is good
for the finite problems of Wales will not necessarily work for
Britain as a whole. Diverting companies to target areas is
ultimately a waste of public money.

Telegraph - Walker hopes to answer critics with a new jobs deal.
Feature suggests he has set himself on collision course with you
by saying free market forces would not clear away slag heaps.
Leader shows some sympathy with Hr Walker’s view, as they
translate it, that it is somehow blasphemous to intrude on the
operation of market forces. What is needed is not necessarily
massive spending but evidence that someone is thinking about the
overall shape of the garden.

Guardian leader wonders why a Minister with such comprehensive
objections to the drift of Government policy stays within the
ranks. He is trying to play things both ways. Resignation not
speeches would shake the Government.

Times - Thatcher anger puts talker's future in doubt.

SOCCER

Star says the maniacal minority must not be allowed to ruin
chances of English clubs returning to UEFA. This is why the
Government’s legislation must work.

Independent leader says UEFA is wrong to give the Government, in
effect, a veto over the re~admission of British clubs to European
footballv  It provides indirect authority to force through the
ill-thought out national membership scheme. Responsive government
would abandon the scheme while retaining the provision to restrict
the movement of flying hooligans.

COMMUNITY CARE

FT leader looks at the need for a policy on community care, It
calls on the Government to accept the recommendation of the
Griffiths Report and set about ensuring that local authorities
discharge their responsibilities as efficiently as possible.
Kenneth Clarke cannot ignore the issue much longer.
                                                                      ANNEX



DTI:   Mr Newton makes inward investment announcement
DTo:   Mr Channon launches Pedestrian Safety Initiatives, London: later
       addresses the Railfreight annual dinner, London

VfA    Mr MacGregor visits Wve College and Withersdone College, Kent:
       also lays formation stone for Wolfson Lecture Theatre. Ken? and
       visits Research Laboratory Plant Biotech. Kent

MOD:   Mr Younger hosts MOD 25th Anniversary Defence Council dinner.
       Lancaster House
DEM:   Mr Nicholls addresses National Council for Voluntary Organisations
       on '’Employment Training', London
DE5:   Mr Jackson visits the University of Bath
DES:   Mrs Rumbold visits schools in Cornwall LEA
DES:   Mr Butcher visits Schools in Bradford and Leeds areas
DH;    Mr Mellor meets delegations re Norwich II District General Hospital
       and the Children Bill: later addresses tne Institute ot Economic
       Affairs Health Unit luncheon. London
DH:    Mr Freeman attends the Health Computing !89 conference. Harrogate

DOE:   Mr Gu muter visits Croydon Council (community charge;

DOE:   Mr Trippier visits Sefron Borough Council Liverpool
DOE:   Mr Howard visits Anglian Water Authority, Huntingdon
DTI:   Mr Atkins addresses Mobile          Radio    Users   .Association conference.
       Oxford
DTI:   Mr Clark makes company visits in Yorkshire
HMT:   Mr Lilley addresses the Westminster Industrial Brief

HO:    Mr Hogg visits Her Majesty's Prison, Ford, Sussex
HO:    Mr Fatten addresses the Electrical Contractors            .Association lunch,
       Olympia
HO:    Lord Ferrers visits the isle of Man (to 13 April)
ODA:   Mr Fatten attends Crown Agents dinner, London
50;    Mr Forsyth holds news conference on NHS White Paper: General
       Practitioners-' Contracts. New St Andrew’s House. Edinburgh: :ater
       addresses meeting of GFs on NHS White Paper, Royal College or
       Physicians, Edinburgh
WO:    Mr Roberts addresses National Institute of Adult Education,
       Swansea: later opens Tabor Chapel Merthr TydOl and attends
       Cardiff 2000 dinner, Cardiff
                                                                                            h sm x




m tm sters   fOVERSEASYMTS)
DSS:       Lord Skelmersdale attends Council of Europe meeting m Lugano no
           [4 AOni)   .............................. ,............. ............................................
MINISTERS (PRESS INTER VIEWS).
DEM’.       Mr Nicholis interviewed by Roland Rudd of The Times on womens
           issues, London
HMT;       Mr Llliev interviewed by Italian TV on UK economy




TV AND RADIO
’T he Thatcher Decade: The First Target1’: BBC Radio 4 (16.05) repeat
"Hong Kong: The Countdown": BBC 2 {19.20} Simon Winchester looks at the
uncertainties surrounding the transition to 195)7
                                                                 13 April 1989
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS


Princess Anne visits United States (to April 16}

ECt      Internal Market Council, Luxembourg {to April 14}

DSSi Family Credit TV advertising starts


STATISTICS

DEM:         Labour market statistics:       Unemployment and vacancies (Mar-prov);
             average earnings indices (Feb prov); employment, hours, productivity
             and unit wage costs; industrial disputes
HO:          Probation statistics: England and Wales (198?)
OPCS:        Hospital in-patient enquiry: trends 1979*85

PUBLICATIONS

HMT:          Finance Bill

MMC Report on Labour Practices in TV and Film making


PARLIAMENT



Questions:        Home Office; Northern Ireland; Prime Minister

Business:         Road Traffic (Driver Licensing and Information Systems) Bill
                  (Lords); 2nd Reading, Money and Ways and Means Resolutions
                  Atomic Energy Bill (Lords): 2nd Reading and Money Resolution

AfJlimmment.Debateg:          B ritish G o v e rn m e n t   Policy   T o w ard s   N am ibia
                              (Mr P Boatey)
Select Committees:      COURT O F REFEREES

                        EMPLOYMENT
                        Subject: Legionnaires5Disease
                        Witness: Westminster City Council
Lords:       Starred Questions
             Southampton Rapid Transit Bill (HL): Second Reading
             Debate on the EEC Report on Fraud against the Community
             Footbail Spectators Bill (HL): Report (2nd Day)
                               2.              13 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main Hews

Guardian’s MARPLAN gives Conservatives 4% lead ~ 44/40/SLD 7/
SDP 6.

Peter Brooke rebukes Peter Walker over his speech saying the
economic recovery in Wales was because this Government had brought
public spending down and borrowing under firm control (Tiroes).

Express says he comes face to face with you for the first time
today - fears speech will damage by-election chances.

Mail says Tory establishment launched by-election campaign last
night with a ferocious assault on Peter Walker ~ Malcolm Rifkind
as well as Peter Brooke disowned him.

Judges get a terrible hammering in leader columns for their
threatened "strike”.

Fujitsu decision to set up in north east described by FT as "one
of the investment coups of the decade",

Government expects to be able to announce next week that Bosch has
decided to go ahead with £100million investment in South Wales
(FT).

British aerospace industry to win orders worth £2billion next week
when Irish aircraft leasing company announces Airbus deal.

Paul Foot, in Mirror, highlights alleged association between
Al-Fayed and Thatcher family, in previewing book on subject.

Lords agree to hear Lonrho appeal but warn firm it could be
in contempt.

Edward du Cann blames a woman secretary for sending special
edition of Observer to Law Lords and Mail names her.

Half ton IRA bomb in Warrenpoint kills girl shop assistant and
injures 34; warning came 9 minutes after explosion.

Express leader says Gerry Adams' feigned concern and regret over
the bombing is as unwanted as it is repulsive. He does not give a
damn about the victims.

Independent devotes a whole page detailing IRA's growing toll of
civilian deaths in its terror campaign.
                               3.               13 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Lockerbie air disaster investigators believe explosives were
unwittingly checked on to flight by American civilian used toy
terrorists (Times).

Professor Sevan Moseley, head of Government’s Institute of Food
Research, says food poisoning is out of control in Britain on
evidence of latest salmonella figures.

Employers make it clear they are not prepared to discuss abolition
of NDLS with TGWtJ; this is said to have scuppered Son Todd’s
chances of avoiding a strike. Kinnock warns Labour MPs of dangers
of supporting immediate dock strike.

But Today says dockers are rallying to Todd's efforts to avoid a
strike.

FT thinks it likely that TGWO general executive will tomorrow
reject proposals for a strike ballot.

Ronald Rudd feature in the Times looks at the legal disaster a
dock strike poses for Ron Todd saying that faced with the
triumphalism of the employers, he knows very well that unless the
union can change course quickly, it risks losing both the fight
over the docks and all the money it owns.

Brian Sedgemore MP leads MPs who are demanding a ballot of judges
before Monday’s walkout to consider Green Papers; he also
threatens judges with an injunction.

Patrick Minford, in Telegraph, says Chancellor is on course for a
soft landing,

Militant Tube workers calling second 24 hour   strike aweek today.

Mirror claims you are out to smash NACODS by refusing
responsibility for pit safety to be vested in colliery managers;
calls it putting blood back on coal.

ASU and EETPO set to merge today.

Engineering Industry union leaders considering possible industrial
action as pay and conditions talks breakdown {Times).

Select Committee on Energy attacks 8NFL for undertaking
contracts to dispose of world's nuclear waste and should
renegotiate contracts.
                               4.              13 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

HOD believes deep sea dumping is best way to dispose of
decommissioned nuclear submarines (Times)-

European Parliament votes overwhelmingly, by 309 to 5, to force
drastic cuts in permitted exhaust emissions by Europe's small cars
(Times),

Pesticide experts to examine health allegations against apple
spray next week; MAFF say public should carry on eating apples.

Guardian leader says 14 out of 15 British apples are produced
without this pesticide.

Farm incomes fell 28% last year.

Beecham and SmithKline Beckman of US agree merger aimed at
creating world's second biggest pharmaceuticals group (FT).

London to resume trading in tin from June after a break of three
and a half years (FT).

Mirror makes further allegations of overcharging by Tesco on day
its sales topped £5billion.

Sam Brittan, in FT, says economic statistics collection should
have been moved outside Whitehall altogether - contracted to the
private sector for a service fee or given to semi-independent
organisations (FT),

Paul Channon orders new investigation into way emergency services
handled King’s Cross fire because of omissions in official inquiry
report (Times 5.

Labour Party to take water and B/Telecom back into public
ownership and others under State control and regulation, according
to Brian Gould after document is leaked.

Sun feature on Kinnock says the age of the Kinnock TV personality
cult is dead, Express says he is heading for a new showdown over
omission of gas and electricity for renationalisation.

How Cardinal Hume attacks Kinnock for calling you the "immaculate
misconception"„

Thousands of trade unionists gathered in London yesterday to hear
Kinnock deliver a scathing attack on the Water Bill (T iases 5.
Today leader, attacking some of Kinnock *s remarks during rally,
says he has water on the brain.
                               5.               13 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Tories are taking the battle to the enemy by deliberately making
the controversial community charge the central point of their
campaign for the county council elections on 4 May (Times),

Tory manifesto for the council elections hails the dawning of a
golden age in local government, declaring its 10 year campaign to
transform local councils ”virtually complete ” {Independent:).

Kenneth Baker tells Select Committee that headteachers were
pressing him to require teachers to undertake unpaid training in
evenings and at weekends (Times).

Lord Joseph calls for overhaul of higher education, freeing
universities to fix their own salaries and students’ fees
(Independent).

Guardian claims one in four further education lecturers faces axe
14,000 posts could be lost over next 5 years.

Mail leader welcomes news that at last Government aims to hit
irresponsible univeristy authorities who do not assure free speech
where it hurts by losing part of their grants.

Veterinary schools at Glasgow and Cambridge reprieved (F T ).

Brighton General Hospital manager says NHS reforms will lead to
higher administrative costs and could lead to the fragmentation of
health care in the rush to compete for patients (Times).

Police arrest 2 men who gave references to Pan Am in respect of
Sun reporter who got a job as a baggage handler and exposed
alleged security weaknesses; Sun reporter also wanted and agrees
to see police today.

DTI appoints inspectors to investigate the ownership of three more
companies linked to Mr David Abell’s Suter Group; the Mersey
Docks & Harbour Company; Winchmore & Metal closures (Times).

Hundreds of home buyers left in lurch after cut price mortgage
firm in Manchester goes out of business.

Child sexual abuse referrals to MSFCC increased by 24% last year
but referrals of other abuse decreased (Times).

EC plan to ban sale of unpackaged potatoes brings wrath of some
papers dovm on it.
                                6.              13 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Spain says it wants the Madrid. European Council to tackle series
of contentious issues including abolition of frontiers, monetary
union, a declaration of social rights, and in initiative for third
world debt. The strongest counter arguments are likely to com©
from Britain {Independent).

Chancellor Kohl expected to bring forward his long awaited cabinet
reshuffle today to revive his flagging fortunes {Independent)♦

Government is likely to take more account of programme quality in
awarding TV licences than envisaged in Broadcasting White Paper.
Home Office will make recommendations to Cabinet committee chaired
by you later this month (F T ).

Duchess of York, in Yorkshire TV interview, says she is deeply
hurt by people who call her a parasite.

Robert Maxwell to make a bid for a large stake in the Jerusalem
Post {Times).

George Younger orders a new campaign to double the number of
blacks and Asians in Britain's armed forces.

Four black Commons workers claim they have been driven out by
"aggressive" and "offensive" treatment by Diane Abbott MP,

Britain’s exports to South Africa increased by 13.3% in 1988 while
sales to Nigeria fell 18.9%, according to London Chamber of
Coniraerce {F T ).

Claims that remains of Russian Czar and family murdered by
Bolsheviks at Ekaterinburg have been discovered.

Times - Warsaw Pact invite NATO to start talks without delay for
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere;   leader
says Warsaw Pact’s talks on removing short range nuclear weapons
frora Europe is a birthday present that NATO could do without.   It
has been well-wrapped to exploit the Western dilemmas, but should
be returned with a courteous letter of thanks.

Soviets offer UK an astronaut place.

Select Committee calls for more economic aid to Soviet Union to
aid reform.

Hail attacks news, on top of sale of aircraft to Libya, of Soviet
supply of 10 advanced bombers to Syria.
                               7.               13 April 1989

                          FBESS OXGEST

Barbara Sush said to be fine after thyroid gland treatment.

JUDGES

Sun says the public has the right to expect in return for great
privileges that judges display great dedication and sense of
responsibility. But to defend the lawyers’ cosy closed shop the
judges are willing to engage in a blatant act of sabotage, 'They
should be sacked.

Today - No group is more pampered and featherbedded than judges.
Yet these men who are to take industrial action are the same who
sit in judgment on trade unionists; feature headed "Squabble that
gives judges a bad name”.

Independent - Labour contrasts Government’s rush to end dock
labour scheme with ’’kid-glove" treatment of lawyers as courts face
disruption.

Express feature - As Lord Lane heads the protest:   ”Xn the dock,
judges who are now a law unto themselves”. Leader says the lurid
language and far-fetched claims of many of our most senior judges
are undermining the credibility of their arguments,   It will be a
political strike next Monday. Judges are behaving no better than
the dockers, both trying to protect privileges and restrictive
practices, At least Ron Todd has tried to restrain his members
and is giving a better example of leadership than Lord Lane.

An Independent leader says the judges are mistaken to call a
meeting when they should be presiding over their courts. But is
also urges Lord Mackay to ensure that the Bar does not vanish in
M s final proposals.

Paul Johnson feature in Mail headed "Guilty;   the judges who are a
law unto themselves".

Telegraph says that while it thinks there is a good case for the
Government to think again about some proposals, the conduct of
some lawyers and above all some senior judges has ranged from
foolish to deplorable.  It is saddening to see judges disporting
themselves in a manner we should deplore in Ron Todd.
                               8.               13 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

LABOUR PARTY POLITICS

Tiroes page 1 lead - Leaked document shows that a Labour Government
will renationalise water and B/Telecoxn but have no plans for gas
and electricity which could lead to a rift with the party’s
left-wing. 'The document adds that they would give priority to
tighten regulations of industries privatised by the Conservatives
and set up an investment bank on investment institutions and clamp
down on takeovers.

YOUR TEH YEARS

Continuing his review of the Thatcher years Brian James in the
Times finds ©states where the right to buy has produced a
generation whose streets are paved with gold.
                                                                                            AHHEX

 M I N i m M i l l K V Is rrs .   speech es     re rn


 DEM:         A ^ e n to g A w S is l/S T J n d o ^                    " " W      ”        R™ =<»

 DH:       r n t e l L « ““ ndon!he ASS0dati0n of Sritish Pharmaceutical
 HO:
             WOT«t“e fc o fe I? dS 2!St CenW,7 TmSt’ H“m£U1 R!gh“                               Seminar’
 WO:
             £ i d o I alker      addresses   Institute   ot' Chartered    Accountants dinner,

 DEM;      ^ ^ C o p e attends press launch of Export ’89 at World Trade Centre,

 DEM:      Mr Lee addresses "Invest in Tourism and                     Leisure:       North      West"
            conference, Manchester

 ° EM:     E m ploy m em T ^S n g ^           tfaining unit in G e n t r y       and speaks on

DES:       Mrs Rurnbold attends reception for Scholastic Publications Ltd, Mew
           Connaugnt Rooms, London

DH,        Mr Metlor addresses Pulse Roadshow, Manchester
DH:        Mr Freeman visits Islington Health Authority
DOE:        Lord Caithness meets delegation from British Plastics Federation Ltd
            on tne environment
DOE:        Mr Moynihan addresses Beifxy Sporting Club dinner, Birmingham, on
            sport                                                    w

D1p:       K m dontt0m5ey presents            Fleet News     Safety    awards,    Hilton        Hotel,

FC0:       MSgowhalker         addresses      Glas§ow     Industrial   Conference          on    1992,

FCO:       Mr Waldegrave addresses International Institute of Strategic Studies
           London on the future oi european security into the next decade"
ODA;       Mr Fatten attends            meeting    with    ACP   Ambassadors          to    Brussels
           London (prov)




M M m m S (OVERSEAS V K I T S )

D7I:       f tr ci ark (to
           Luxembourg  &ndiA  W* Maude attend EC Internal Market v~uu*»,u,
                           14 April)
                                                                 Council
                                                                          AUHEX




MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS

DEM:       Mr Fowler gives     national   TV   and   radio   interviews    on     Labour
           Market Statistics

FCO:        Sir Geoffrey Howe interviewed by John Eidenow, BBC World Service
           for ’The Thatcher Years’' programme; later interviewed by Gordon
           Clough, BBC Radio 4, for "The Thatcher Years”
DOE:       Mr Howard on BBC TV’s Question Time. Wales

FCO:        Mr Waldegrave interviewed by Osriti (Middle Eastern) Magazine on
           his experiences in the Gulf


TV AND RADIO

'The Sharp End”: Ch 4 {18.30) Employment issues

T-Xard News”; Ch 4 (20.00) Ray Snoddy of the Financial Times investigates the
British Press

"This Week": Thanes (20*30) on the abduct,ion of children across
international boundaries. Interview with Mr Bggar {FCO)

“Question Tirae”: BBC 1 {22.15) with Michael Howard, Joan
Ruddock, Alan Watkins and Phil Williams
                                                       14 April 1989
PRIMEHIHISTER


M&XH HVBKTS

The Queen visits the Royal Stax and Garter House, Richmond* Surrey

The Princess Royal attends the Volvo World Cap Finals, Tampa,
Florida, USA (to April 16}

Prime Minister launches Westminster Initiative for a "Cleaner, Greener
Westminster * and gives lunch in honour of Nobel Friz© Winners at
10 Downing Street- In the afternoon she receives honourary vice-
presidency of the NSPCC


STATISTICS

BSC/BISPA: Usable steel production (Mar)

CSO:        Tax and price index (Mar)
DEM:        Retail prices index (Mar)_______




PARLIAMENT

Commons
Business:        PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS
                 Control of Smoke Pollution Bill: 3rd Reading (Mr Andrew
                 Hunter)
                 Weights and Measures (Amendment) Bill: Committee Stage
                 (Mr Jerry Wiggin)
                 Sunday Trading (Reform) Bill: 2nd Reading (Mr Steven Norris)

Adjournment Debates:            Maternity services in East Lancashire
                                (Mr K Hargreaves)


Lords:      Starred Questions
            Debate on the Report of the European Communities Committee on
            Radioactive Waste Management (19th Report, 1987-88, HL Paper 99)
            Debate on the Report of the Select Committee on Science and
            Technology on R&D in Nuclear Power (2nd Report* 1988-89, HL
            paper 14)
                               2.              14 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Judges bow to pressure of public opinion and postpone their
meeting on the Green Papers until a Saturday - out of court hours
- when Lord Chancellor will address them.

Meanwhile Telegraph, Guardian and FT report Government is ready to
make major concessions - on contingency fees, certification of
advocates and multi-disciplinary practices.

Judge Pickles in Sun says most judges are infected by
conservatism, complacency and conformity.

Mail leader welcomes at last some judicial wisdom. Let us trust
we never hear such foolishness from the judges again.

Lord Mackay in the Times puts his legal reform proposals in
context.

President Bush to visit Lockerbie to thank the townspeople for
their help after the air disaster.

You snubbed Peter Walker in the House and in Cabinet yesterday
(Sim) - speculation that he is on his way out.

Peter Walker to call for a stronger regional policy in broadcast
tonight which was recorded before Christmas,

Michael Heseltine canvasses idea of English Development Agency
like SDA and WDA.

Joe Haines, ever hopeful in the Mirror, says Peter Walker
calculates that your end is in sight and has therefore thrown his
hat into the ring,

TGWJ meets today on recommendation from docks committee for a
strike ballot amid reports dockers are rallying behind Hon Todd’s
policy of negotiation first.

Employers pledge not to reintroduce casual labour,

Norman Fowler warns that unemployment could rise again unless
workers keep pay rises down. Higher interest rates feared as
earnings rise.

Today says you have let the country step back into its bad old
ways, We have blown tax cuts on foreign goods. There must be no
more tax cuts until inflation is under control.
                                 3v                14 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST


Joe Rogaly, in FT, says that at ©nd of first quarter of 1989 the
Government is not quite so cocksure as it was at the end of 1988.
But his assessment is that, although there is a burgeoning sense
that there may be something really amiss, it only adds up to a
series of local difficulties. But he warns that, as complacency
continues, you and the Chancellor sees* unwilling to listen to
arguments about those of the very poor who have become casualties
of the refocussing of State aid.

Security is no longer classed as a tax perk, it emerges in Finance
Bill (FT).

Rail unions reject 8 R 's ■final * 7% pay offer.

Law Lords rule that people who deal in shares on the basis of what
they know to be unpublished, price-sensitive information are
guilty of insider dealing (FT).

Series of new prosecutions for insider trading to go ahead as a
result of House of Lords ruling closes loophole in Company
Securities (Insider Dealing) Act (Times).

Monopolies report clears broadcasting unions of restrictive
working practices (Times). Meacher says report is one of the
sharpest humiliations for Government since it came to power.

Civil Service Commission is to radically reformed, and possibly
abolished in its present form (Times).

Threat of the £2 gallon of petrol - Shell says it needs another
lOp on the price.

Today says Government must not   fight againstEuro Parliament *s
plans to cut car exhaust pollution. Express says it is a price we
should be prepared to pay.

Road death toll in 1988 lowest   for 34 years.Britain’s drivers
are safest in SC, according to Paul Channon.

Telegraph leader says transport is becoming a major political
issue and the Government will have to pursue more positive
policies if the issue is not to become an electoral liability.
                                 4.              14 April 1989

                            PRESS DIGEST

Independent leader says the Roman remains found near Cannon Street
station are more significant and more spectacular than anticipated
and merit preservation. It calls on the Department of the
Environment to pay compensation to the property developer in the
absence of English Heritage’s ability to do so.

Johnson Matthey, the makers of catalytic converters, criticise car
makers for putting a price tag of £500 on cost of owning a "green"
car when factory price for convertor is only £50 (Times).

European Commission announces voluntary deal with Federation of
European Aerosol Manufacturers to cut back use of CFCs by 90% by
the end of 1990 (FT).

Tesco bans apples sprayed by pesticide Alar which is said to cause
cancer,

Kinnock accuses Ken Livingstone of leaking Labour policy paper on
re-nationalisation.    He defines a top earner - ie one who will
pay 50% top tax rate - as anyone earning over £40,000,

Labour to review pledge   on buying-back majority shareholding in
British Telecom and the   water industry. Kinnock also confirms
Labour?s defence policy   review will recommend retaining nuclear
weapons and bases while   they are negotiated away (Independent).

In letter to Cardinal Hume, Kinnock apologises for calling you the
”immaculate misconception".

Times leader says Kinnock in his jibes about your "immaculate
misconception” and "the assumption of the blessed Margaret” went
well beyond what is acceptable. His equivocal atteropt yesterday
to calm his critics is unlikely to succeed in doing so.

David Bailey, photographer, planning Green Party’s TV election
campaign.

Sharp decline in farming income, the result of political pressure
to reduce subsidisation of agriculture, is driving farmers into an
uneasy alliance with environmental groups as they search for ways
to stay in business (Times),

George Gale, in Mali, says English Tories should invite Scotland
to secede - we'd be a lot better without it.

Kenneth Clarke announces £50million to spend on 100 consultants
appointed to tackle waiting lists in specific specialties (Times).
                                5,              14 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

 Four hospitals in Brighton being considered as a single group for
 self-governing status {Times),

 Vice Chancellors say plans to double university tuition fees and
 separate the funding of teaching and research will lead to the
 demise of weaker universities {Times),

 Chairman of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals says
 private tuition fees are no longer a taboo subject {Independent),

Lord Chilver, chairman of Universities Funding Council, suggests
that in future Government funds might be channelled to
universities in proportion to how much each university raises from
private sources (FT)„

Further education union says extra 15,000 lecturers will he needed
by the middle of the next decade {Times).

Booming student enrolment in further education allays fears that
thousands of lecturers? posts could be lost (Independent).

Netting Hill rapist, 32, given three life sentences for his
campaign of terror. Mail says the case raises some disturbing
questions about the efficiency and competence of the police.

Star has no sympathy or regrets for deaths of two armed robbers in
Harrow at hands of the police. It takes same satisfaction in that
armed gangs can no longer feel safe waving guns in innocent
people's faces,

    reporter detained for 7 hours in cell by police investigating
his allegations of breaches of security at Heathrow.

Hon Neil, director of BBC News & Current Affairs, to become
managing director of BBC Regional Broadcasting for TV and radio
(Times).

Sun. leader calls for Tom King to be sacked and replaced by Ian
Gow.

IRA supporters scuffle with police as a Maze escaper is
extradited to Northern Ireland*

         says Government lawyers have concluded that Ryan's
chances of a fair trial on terrorist charges were seriously
prejudiced by your remarks last year.
                                               14 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Tapes which recorded all British Transport Police messages on the
night of the King's Cross fire have been wiped clean. An officer
has been reprimanded {Times)„

Man who tried to grab Princess of Wales in Northumberland says he
wasn’t trying to do her any harm,

EC agrees rules on sex and violence for satellite TV.

Delors Committee marks out route by which Community could move
towards economic and monetary union. Details are not due to be
released until Monday (FT),

Britain and West Germany have mainly borne the costs of the
billions of pounds fraud by Dutch, French, Belgian and West German
butter producers (Times),

Lord Cockfield says Britain and her EC partners are perpetuating
or conniving in multi-million pound swindles against the taxpayer
by failing to tackle EC budget fraud (Independent).

Independent leader says Chancellor Kohl’s cabinet reshuffle is a
last-ditch salvage operation. If it fails, he faces the axe. At
the national level he has been found wanting and at the European
level he is no match for you and President Mitterrand, He lacks
the requisite qualities and the cabinet reshuffle is unlikely to
make anyone think otherwise for long.

US Defence Secretary says Washington is in no hurry to update its
Lance missiles in West Germany - the clearest indication to date
that the US may be ready to accommodate the political problems of
Chancellor Kohl and delay deployment on new missiles


At least four NATO countries, West Germany, Belgium, Denmark and
Greece, eager for talks with Warsaw Pact on missile cuts (Times),

At least 6 Palestinians killed and scores more wounded after
Israeli night raid on West Bank village goes disastrously wrong
(Times),

Cecil Parkinson says in Moscow that gigantic vested interests
stand between Gorbachev and his goal of liberalising the social
and economic life of the Soviet Union (Times)„

Anthony Buck MF, Colchester North, to retire at next election.
                                  7.           14 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

PETEH WALKER

Sun ~ Thatcher snub for Walker.

Mirror - Walker will go.

Today ~ Maggie's sentence of doom for wet Walker,

Express - A Thatcher slap down for Walker the rebel.   MPs
convinced he will go in next reshuffle.

Tixaes - Peter Walker remained defiant last night after being twice
corrected by you in the Commons when you made it plain it was your
policies, not his, that were working for Wales.

Telegraph - Peter Walker hits back after frosty No 10 reception.
Issues press statement on Welsh economy.

FT - Downing Street indicates its anger at Peter Walker* going out
of its way to make clear that he had not been asked by you to
contribute to yesterday’s Cabinet discussions.

YOUR TEN YE&BS

In the final part of his series on the Thatcher decade Brian James
in the Times looks at a nation at play and observes those for whom
leisure has become a prison.
                                                                        MINHX

M m m % m £ m y i§ m j> F M £ £ m s.M £ }
DEM:      Mr Fowler addresses Society of Chief Personnel Officers conference,
          Bournemouth
DBS:     Mr Baker attends lunch for Nobel Prizewinners, London
SO:      Mr Rifidnd visits site of Woolwich Homes Development, Whitfield,
         Dundee: later attends launch of Whitfield Urban Partnership, Dundee
         and visits Ninewells Hospital, Dundee
DEM:     Mr Cope addresses        Leeds     Polytechnic’s "Business in Industry
         Exchange" conference
DEM;     Mr Lee addresses Bury Chamber of Commerce’s annual general
         meeting
DE5:     Mr Butcher visits the Loundon School and Community College,
         Coventry
DH:      Mr Meilor opens "Working for Patients" seminar, Connaught Rooms,
         London; later attends seminar for District Health Authority
         Chairmen, London
DH:      Mr Freeman visits Birmingham re Census Test, Ethnic Origins
         Questions
DOE:     Lord Caithness     addresses     Suffolk Preservation   Society on     the
         environment
DOE:     Mr Gammer visits Newham Council (community charge)
DOE;     Mr Trippier attends opening and topping out ceremony, Meadowhill,
         Sheffield; later visits Mansfield
DTI:     Mr Maude visits Deauville Advertising Association conference
DTp:     Lord Brabazort visits Swansea to see DVLC and the coastguards
MAJFF:   Mr Thompson visits Fish Fair, Glasgow
SO:      Mr Lang visits      Mitsubishi Electronics Factory, Livingston, West
         Lothia




MINISTERS (OVERSEAS VISITS)
FCO: •    Sir Geoffrey Howe attends European Community Foreign Ministers’
          Morroal Weekend, Granada (to 16 April)
                                                             AHSEX




TV AND RADIO
'The Thatcher Factor: First Lady of the Treasury”; Ch 4 (20.00) Hugo Young
asks whether there has been a Thatcher economic miracle
"Any Questions”; BBC Radio 4 (20.05) Gordon Brown, Alex Salmond Sir George
Young, Katharine Whitehom
                                                                   17 April 1989
  PRIME MINISTER


 M&XH EVENTS

 Scottish TUC annual conference, Aberdeen (to 27 April)
 Amalgamated Engineering              Union   National    Committee,   Winter Gardens,
 Eastbourne (to 26 April)
 EC; Agriculture Council, Luxembourg (to 18 April)
 EC; ECGFIN Council, Luxembourg
 Mr Cheney, US Secretary of State for Defence visits UK
 Mr Lukanov, Bulgarian Minister of Foreign Economic Relations visits UK



 CBI:       CBI/FI’ survey of distributive trades (Mar)
 C5G:       Index of output of the production industries (Feb)
 DTI:       Retail sales (Mar-prov)
DTI:____ Overseas trade statistics (Feb)       _________________________
PUBLICATIONS
DBS:        HMI Information Technology Curriculum Matters          reports
DSS:        Treasury minute on quality of service to the public in DSS offices

PARLIAMENT
Com m ons

                  Social Security; Transport; Wales
                 Dock Work Bill: 2nd Reading and Money Resolution
                 Motion relating to the Housing (Change of Landlord)
                 Regulations
                 Motions relating to the Education (National Curriculum)
                 (A tta in m e n t T arg ets and Program m es of Studv in
                 Mathematics) and (Science) Orders
Adim mmcnt Debate: The Mersey Tunnels’ Finances (Mr George Hcwarth)
                                 2.                  I? April 1989




Select Committees:    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                      Subject: National Insurance Food and Social Fund: Quality
                      of Service at local Offices of the Department of Social
                      Security
                      Witnesses: M I A Partridge,      €B, Permanent Secretary,
                      Department of Social Security, G Holland, CB, Permanent
                      Secretary, Department of Employment
lA'ttxk:   Starred Questions
           Water Bilk Second Reading______________________________________



MINISTERS       -    See Annex
                               3.                17 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Police name 24 of 94 dead; they include two teenage sisters whose
father tried to save them and a boy of 10, Host are teenagers,
Two brothers, 28 and 30, who die leave six children.

Horrific pictures on front pages of spectators crushed against
wire fence.

Main headline is "Never again”; commentators turn their venom on
the management of the game.  Opening of gates by police also comes
under spotlight.

Mali leads with "Who opened the gates?”

West Midlands police chief to conduct inquiry into the policing of
the ground.

Police complain about being attacked and kicked by fans while
trying to rescue injured.

Turnstile keeper, according to Sun, admits ticketless fans were
let in after offering bribes up to £30 a time.

MPs call for an end to cages onfootball grounds;   John Stalker,
ex-policeman, in Express, calls for an end to terraces.

Roy Hattersley HP wants perimeter fencing abolished.

John Carlisle HP wants the membership Bill postponed pending
preliminary inquiries; and David Alton MP calls for a new
national stadium to be built to house in safety the vast crowds at
the big matches {Times).

Criticism of lack of first aid facilities and stretchers.

Liverpool abandon all matches for the present.

Semi-final thought likely to be replayed elsewhere and the Cup
competition to be completed. Disagreement among press over
whether it should go ahead.

Donations to disaster funds total about Clmillion.

Times page 1 ~ Amid accusations of incompetence against the
police, rescue services and ground staff, it became clear last
night that any inquiry must look beyond Sheffield and into the
whole organisation of football as a spectator sport.
                               4.               17 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


CSX/FT survey suggests that widely~expected slowdown in consumer
spending might not be as swift as previously thought (FT).

Delors Committee calls for progress towards economic union by 1990
(.FT).

Government figures expected to show that the average employe© in
UK now produces 50% more per hour worked than the Japanese.

A radical plan is under consideration for privatising part of BR ’s
South East network, Including Waterloo, to help pay for the
£1.7billion high speed Channel tunnel rail link (Independent),

Ron Todd tells dock employers that they can avoid the possibility
of a damaging dock strike if tomorrow they begin ’’meaningful
negotiations" (Times)*

National Association of Estate Agents draws up new code of
practice; but it would not outlaw gazumping {FT).

You are being urged to demonstrate support for the environment by
stepping in with safeguards for scores of combined heat and power
projects in Britain which are threatened by privatisation * Policy
Unit is already thought to be strongly in favour of expanding CHP
{Independent)-

FT leader argues that Britain made a political mistake when it
chose to espouse lean-bum engine technology in preference to the
installation of three-way catalytic converters on all motor cars
(FT).

University academics reject a 2 year 6.5% pay offer but lift exam
boycott (Times).

Sir Hector Laing announces he is to stand down as chairman of
United Biscuits.

A report on Whitehall efficiency, due to be published within the
next few days, has cost the taxpayer nothing but could save
millions in increased efficiency.   It will give you credit for the
premium placed on efficient management in the civil service since
1979 but will warn that without another boost of Ministerial and
official priorities in a mangerial direction plus a retooling of
existing systems whole initiative could run into the sands. Key
recommendations of the report include the replacement of paper
based systems by Information technology, strategic planning and
political leadership (Independent)*
                                s.              17 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST




British Telecom denies reports that it is to increase telephone
charges by 3% from August (Times).

Government’s green policy will be put to the test when road
schemes affecting the White Cliffs of Dover and Winchester's last
open hillside are decided (Times).

Rivalry between Cecil Parkinson and Lord Young has surfaced in a
bizarre dispute over the project for the Russians to put the first
Briton into space (Times),

Trainee barristers will receive a minimum income of about £6,000 a
year throughout their initial 12 month training under proposals
agreed by the Bar’s ruling body (Times),

Head teachers call on Ministers to stop regarding them as the
enemy over education reforms (Tiroes),

Kenneth Baker is expected to announce later this week his first
refusal for a school wishing to opt out of local authority control
(Times).

Royal College of General Practitioners overwhelmingly rejects NH5
reform proposals (FT).

Kenneth Clarke coming under strong pressure from Ministerial
colleagues and senior Tory MPs to reach a swift settlement over
GP s’ contracts (Times)„

Two-thirds of Tory MPs tell pollsters that responsibility for food
should be switched from MAFF to Health (Times).

Child Poverty Action Group cosies up with new figures which, it
claims, show that the gap between poorest and rest has widened
over last 10 years.

Louis Blom Cooper urges the newspaper industry to put its own
house in order to avert growing demands for statutory controls ~
in the foreword to the Press Council’s 35th annual report
(Independent).

Government may ask Press Council to organise inquiry into media
law (FT).

Sky television sheds half its advertising sales staff (FT).
                                  6.            17 April 1989

                             PRESS DIGEST

Plain clothes policemanon surveillance duty at Birmingham
drinking club murdered;    S3 people, mostlyWest Indians, arrested.

Sir Philip de Zulueta dies, aged 64.

Foreign Secretary flies   to Washington amidNATO disarray {Mail>
over whether SNF should be modernised.

Bush administration is considering strategic nuclear arms
proposals that could delay completion of a treaty with the Soviet
Union {independent),

Spanish Ambassador to Lebanon killed as shells and rockets blast
Beirut.

Deep divisions in Hungarian Politburo revealed; Pozsgay at
meeting of 600 activists who demand more reform.

Reports that South Africans have killed 9 more SWAPO in border
clashes in Namibia.

An attempt will be made in Dublin this week to assess the
prospects for court action against Ryan. Fine Gael is to seek a
ministerial report on the Criminal Law Jurisdiction Act which
could be used to try Ryan on explosives charges (Independent).

SHEFFIELD DISASTER/COMMENT

Star page 1 lead comment says the finest and most fitting memorial
to the dead of Hillsborough is to order the immediate closure of
the terraces for ever. Surely even our ostrich-like football
directors do not need any more dead bodies to convince them that
the cramped, antiquated, lethal concrete monstrosities behind the
goals of our grounds have got to go.

Sun leader headed "Blame the game” wonders what els© the police
could do given that many might have been crushed to death outside
the ground. It accuses clubs of putting making money before fans*
safety, But sadly much of the cash spent on our ageing grounds
goes on crowd control mads necessary by hooliganism.Football    is
a great game but it is not worth dying for.

Mirror leader headed "Never, never again” says what was a cage for
hooligans became a death trap for the innocent. There was no
escape because provision for escape was inadequate. Rather than
go ahead with soccer membership card scheme. Government should
encourage clubs to move towards all seat grounds.
                               7,              17 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Today - The tragedy was at once unnecessary yet completely
inevitable* The deaths and injuries were caused by man's
negligence, carelessness and incompetence. The men who run
football in England are almost without exception self-glorifying
fools. They revel in the puffed up importance which their
positions in sport bring but show little concern for the fans, it
isn’t as if English soccer is poor when £70million has been spent
this season on transfer fees,

Express says the truth is that professional soccer in this country
is played in antiquated pigsties, many of which were built before
World War I. All seater stadia must become the norm. If clubs
can afford £lmillion plus for new strikers they can certainly
afford to contribute to making their grounds safe. Government
must help financially too,

Hail under heading "The real truth about the tragedy" says the
hell at Hillsborough was in part the unwitting result of
determination to avoid vilence - a lethal trade off between
security and safety. You must take this on board- It exposes,
though does not invalidate, the Football Bill.

Telegraph says there is a bitter sense of irony that the tragedy
should come when soccer hooliganism seems in decline. Seyond the
tragic failure of policing some other brutal terrors are apparent.
It is no longer safe or socially tolerable for football
supporters to be packed standing in huge crowds. All-seat
stadiums must become the rule. And since clubs are not the best
judges of their own affairs, they must be told what is and is not
acceptable.

Times leader looks at the great British tradition of football
saying that the British way of football has been given the
benefits of many doubts. Too many. It suggests wire fences that
could open on to the pitch or replaced by dry moats. Membership
schemes could be enforced - although if the Government were
serious about a searching inquiry into football, it would be worth
postponing the piecemeal bill currently before Parliament,
Stadiums could be fitted throughout with seats;  "Stands” could
become as much a part of the past as public executions. But, at
the bottom of it all is the structure, organisation and psychology
of the game. Reform costs money.

Richard Faulkner, deputy chairman of The Football Trust, discusses
in the Times the steps that should be taken to make football
grounds safer.
                                  8.           17 April 1983

                             PRESS DIGEST

Guardian - a tragedy, individual acts of heroism apart:, without
any redeeming feature.  It was a professional event organised by
professionals and it was the most awful, dislocated, deadly botch.
What matters now is the most fundamental investigation of safety
at football grounds. Unless there is now a mighty response to
refurbish our football grounds - and to accept that any additional
risk of hooliganism will spell nemesis for the game « it will
surely happen again.

Independent leader says suggestions are already being made about
technical improvements which British stadia need. At least as
important are the cultural improvements required from both
authorities and fans.

YOUR VISIT

Star - Solemn picture under heading "Maggie's fund for victims’’.

Sun ~ Maggie near to tears on terraces of terror. ”My grief for
families” .

Mail and Mirror ignore it.

Today front page picture of you behind the fatal fence and at
bedside of boy with injured hands.

Express picture of you emerging from the caged part of the ground
where the disaster occurred - ”We feel for you so very deeply,
Thatcher words of comfort for families left to face trauma”.

Telegraph pictures you through the fence over heading ”Cabinet
likely to demand urgent stadium safety Bill. You praise schoolboy
who told you now he helped to give mouth to mouth resuscitation
before h© collapsed himself.

Guardian ~ Prime Minister hears how boy 16, helped 8 to safety.
Picture of you inspecting the fence.

YOUR TEH YEARS

A Fabian society publication: ”AB€ of Thatcherism” attempts to
prove that the decade of your premiership shows record interest
rates, balance of payments deficit, bankruptcies, house
repossessions, increased tax burden, crime levels, hospital
waiting lists and water pollution (Independent).
                                                                              mmx.



  MINISTERS. (UK VISITS, SFEEOiES ETC)
 DES:     Mr Baker addresses the Surrey Federation of Women’s                  Institutes
          conference on "Adult Education”
 DTI:     Lord Young and Mr Clarke meet Mr Lukanov, Bulgarian Minister of
           Foreign Economic Relations; Lord Young later addresses Management
           Research Group, Institute of Directors, London
 CO:      Mr Luce addresses Business Sponsorship incentive Scheme             reception,
          London
 DEM:    Mr Cope meets representative from Danish Federation of Trade
          Unions, Mr Thorgrirason, London
 DEM;     Mr Lee opens 5til Industrious Oldham Exhibition, Oldham
 DES:    Mrs Rumboki launches Open University National Association of
          Governors and Managers introductory package for school governors,
          institute of Chartered Surveyors, London
 DES:    Mr Butcher visits Leicestershire Youth Service
, DES:   Mr Jackson addresses Newcastle Polytechnic
 DH:     Mr Mellor addresses reception for Westminster Hospital Association
         of Friends, House of Commons; later gives opening speech at
         "Housing and Health: Care In the Community" conference, St Barts,
         London
 DH:     Mr Freeman visits Pilgrim Hospital, Boston, Lines
 DOE:    Mr Trippier visits Mansfield District Council to see projects funded
          by derelict land grants
 DOE:    Mr Howard visits Thames Water Authority, Reading

DOE;     Mr Moynihan meets Robert             Hughes      MP   to discuss children’s
         playgrounds (and 18 April)
DOE:     Mrs Bottomley addresses United Biscuits strategic management
         course seminar on "unleaded petrol”; later visits Clerfcnwell
         Heritage Centre
DTI:     Mr Forth visits Leeds Task Force
MAFF:    Mr Thompson has dinner with Bulgarian Trade Minister, London




MAFF:    Mr MacGregor and Mr                Ryder   attend     Agricultural   Council,
         Luxembourg (to 19 April)
FCO:     Lord Glenarther visits European Space Agency, Paris (to 20 April)
                                                                ANNEX




MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS)

DES:       Mr Baker gives lecture on ”A Tale of Two Cities" for Granada TV,
           City of London School for Girls, Barbican
DH:        Mr Clarke interviewed by Glasgow Herald
OEM:       Mr Nicholls interviewed by Shelley Karabell of NBC News,         on
           women’s issues
DOE:       MrsBottomley Interviewed on the environment, by John Williams,
           Evening Standard and Victor Smart, Observer

TV AND RADIO
Trading Places': Thames (19,00) Paul Heiney asks whether Portugal can be
turned into a more competitive country before it meets the challenges of 1992
’World in Action': Thames (20.30) Current affairs
’Panorama": BBC1 (21.30) Joshua Rozenberg looks at the Government’s plans to
reform the legal system, as judges protest __________________________ _____
PRIME MINISTER                                         18 April 1989


MAIN EVENTS

Geranium Day for the blind:          Prime Minister buys a flag

Prime Minister opens CSCE London Information Forum, QEII Centre ?
later visits Luxembourg for 150th anniversary celebrations and
has bilaterals with Perez de Cuellar, Rhyzkov and Vranitsky

London Transport publish report on safety standards in Lambeth
and Southwark Tube stations

Statement on Toyota investment



STATISTICS

HMT/CSO: Public sector borrowing requirement (Mar)

OPCS:       Infectious diseases (March qtr 1988 prov)

OPCS:       Census newsletter number nine

OPCS:       International migrations       OK, England and Wales 1987


PUBLICATIONS

DEM/8SE; Risk of criteria for land use planning          in the vicinity
         of major industrial hazards

HAG:        Monitoring and Control of BMFL (11.003

Law Commission:     A criminal code for England and Wales

Maunsell Report on the Safety of Concrete Bridges


PARLIAMENT

Carnum

Qttg&kms;      Employment; Health; Prime Minister
Business:      10 Minute Rule Bill: Football Spectators (No 2)
               Opposition Day (7th allotted day, 1st half)
               There will be a debate on*the National Health Service on a
               Social Democratic Party Motion
               Motion to take note of EC Documents on the Single Market
                                            2-                           18 April 1989
 PARLIAMENT {Cant’d}

                                 Private investment in transnorf ?«#
                                 Fry)                  transport ffitrastructure (Mr p

                          transport

                         w 5 f e vDepartment
                         Witness.  S l c„& pendi^ re Wh!« Pap=i-
                                              ot Transport
-LfiSla;   Starred Questions
           Official Secrets Bill: Report
           AdSS                       (HL); Second R^ i" S
           m ? : M 0 t t o „ f ^ p r o Cv a l!Fm a”a a l   Conditio" «   (Scotland)   Reguiatiom

           Morion for A npm irai 'nancial        Conditions) (Scotland)      Regulations   I989:
 Guardian says Conservatives are strongly placed to hold the
 county council elections challenge.

 Foreign Secretary indicates in Washington Britain will not
 press for an immediate decision on modernisation of NATO short
 range missiles.

 Football terraces to be barred - seating only grounds planned —
 Sun says you have revolutionised soccer safety at a stroke.

Pressure on Government to drop or postpone plans for national
membership card scheme.

 Lots of pictures of Prince and Princess of Wales at Sheffield
 hospitals.

Much coverage of Supt Roger Marshall who it is said gave the
order to open gates - he is described as a broken man.

Express leads with an “exposure” of the fatal blunders and says
policemen rounded on senior officers yesterday, accusing them
of causing the tragedy.

Team of 150 police officers under West Midlands Chief Constable
to investigate policing at Hillsborough.

Speculation that Liverpool will pull out of the   Cup
competition;  Notts Forest agree to play.

Big row over remarks by UEFA president, Jacques   Georges, for
calling Liverpool fans beasts. Liverpool chief    executive calls
on him to resign.

Independent criticism of how much clubs spend on safety
compared with buying footballers.  £70million has been spent
on improvements since the 1975 Safety of Sports Grounds Act -
the same amount has been spent trading footballers this
season.

Beatles to take part in charity record to raise money for
disaster victims,

Mirror report that cages are being torn down at Derby, Spurs,
Newcastle, Liverpool, Sheffield Wed, Norwich and Wimbledon.

Times claims that a five~point plan which could have prevented
the tragedy was presented to the Fh by the London chairman of
the supporters * association two years ago but largely ignored.

Times under heading “Medical cover on the cheap” says the St
John Ambulance Brigade is to be paid £35 for attending
Saturday’s game.

Tiroes - Press Council to inquire into press use of photographs
of disaster after people flood switchboard complaining. Daily
Mirror picture was the one people mostly spoke about.

A single SC currency proposed as part of a programme to achieve
economic union produced by Delors group.
 Chancellor says UK Government cannot accept transfer of
 sovereignty implied by report.

 Times - Chancellor denounces proposal for European economic
 and monetary anion because it would in effect bring about the
 United States of Europe, which was simply not on the agenda
 for the moment.

 FT says that in Luxembourg the Chancellor makes clear that the
 OK will seek to block any proposal for an inter-governmental
 conference to amend EC treaties and to allow transfer of
 economic and monetary sovereignty. Leader argues that you
 should pick up the European monetary gauntlet, at last.

 Guardian says if we are serious about monetary union it is high
 time we showed our good intent by joining the BMS.

-Independent leader says the danger for Britain in standing
aside from EMU is that we will find ourselves on the outside
with diminished influence on the community*s economic
evolution.  The attractiveness of the goal of a common SC
currency should not be underestimated.

BP raises price of petrol by another 7.7p a gallon - nudging
£2 after fourth rise this year.

French allow Nissan cars in without restriction - a victory,
the Mail says, for other foreign companies wanting to set up in
Britain.

Bosch development in South Wales will bring nearly 3,000 jobs
to Britain.

Another 3,000 expected to flow from today's announcement of
Toyota* s decision to manufacture in the OK.

Universities refuse to raise 7% pay offer to lecturers (FT).

Vice Chancellors may seek 6.5% pay award for individual
universities where the majority of lecturers are working


Threat of 24-hour BBC strike over pay next Monday.

TV viewers much more concerned about bad language and violence
on screen than sex <Times).

Arrangements for the disposal of household and hazardous waste
are inadequate according to the pollution inspectorate
(Independent),

Scotland Yard detectives still waiting as Egyptians thwart
inquiry on Al~Fayeds {Tirnes).

Bar Council’s fighting fund to oppose reforms of legal
profession tops £lmillion in less than 12 weeks (Times).

Lord Havers says he will vote against Government for first time
if Lord Chancellor*s proposed reforms are incorporated in a
Bill.
 Hobart Alexander QC argues Law Reform will make justice motet
 expensive and less accessible to the consumer (Independentj.

 London School of Economics report says livestock killing,
 human injuries and road accidents caused by stray dogs cost
 the nation £70million a year (Times)„

 Amnesty International report claims Gibraltar inquest did not
 answer the fundamental question of whether the IRA. terrorists
 were killed deliberately rather than arrested {FT}.

Women receive more than 8 million obscene/threatening phone
calls a year according to Gallup Poll for Channel 4


Harriet Barman yesterday claimed the Government was allowing
community care for the elderly to drift into chaos
?Independent)„

GPs overwhelmingly rejected NHS proposals yesterday ~ fearing
that there are no safeguards for them to continue* to prescribe
as they see fit rather than offering siasply the cheapest
treatment (Independent).

Seven year ban on Solidarity lifted yesterday.

President Bush immediately offers one billion dollars worth of
aid.

John McCarthy begins his fourth year as a hostage in Lebanon.

Speaker of OS House of Representatives/ Democrat James Wright,
looks to have the skids under him on "ethical violations"
charges involving £100,000.

HILLSBOROUGH COMMENT

Star says there is little point in sounding off until it is
known for certain who is responsible. But people can do"
something useful ~ buy a charity record.

Brian Hitchens, Star editor in his column, attacks idea of
completing this year’s FA Cup competition and likens the greed
for money behind the decision to go ahead to "the stench of
decay wafting from under the doors of the Fh n ,

Sun asks if it is fair to make the police scapegoats. Why were
they placed in their dilemma? Because thousands of fans, many
without tickets, tried to get into the ground just before the*
kick-off either by forcing their way in or by blackmailing the
police into opening the gates. So Car we have heard not a word
of criticism of these fans in Liverpool,

Jimmy Held, in Sun, says let*s not forget the dead and injured
are the victims of the mindless hooliganism that has defiled
English football.

Mirror attempts to justify its use of horrific pictures of the
disaster as it happened.
 f<^ay says silence is the refuge of the guilty and      South
 YorJc»nire police* ^3 descent into muteness is hardly   surpris *ng
 They are unable to summon up the courage to defend      themselves!
 They allowed themselves to be used by the football      authorities
 who are ultimately responsible for the carnage,

Express leader says it i s not unfair that the South Y orkshire
police have become the main target of recriminations.    It is
vital to examine ruthlessly the way the police planned for
Saturday’s match and their actions at the time.   It welcomes
decision to go for all-seat grounds.

Mail leader says the national membership card measure should
not be scrapped.  It may well still be needed but its passage
through the Commons should be delayed until the preliminary
findings from the Hillsborough inquiry, All-seat stadiums are
fundamental to football safety.                               ~

Guardian leader says the Home Secretary pitched it sensibly
and sensitively yesterday. We have reched a point where the
surging kops ^culture of football has to be changed. Football,
with a positive Government lead/ now has to make sure fans are
cared for when alive and not merely lamented in death.

-Independent leader welcomes decision to go for all seater
stadia but says the Government are unwise to pre-empt Lord
Justice Taylor in the matter of ID cards.

FT - Parliamentary debate started in respectful silence but
ended in angry accusations over Government intransigence about
national membership scheme proposals.

Times leader says it has been a consistent supporter of
membership scheme and that it is easy to understand your
irritation and that of your colleagues, but irritation is a
poor servant of polio/. By misreading the mood of the House
the Government risks permanently reducina the memorial to the
Hillsborough dead. The game of football'is in a state of
shock. There is a chance now that the football business will,
at last, show a willingness to put its ramshackle house in
order,

YOUR TEH Y E m S

Lord Home pays an anniversary tribute to you in the Times under
the heading “Britain's Counter Revolution” . He ends by saying
Thatcherism has more to prove, but the first 10 years have not
been a bad start.
                                                                             ANNEX
  M M S M S i i lK y is rrs .   s f e e c h f s ftpn

  DBS:       Mr Baker attends the official opening of the newlv constituted
             Cdlege sites° eCnniC;    V5SUS Mi^esborough City Technology

  DOE:       Mr Ridley addresses Water Research Centre lunch, London
 DTI:        Lord Young hosts lunch for Mr Lukanov, Lancaster House- later
             addresses London Docklands Business Exhibition, London City Airport
 DTI:        Mr Newton addresses conference for launch of '’Materials Matter”
             campaign, London
 HUT:
             L ^ndon^     a£^ resses           Association of American Correspondents,

 HO:        Mr Hurd hosts dinner for delegates to London Information Forum
            conference on Security and Co-operation In Europe"; iater presents
            British Regional Press Awards, London
 WO:        Mr Walker opens new BRS Western Branch. Swansea; later visits
            Irimty College,_ Carmarthen; also opens Special Care Babv Unit
            Carmathen ana visits St Davids University College, Lampeter
 CO:        Mr Luce addresses Equal Opportunities Officers conference, Windsor
 DEM:       Mr Lee attends media launch of BTEC Travel and Tourism course in
            London
 DBS:       Mrs Rumbold visits Bishop’s Hatfield Girls’ School, Hertfordshire and
            speaks on ’Women into Work"
DH:        Mr Meilor attends Child Care/ACC/AMA conference on Provision For
           Under ( 5s, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London; later dines with
           Citizen s Action AIDS policy unit, London
DH:        Mr Freeman visits Harringay Health Authority and addresses British
           ParkSLondon°       Research Association annual symposium, Regents

DOE:       Mr Howard visits Clean Kent campaign at Brands Hatch
DOE:       Mr Moyniham meets Robert Banks MP and delegation from Norton
           Opax on ID system presentation            °              1
DOE:       Lord Caithness, Lord Hesketh and Lord Arran attend Water
           Authority Chairmans dinner; Lord Caithness later has drinks with


DOE:      Mr Chope addresses Association of District Council lunch on ’Future
          Development Plans”

DOE:      Mrs Bottomley       meets delegation from West           Midlands MPs re
          shipments of hazardous waste
                                                                    AlffiEX



DTp:       Mr Bottomley attends launch of Bike ’89 Exhibition, Hyde Park,
           London
DTp:       Lord Brabazon opens Expoship London exhibition. Barbican Centre,
            London; later attends Royal Institute of Naval Architects annual
            dinner
HMT:       Mr Lament addresses Unitary Tax Campaign annual meeting, London
MAFF:      Mr Thompson addresses North Sea Scientific Task Force, Plymouth
ODA;       Mr Patten addresses Open University, Milton Keynes
WO:        Mr Roberts attends       Enterprise   Workshops lunch, Lords Cricket
           Ground, London


MINISTERS (OVERSEAS VTSmn
MOD: Mr Younger attends Nuclear Planning Group, Brussels (to 20 April)




MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS*
DOE:       Mr Moyniham has lunch with Robin Oaklev, political editor of The
           Times                                 ' ‘


TV AND RADIO

’The Thatcher Decade: The Most Important Man'; BBC Radio 4 (19.20) In the
second of three programmes about Mrs Thatcher's ten vears in power, Nicholas
Jones examines the role of Bernard Ingham
 After Dread and Anger:        BBC Radio 4 (2030) One of six documentaries on
the State and race relations

Taking Liberties’: BBC 2 (21.50) looks at discrimination against people with
                                                                      19 April 1989
m i m MINISTER

M&IH EVENTS

Glasgow rail crash inquiry opens

Nuclear Planning Group Ministerial Meeting, Brussels (to April 20}

Paul Channon launches Pedestrian Safety Campaign

The Princess Royal visits Nottinghamshire

NPG meeting, Brussels

House of Commons Defence Committee take oral evidence on Trident
programme {AWE Aldermaston facility)

Franco-German Summit, Paris

Interview with Reader's Digest published.


STATISTICS

OFCS: Birth statistics 1987
WQ; index of production and construction for W ales (4th Q lr)________________________

PUBLICATIONS
CO: Civil Service Commission annual report (prov)____________________________
FAY
DES:      Draft of the next edition of the teachers pay and conditions
_________ document_____________________________________________________
P A R L IA M E N T

Commons
Questions:           Trade and Industry; Environment; Scotland
Business:            10 Minute Rule Bill; Leasehold Reform (Common Hold) (Mr
                      Dudley Fishburn)
                      Opposition Day (8th allotted day)
                      Deoate entitled "Investing in the Future - the Next Decade" on
                      a Social and Liberal Democratic Party Motion
                      Debate entitled "Care in the Community - the Next Decade" on
                      a Social and Liberal Democratic Party Motion
                                               2*                   19 April 1989
PARLIAMENT      (Cont'd)

             eoates:          The closure of Barnborough colliery (Mr T Patcheti)
                        ENVIRONMENT
                        Subject.- British Waterways Board
                        Witness: British Waterways Board
                        A G R IC U L T U R E
                        Subject: Land-Use and Forestry
                        Witnesses; National Farmers' Unions; Farmers' Union of
                        Wales; Country Landowners’ Association; Scottish
                        Landowners Federation
                        ENERGY
                        |u g e t ; Energy Policy implications of      the Greenhouse
                        Witnesses: Association for the Conservation of Ener«v
                        S n d for Nature"      Greenpeace, and the World Wide

                    STANDING ORDER COMMITTEE
                    Subject: London Regional Transport (No 2) Bill
                    EM PLOYM ENT
                    Subject: 'Employment for the 1990s" White Paper and the
                    work of the Department of Employment Group
                    cYj®eSn S: *       Hofl j^ rm a n ' Fowler, MP, Secretary of
                              ?cr,     A    Employment, Rt Hon John Cope," MP
                    Minister of State, Department of Employment
                    HOME .AFFAIRS
                    Subject: Expenditure and Estimates
                     Witnesses: Home Office, Lord Chancellor’s Department
                   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                   Subject: Locate in Scotland
                   X m f w * JT A* %0Xh Secretajy, Industry Department for
                   Development A ^ n c^ °       Chiaf ExeCUtive' Sro!tish
                   TRANSPORT
                   Subject; Roads for the Future
                   Witnesses: East Coast Motorway (4,15); Bank of America

                   COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE BILLS
                   unopposed

                   L        London Regional Transport (Penalty Fares) (Lords)
                  j"-      onnsh Railways (Penalty Fares) (Lords)
                  3.       Avon Light Rail Transit (Lords)
      S tarred Q uestions
      Aofance       ^       iniportance of preserving the unity of the Western

     fatak'of %                                     'ak“ g ” S!reng!hcn lhe
                               3.              19 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Boy of 14 becomes 95th Hillsborough victim.

Police allege that drunken fans picked the pockets of Hillsborough
disaster victims and kicked, punched and urinated on them during
the police operation,

Press turns venomously on football authorities for deciding to go
ahead with FA Cup competition.

Papers report signs that the Government may be weakening on
Football Bill after remarks by Lord President in the House.

Lord Justice Taylor says soccer grounds should be made safe for
start of next season.

Independent - A group of parliamentary private secretaries have
threatened to resign unless the football spectators bid is put on
ice* Meanwhile, John Wakeham hinted yesterday that debate on the
Bill may be suspended for a few weeks longer than expected.

UEFA chief apologises for "beasts" jibe.

Home Secretary being pressed within Government to order police
and licensing authorities to begin limiting number of spectators
on terraces {Times).

Government is taking action to buy off Tory opponents to
Spectators' Bill with John Wakeham guaranteeing that there would
be opportunity to inject into the Bill interim measures called for
by Lord Justice Taylor (Times).

Times claims that police chief called for delay to kick-off is
denied by Sheffield Wednesday club, FA officials and the referee.

Lawyers issue writs alleging negligence against Sheffield
Wednesday and South Yorkshire police on behalf of 9 survivors.

Liverpool City Council offers to pay for funerals of victims.

National Dock strike looms closer after talks with employers break
down after 6 hours; ballot expected to be given go ahead this
week.

All-out strike threatened on Tube after another 24 hour stoppage
tomorrowv
                                4.              19 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Coverage of Luxembourg linked with visit to Russia next year and
your talks on Lebanon.

Times - You urge Moscow to intercede with Syria to stop fighting
in Lebanon. Your intervention formed part of an intense
diplomatic effort involving many countries to bring about a
ceasefire, Leader says if anything can be done about Lebanon, it
has to be done in conjunction with other powers. The most obvious
instrument is the UN Security Council, whose members are probably
closer now than for many years. Two others are the EC and the
Arab League.

Mitterrand appeals to Britain, US, Soviet Union, Spain and several
Arab countries to join concerted effort to halt fighting in the
Lebanon- US, however, promptly rejects the idea of becoming more
actively involved {FT ).

You are to visit Soviet Union next year "to build on spirit of
glasnost”.

Telegraph has picture of you with Grand Duke and Ryzhkov.

            picture of you in Luxembourg for 150th celebrations.
The locals stayed away but leaders from the countries who signed
the Treaty of London in 1839 turned up. Also coverage of your
speech at the CSCE Information Forum - in defence of your record
on freedom of the press.

Today and Stan portray visit as your beating the Queen to Russia.

Mail:   Flag waving coup for Maggie with a second visit to Russia.

Lord Cockfield says our attitude to national sovereignty over
monetary union is the "attribute of the caveman”. To block
progress towards a Euro currency would be a ”fraud on the Treaty
of Rome".

CBI gives cautious welcome to moves towards a single Suro
currency.

Pohl welcomes Delors proposals (FT).

Times says forthright rebuff of Delors package means that once
again Britain has thrown cold water over a grand design for
European integration. Once again the stage is set for a British
veto, prolonged confrontation with Community partners and familiar
recriminations over Britain’s lack of commitment to Europe.
                               5.              19 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST



£l4b±llion debt repayment in last financial year - PSDR outturns.

John Edmonds, general secretary of GMB, says fall in number of
school leavers is a "time-bomb” ticking away at the heart of the
Government *s economic policies and presents unions with their best
chance for 10 years (Times).

CSI report to be published in June will urge industry to stop
recruiting school leavers except as part of structured education
and training programmes (Times).

West Germans’ success in winning round NATO to their position on
modernisation of short-range nuclear missiles mean that Britain’s
hardline stance has to some extent been eroded (Tiaies).

Lonrho to answer contempt charges at special Lords hearing on May
15,

Britain will face prosecution in the European Court if it fails to
produce within two months a more rapid programme to taring water
quality up to EC standards (Times),

Objections from EC may force Water Bill amendment. Ministers
consider changes to a key clause which, as it stands, would give
the Government authority to grant privatised water companies
exemption from prosecution for failing to meet EC water purity
standards (FT)„

Labour promises a £12billion crash programme to clean up water
when it comes to power (Times),

British Aerospace and Rolls-Royce win £754million share of
£9bilIion order for 300 jets announced by Irish leasing company.

British Airways launching a bid for a substantial slice of Sabena,
Belgian airline in trouble.

Toyota announce £?00million investment in car plant in Derby.

independent leader says the decision by Toyota to build a
£700snillion car plant is extremely encouraging. The investment
has not been won by offering bribes - no subsidy is being paid.
Nor is Toyota’s decision unexpected. Such investments are the
free market’s equivalent of regional policy, in some ways the
most heartening aspect of Toyota's decision is the confidence it
reflects in the ability of British workers.
                               6.               19 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


FT says Toyota delays decision about location of related enginge
plant. Feature asserts that the investment signals the start in
earnest of the battle for domination of the European car market in
the 1990s and highlights the vacuum in policy-making in the EC.

Guardian says to the extent that indigenous UK car firms don't
seem much good at making cars the arrival of the Japanese should
perhaps be doubly welcome.

Italy refuses to lift curb on UK-built Nissan cars (FT).

Mail backs consumer council in querying why some foreign cars cost
half as much again in Britain as in USA; it also welcomes efforts
of OFT to raise £50 cheque guarantee limited on plastic cards.

Gas explosion rocks Cormorant Alpha platform;   150 evacuated.

Allegations that fire inspectors found death traps in 10 Tube
stations a year after King’s Cross disaster.

CEGB plans nuclear reactor on Anglesey {Independent)♦

You give what is described as a "final warning” to press at
opening of London Information Forum.

You hit out at ’distortion’ of media and intrusion into private
lies of friends of politicians - in both Header’s Digest article
and London Information Forum speech (FT).

BBC staff vote to stage s series of strikes over pay rises
starting on Monday after 7% ’final* offer. Star, recording some
of the programmes we shall miss, asks "Who said all strikes were
bad?".

Stan salutes public spirit of two BBC journalists in giving
evidence at mob murder trial in Northern Ireland notwithstanding
threats to their lives.

Big pay increases for Central and TV-AM executives to stop them
joining satellite TV.

MPs believe Government Whips are acting to ensure the Eight of
Reply Bill will be defeated on Friday {Independent}.

OS Congressional inquiry has revealed that large numbers of
American diplomats cancelled their seats on Pan Am flights in the
week before Lockerbie (Independent).
                                 7.              19 April 1989

                            PRESS DIGEST

Adrian Khashoggi arrested in Switzerland on racketeering charges.

Keith Best has won his appeal not to be disbarred by the Bar
Counc11 {Independent).

Labour’s soft left pressing Kinnock to accept compromise over
nuclear defence aimed at avoiding damaging split when policy is
unveiled next month (Times).

Chris Patten, in a Tory Reform Group lecture, says
Conservatives must establish firmly in the minds of the electorate
that their economic and social policies help everyone if the party
is to stay in power,

Where is the missing Cabinet in the Vale of Glamorgan by election?
Only Peter Walker is booked to appear in the constituency this
week (independent}.

Your Header’s Digest interview, published at last, used by a
number of papers - along the lines that you are planning to stay
in office until you find a "young pretender" to take over.

Express   says you are preparing to axe "dead wood” from your
Cabinet   - including Foreign Secretary, Welsh Secretary, Paul
Channon   and Lord President. Tipped for promotion are Chris
Patten,   Michael Howard and Michael Portillo.

Mali says you warned the Cabinet old guard they must make way for
young Turks.

Times carries extracts from your Reader’s Digest interview about
press intrusion into private lives and that you will use summer
reshuffle to promote some of the younger loyalist backbenchers to
Ministers.

You hint, in Reader’s Digest interview, that you might yet vie for
Lord Liverpool *s record of 15 years as Prime Minister


Peter Jenkins discusses the reopening of the Westland affair by
the Defence Committee {Independent).

HILLSBOROUGH

Star says the truth about the disaster comes down to money. If
the stadium had been all-seater 95 tragic deaths could have been
avoided. The cost: €495,000. Sheffield Wednesday paid £550,000
for one player.
                                8.              19 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST


Sun says   football should be ashamed today for their indecent
haste in   deciding to go ahead with FA Cup competition.

Mirror says the FA and Football League ought to have declared a
week’s mourning for soccer, postponed all fixtures, extended the
season if necessary and cancelled the Cup Final. For what they
have done to football, Millichip, Kelly and council should resign.

Today says that to call the people who run English soccer
insensitive, as Liverpool did yesterday, is a remarkably
restrained use of language. They are crass, brutal, vain
buffoons-  If they had had any intelligence or feeling they would
not have begun to talk about soccer yet. In fact they would have
resigned. But if they were like that Hillsborough would not have
happened.

Express, under heading "The fans are not blameless” asks have we
become to wearily used to loutish lack of self-discipline that we
can no longer recognise it for what it is? Why were fans late in
turning up. Could it have anything to do with tanking up before
the kick off? It is not for those who turned up without tickets
in the confident expectation of being able to trick or force their
way into the ground to lay the blame for the carnage at the feet
of others.

Telegraph leader says it must now be abundantly clear to all but
the politically entrenched that after Hillsborough the
Government’s controversial. Football Spectators’ Bill should be
suspended - the sooner the better for the Government.

EC

Sun says Britain joined the SC solely as a trading partnership.
The country has no desire to bury her identity in some
supra-national state. Yet this is precisely what the Eurocrats
are trying to create.

YOUR TEH YEARS

David Owen, in the Times, looks at “The Thatcher Decade” saying
love her or loathe her, you evoke many of the same deep feelings
that Churchill, Lloyd George and Attlee all aroused in their time.
What you fail to understand is that conviction, compromise and
concensus are characterisitcs that allowed Lloyd George, Churchill
and Attlee to serve in coalition governments and contribution to
their being great Prime Ministers.
                                                                  A H IS E X




 MINISTERS (UK VISITS. SPEECHES ETC)

 DEM:    Mr Fowler and Mr Nicholls (prov) address "Look after vour hear”
         campaign workplace conference, Roval College of 'Phvsicians
         London

 DEN,    Mr Parkinson addresses Kleinwort Benson’s International Fund
         Managers conference; later addresses Grand Emanuel dinner for Lord
         Major, Mansion House, London
DTI:     Lord Young meets Dr Bangemann, EC Single Market Commissioner
         and, later, the Prime Minister of Thailand
D Fp:   Mr Channon launches new pedestrian safety measures, London
HO;     Mr Hurd addresses Parliamentary Press Gallery lunch, London
DEM;    Mr Cope     launches   BISON     computerised    information    exchange
         London
DEN:    Baroness Hooper opens Ehury Bridge Substation
DES;     Mr Jackson addresses IPCS Science Group conference, Westminster
DH:      Mr Mellor gives closing address at "Look after your heart" campaign
         workplace conference, Royal College of Physicians, London
DOE,     Mr Howard addresses National Association         Rural Trust          planning
         seminar,7Covemrv
                        j
                                                                                      *
DOE;    Mr Gummer visits the Isle of Wight and meets local councils re
        Community Charge
DGE,    Lord Caithness has working lunch with East Midlands Electricitv on
        environmental standards on power generation
DOE:    Mr Moynihan visits Severn Trent Water Authority and                      West
        Midlands Regional Council for Sport and Recreation, Stoke on Trent
DOE,    Mr Trippier and Lord Hesketh visit Docklands and open various
        regeneration projects; Lord Hesketh later meets Inland Waterway
        Advisory Council

DOE:    Mrs Botcomley addresses Refrigeration Industry representatives, with
        F^ter Thurnham MP; later visits Plymouth and addresses North Sea
        Task Force on marine environment
DOE:    Mr Chope visits Dartford and meets Consultative Committee on the
        Channel Tunnel
                                                                      Ampx




 MTNISTF.RS (1 TTC


 DSS:
             Unit Ske!rnersdaie visits Newbury ILO and Newbury Resettlement

 DTI;       Mr Maude presents Innovation for Business Awards, Industrial
            Society, Loncon; later opens Smaller Companies Exhibition with
            Shearson Lehman Hutton, London
HO:
            Northantfg           WeUin§borou^h      YounS Offenders    Institution,

MAFF:       Mr Thompson visits Animal Health Trust, Newmarket
MAFF:
            F o n f e r S e i S S S 0"   addreSMS                Fertilisers   joint
MOD:        Mr Neubert visits RAF Upper Heyford
WO:         Mr Roberts opens new Ffiim Cymru offices, Cardiff


TV AND RADIO

The Thatcher Decade: The Most Important Man5: BBC Radio 4 (16.05) repe at
’Dispatches’: Ch 4 (20.30)
                                                                  20 April 1989
prims:minister



MAIN EVENTS


The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh visit West; Glamorgan and Mid
Glamorgan accompanied by Mr Walker

24 hour tube strike

HO:      Archbishop Desmond Tuto visits HMP Winson Green, Birmingham

Grant Maintained School ballot announcement of Bishopshalt
School, Uxbridge


STA TISTIC S

BOE:            Institutional investment (3rd Qtr)
8GE:            Provisional estimate of monetary aggregates (Mar)
CLSB:           London and Scottish banks monthly statement (Mar)
DTI:            Vehicle production (Mar)
HO:             Fire statistics {1987)
OPCS:           Hospital in-patient enquiry trends (1979-85)______________
PUB LiC ATTO N 5S

Law Commission: Compensation for tenants’ improvements________ ____ _________
PARLIAMENT


-Q.y.gSjjga§:         Northern     Ireland;   Agriculture,   Fisheries   and   Food;   Prime
                      Minister
B,U§ingS£;            There will be a debate on Private Bill Procedure on a Motion
                      for the Adjournment, Hie Report of the Joint Committee on
                      Private Bill Procedure (HC 625) will be relevant to the debate.
AdfoMmmeot; Debates:               The case for drawing up comprehensive rules of
                                   procedure for the General Commissioners of Income
                                   Tax (Mr M Marshal!)
.Select Committees:         COURT OF REFEREES
Lords:          Starred Questions
                Security Service Bill; Report
                Companies Bill: Report (4th day)
                Antarctic Minerals Bill (HL): Second Reading
                                 2,            20 April 1989

                            PRESS DIGEST

Main News

You face a full-scale revolt over Football Spectators Bill -
Cabinet to consider today.

You are understood to have accepted the case for a longer
postponement for the Football Spectators Bill after being warned
it could be defeated in Commons if brought forward now. Ministers
who met last night to consider Bill’s prospects in view of
backbench feeling decided that there must be a response to the
call for it to be delayed until Taylor reports (Times).

Reports that five of the 95 dead may have died outside the ground.

Police in South Yorkshire and on Merseyside fall out over
allegations of bad behaviour by Liverpool fans at Hillsborough
during and after the disaster; Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
orders silence. Home Secretary tells them to stop it.

Meanwhile Sun persists in its allegations and leads with story of
publican who had his premises vandalised and plundered after he
had given them help.

Times: picture of excessive drinking before match in Sheffield is
emerging and police may need force of 150 for inquiry team.

Other publicans report how fans drank them dry on Saturday and
emptied four supermarkets of beer.

FT leader calls on Government to bury its pride and withdraw the
Football Bill.  It goes on to argue that the problems which plague
British football are unlikely to be cured by artificial devices
such as Identity cards.

Guardian leads with "Thatcher to insist on ID timetable”.

FA give permission for all clubs to postpone next Saturday*s
matches out of respect for Hillsborough dead if they wish to do
so*

Sim says Labour canvassers believe Conservatives are set to hold
Vale of Glamorgan.

            says Labour are 13-8 on to win.
                                3.             20 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


France and West Germany agree to give general political suport to
the Delors report. Sam Brittan attacks the report as an unholy
mixture of central bankers’ and central planners’ Ideas; and
argues in favour of Britain’s joining the full EMS as a means of
influencing future developments towards monetary union (FT),

47 die as gun turret on US battleship Iowa blows up;     45 injured.

Guardian says the first rule of war Is not to throw the infantry
into an unwinnable battle.

UK oil production out again by oil platform explosion;     price
pushed up to 21.45 dollars.

Explosion in Brent pipeline shuts down 25% of oil production.

Times - Tony Worthington’s Right of Reply Sill likely to be
rejected; leader says the Bill should be talked out as its very
simplicity renders it a minefield. Scrutiny of the media is
healthy but the proposed remedy is open to manipulation, including
political manipulation, of the most perilous kind.

Andreas Whittam Smith says the Right of Reply Bill has already
acted as a spur; it Is not needed as a curb - national newspapers
know what they must do and they must get on with it (Independent).

Port employers reject ACAS offer of help in dispute over abolition
of National Dock Labour Scheme - they say it would be
inappropriate. Express says port employers are right to reject
the preferred ACAS intervention.

Jimmy Knapp, NUR, tells Scottish TUC that railway workers might
strike in support of dockers„

Dockers leaders meet today and are expected to urge the TGWU to
call a national strike ballot (FT),

London hit again today by Tube strike in support of £64 a week
rise,

Threat of a strike each week.

Telegraph page feature on Britain's crumbling railways.

BBC reject call by broadcasting unions to try to avert pay strike
planned for Monday.
                                    4.                20 April 1989

                              PRESS DIGEST

 Government plans to change special pay machinery guaranteeing
 firemen large wage increases could lead to strike (Times).

 Vauxhall returns record profits of £151.9million - seven times
 better than 1987. They are to be the first to fit c a l a l y t i c
 converters in UK.

 Sun asks why Toyota are coming to Derby: because the hand of the
 Rising Sun recognises rising opportunity.  "Yet when Socialists
 were in power”, it adds, ”the Nips would rather have committed
 hari kari than take their chances here”.

EC says GEC/Siemens bid for Plessey can go ahead;          DTI yet to
pronounce.

Claims that plans to plough back some of proceeds of water
privatisation into water and environmental improvements are being
blocked by Treasury.

Times leader says privatisation plan is much unloved and
flotation threatens to become a political millstone and a flop in
the City. Using the proceeds of the sale for anti-pollution
purposes might help to convince a deeply sceptical public that
water privatisation will be, as Mr Ridley claims, good for the
workers, good for the consumers and good for the environment. it
would also keep the Government out of court.

Government has banned release of detailed data about compliance of
drinking water with quality standards set by EC for fear that
information might deter potential investors in run up to
privatisation {Times)»

Six local authorites are preparing to challenge in the High Court
the Government’s right to sell off assets transferred from the
councils to the regional Water Authorities (I n d e p e n d e n t ) .

MAFF and DOE attack EC plan to curb the use of nitrates by farmers
in a joint memorandum to the Lords Committee on European
legislation (FT).

Banks agree to double or even quintuple cheque guarantee limits
for plastic cards, but customers will have to apply for new cards.

MMC to investigate Black & Decker on charge of restricting DIY
competition.

D’Tl is preparing to push through sweeping recommendations to the
MMC report on the brewing industry this summer (I n d e p e n d e n t ) .
                               5.              20 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Decision on a preferred bidder for Girobank expected in the next
few days. Front runners appear to be Alliance & Leicester and
Co-op bank (FT).

Plans to build a refuse burning power station in Lewisham which
would heat hundreds of homes are going ahead (Independent).

Law Lords defer judgment on Lonrho's appeal. They usually take
four to six weeks to prepare their judgements. The parties return
to the Lords today to discuss the scope of the special hearing
on May 15 to consider whether Lonrho was in contempt (FT),

Confusion over whether it is likely that Select Committee will
reopen Westland affair - Mirror says it will. Times says Commons
Defence Select Committee to write to Leon Brittan asking him
whether he stands by his assertion that he had Downing Street's
express approval to leak Westland's letter; Telegraph says
Committee took its first step yesterday to reopening the
Committee.

Sir Leon Brittan has been asked b y the Commons Defence Select
Committee to explain his recent statement that 10 Downing Street
gave "express approval" for the Westland leak (Independent). MPs
will decide whether to reopen the inquiry after studying Sir
Leon *s response.

Tobacco companies still receive more than one reference very 3
minutes during sports events they sponsor on television and Sir
Peter Lazarus, Chairman of the committee for Monitoring Agreements
on Tobacco Advertising and Sponsorship, has called for them to be
renegotiated (Independent).

Kenneth Clarke poised to make major concessions over GPs’
contracts, according to Express, in effort to salvage NHS
reforms.

Kenneth Clarke writes to GPs complaining that leaflet issued by
BMA opposing NHS reforms is inaccurate and misleading (Times).

University lecturers may face pay cuts if industrial action
continues ~ and the Government refuse to pay more than £67mlllion
due as the third part of an earlier pay deal (Independent).

3 more hospitals have emerged as possible candidates to become
self-governing hosptials {Independent),
                                   6,          20 April 1989

                              PRESS DIGEST

John Butcher attacks Left-wing Labour authorities which relegate
academic excellence and ban competitive sport in schools.

Campaign led by Ministers and senior Conservatives to force
student unions to open their closed shop has been dealt a powerful
blow by a confidential Government survey obtained by Times which
shows that most student unions spend less than 0.5% of income on
politics.

Nearly a quarter of babies now being bora are illegitimate.

Investigating Committee of Solicitors Complaints Bureau recommend
an overhaul of the system of dealing with complaints against
solicitors (Times}.

Government to fill gap left by West German reluctance over SNF
modernisation (Express).

Britain is planning to take the lead in deploying new air-launched
short range nuclear weapons. New F-I1I and F-15E bombers will be
based at Upper Heyford and Lakenheath and additional missiles
fitted to Tornados at other bases (Independent).

NATO defence Ministers, including George Younger, move closer to
taking more US nuclear bombers with lion’s share almost certainly
coming to Britain (Times).

US aims to station extra F~llls at Uper Heyford if NATO decides to
back deployment of more nuclear-capable aircraft in Europpe (FT).

Telegraph says Army is so short of men that number of rifle
companies in some infantry battalions is being cut.

Express says Lord Cockfield, "a Euro raver", is no longer, out of
office, the menace he once was, But he’s every bit as silly. He
undermines his own case, like the judges, with the wildness of his
language and absurdity of his arguments.

Express feature reports Sir Leon Brittan as not intending to
perform a balancing act between British and EC views but to stand
up for what he believes. It suggests he wants to try to jolly you
out of your ”worst Euro excesses” by holding out the prospect of
an EC that commits itself to Thatcherims,

EC reported as promising not to undermine our efforts to remain
free of rabies.

Daphne du Maurier dies, 82.
                               7.               20 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Mail says Charles Powell is -to leave your office at Christmas;
centre page spread on your search for new Cabinet talent.

Third day of anti-government rallies in Peking in support of
democracy.

Hail says workers are pouring into Peking to swell the demos.

Express reports 44.5% of West Germans see Hitler as a "great
statesman”; 62.5% think World War II was forced on Hitler.

Lech Walesa expected to receive hero's welcome at Vatican today.

Renewed calls for Britain to change nationality laws and let Hong
Kong people live here dominated first public hearing by Select
Committee (Times},

The Hungarian government, admitting its step by step economic
reforms have failed, is to try Thatcherism instead {Independent),

Tariq Ali joint author of new play which attacks Islamic
fundamentalism.

HILLSBOROUGH COMMENT

Star says police allegations against Liverpool fans have hallmarks
of panic reaction. Now police must produce evidence.

Sun, in defiant leader headed "The truth hurts", reiterates that
many Liverpool fans who stormed the ground had been drinking and
other allegations of violence and thieving. It says it did not
invent this - the facts came front the police, an MP, local
publicans and taxi drivers. Hopefully, telling the world what
happened will mean that something is done to prevent it happening
again.

Mirror attacks anonymous South Yorkshire policemen who have
"smeared the dead of Hillsborough and those who mourn for them".
They have attempted to fit up the fane for the tragedy in order to
deflect blame from themselves - a despicable act.

Today - The descent into petty squabbling and mud slinging over
the disaster is a scandal.  It does not doubt that some fans were
drunk and ill-behaved but that does not mean the fans were to
blame any more than that the police caused it. The time for the
police to defend themselves is at the inquiry.
                               a.               20 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Mail leader headed "The police cannot have it both ways'* says
after dignity and sombre restraint comes backbiting.    But South
Yorkshire police cannot in advance of giving their formal
testimony both refuse to discuss their own controversial actions
and damn the conduct of Liverpool fans.

Guardian says the point Sheffield policemen are trying tomake is
a serious one wrapped in foolishly combative language; the
tragedy has many stands but the central one was the milling throng
in too small a space outside the ground. Lord Taylor must portray
the problem whole.

ftHTI DRUGS TRAILS

Mail - Maggie tells how to beat drug danger.

Telegraph story with splendid picture.

YOUR TEN YE&RS

Hoy Jenkins in the Times "The Thatcher Decade” series, compares
you with previous Prime Minsiters, saying you best resembleLloyd
George, but much of the time you are most like Neville
Chamberlain. You have been lucky with your opponents at home. So
you have survived, never with a great surge of popular votes, but
with great cohorts behind you in the Commons. How far you have
been right as well as self-righteous will take longer to decide.
                                                                        &mmx
             I.(UK VISITS. SPEFrHFS P T C )
  DES;      Mr Baker addresses the Young Enterprise AGM at the Cenr*H H-iU
            of the Institute ot Chartered Accountants of England and Wales
  DOE:
            j^ndondley aHeflds British Chemical           Industry Association's   lunch.

  DSS;      Mr Moore meets with Gingerbread, London
  DTI;      Mr Newton launches Warren Spring Laboratory as Next Steps Agency-
  MAFF:    All Ministers attend launch of ’’Loaves and Fishes", MAFF centenary
           history exhibition, London                                  me -

           Mr Lee visits Bradford (tourism) and attends ISC05 1st anniversary
           bookletB-acForcl    f iaunches Regional Tourist Board strategy

 DEM;      Mr Nichoils attends Clothing and Allied Products Industry Training
           Board meeting m Leeds and tours centre                  "        ~
 DES:
           LondontCher attends Spring Clean Britain Day at Liiiia Baylis school,

 DES:      ^   ,Rum°oW addresses West Northants National Association of Head
           leachers, Kangsthorpe Grove Lower School. Northants
 DH:       Mr Meilor attends General Practitioners Roadshow, Bristol
 DH:      Mr Freeman visits OPCS, London
 DOE:     Mr Gummer addresses Pacemakers Luncheon Club on streamlining
          local government                                            -
. DOE:
          PSA^uiidfnp5^5            and Salford for unveiling ceremonies for two

DOE:
          receptio^findon attem5s Assoc^ on          of     Metropolitan Authorities

DOE:      Mr Trippier addresses Institute of Civil Engineers 1992             Buildin®
          Technology conference, London               v                              =
DOE:
                 F v n S f ? T eni* ¥ e r0t Dogs SaiIin§ Centre; !ater       addresses
          ^lju2a Express London Hockey League 20th anniversary supper
DOE:      Lord Hesketh visits Gloucester Docks with British Waterways Board
DTI;      Mr Forth visits North Peckham Task Force
MAFF:     Baroness Trumpington addresses North Stucken presentation lunch on
          “Horticulture” London; later meets Thai Deputy Prime Minister, Mr
          Sarasin
GAL;      Mr Luce addresses Museums Collections Policy Seminar, imperial War
          Museum, Oxford, Cambridgeshire; later addresses reopening of Lower
          Marley Gallery, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge
                                                                                     A8NEX


 MINISTERS (OVERSEAS VISITS*

 FCO;            Mr Eggar visits Bermuda and Mexico (to 30 April)

 MmmmsjmEss i n t e r v i e w                s

 DTp:          Mr Channon appears on Sky Television ’Target” Programme (530pm)
 DOE:          Lord Caithness has lunch with David Westell, Daily Telegraph
 HO.           Mr Renton interviewed by West German Television re Broadcasting


TV AND RAPID

e S p i o y m S is S e s '   ^    4 (1 8 3 0 ) l0 ° t e at ,h e   chai« e s in !he   workplace and


howd S ' S'areh                     J S T f 4- S"°ddy ?f 1 ?           Fina"cial Tfa»
Readers get the chaace^o complain                0065   sensa!,onal« d     %         British   press,


fo fr!fo ™ \f’,!e ^ lc ia ™ C * * “* 4 (2°m               t o t a » Roz“ berg e a a i * . the case

'This Week’: Thames (20.30)

Nature : BBC 2 (2030) Is Britain becoming a nation of ^urba^e                         collectors for
other countries' dangerous rubbish?                   ~                               col,ector:s t0i

™ T on!lZ me’: BBC               1 (22'00> With ,o h n Pat!en’ Kei*            V“ - Sasan Thomas
                                                                             21    A p ril   1989
PRIME MINISTER


MAIM EVENTS


The Queen attends the Tercentenary Parade of the Royal Welsh
Fusiliers at Fowls Castle, Powys

ECi      Trade Ministers seminar, Madrid (to April               22)

International Press Institute Seminar on Press Freedom

Launch of DOE Environment Awareness Week


STATISTICS
CSO: Cyclical indicators for the UK economy (Mar)
CSO: Preliminary estimate of consumers expenditure (1st qtr prov)


PUBLICATIONS
DES:        HMI report on the education of physically disabled pupils

PA RLIAM EN T

Commons
Business:        PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS
                 Right of Reply Bill: Remaining Stages. (Mr Tony Worthington)
                 International Parliamentary Organisations* (Registration)              Bill:
                 Committee Stage, (Mr Michael Marshall)
                 Lotteries Bill: 2nd Reading (Mr Roger King)
Adjournment Debates:         The proposed closure           of   Fullerton        Hospital,
                             Doncaster (Mr M Redmans)
Lords:      Starred Questions
            Debate on the Report of the Select Committee on Science and
            Technology on Agricultural and Food Research (1st Report, 1988-89,
            HL Paper 13 and 4th Report. 1987-88, HL Paper 104)__________________
                                2,               21 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Fears of a further rise in interest rates after West Germany
increases its rates;  a surge in bank lending; and lost oil
production. Shares lose £6billion in an hour.

Mirror expects a rise of interest rates today.

Exports of British made cars soars by 21% in 6 months to March
{Times).

F T ’s Lex column says yesterday’s bombshell from the Bundesbank has
quite properly destroyed any bullish notion of lower interest
rates but has created an equally dubious expectation that rates
everywhere else will have to rise at once (FT).

Pops treat decision to go ahead with membership card scheme with
tactical delay in remarkably low key, probably because it seems to
have taken the heat out of Tory opposition.

Mail leads with "Soccer card rebels cave in" - a spectacular
display of nimble footwork,

Tory MP denounced Kinnock's performance as "stupidity of an
enormous magnitude.

Colin Welch, in Mail, says Kinnock was unusually rude to you and
did himself no good and you no harm.

Guardian of course portrays it as a retreat.

Kinnock says you are in the position of *a Martian trying to
understand cricket” .

Two girls apparently portrayed on front pages as being squashed to
death against fence found to be alive.

Letter from a survivor of Hillsborough, who disputes police claims
of violence against them, carried on front page ofIndependent.

Liverpool and Everton to pull down safety fences before next home
fixtures?   Liverpool to replace them with safety corridor at front
of terrace.

David Alton says police officer who smeared Liverpool supporters
should be named (Times}.
                               3.              21 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Threats of or actual or threatened industrial unrest on Tube, in
docks and among railwayman, engineers and powerworkers brought
together in one story.

Dockers to be balloted on strike action over abolition of National
Dock Labour Scheme. Employers' leader says the decision is
clearly political. Press think strike inevitable.

Port employers are considering legal proceedings to halt a ballot
on a national strike.

Independent leader says the negligible worry which was caused
yesterday by the dock leaders decision to hold a strike ballot is
a sign of the times. The position of dockers is weak, Nobody
thinks that by holding a strike they can force the Government to
preserve the scheme.

Secret hard core of union activists - The Shepherd’s Pie Group -
said to be behind unofficial strikes on Tube.

Tube strike blamed on faceless intimidators {Times).

Professor at Birmingham Polytechnic claims he and his family were
threatened by other lecturers trying to prevent him accepting new
job because they did not like contract he had been offered
(Times).

Leon Brittan reported as accusing you of narrow mindedness and
creating problems in Europe where none existed over frontier
controls.

Britain dangerously isolated as EC welcomes monetary union
(Times}.

Joe Hogaly, in FT, examines the opportunities for Labour of
espousing a European policy to speak to the modem-minded and the
young,

European Commission is to consider proposals for 2 new community
agencies in which would be vested powers to police the food and
drugs industry and to monitor the protection of the environment
(Independent}.
                               4,              21 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

US Defence Secretary says he hopes by 1991-1992 NATO will be ready
to decide on successor to Lance missile, Times leader says NATO
should try to ensure that "this year, next year, sometime" does
not become "never”. By playing host to more nuclear-armed allied
aircraft, Britain might at least remove one of Bonn’s objections -
that West Germany now has more than its fair share.

Unity as NATO WPG meeting ends with US saying there is enough
consensus to press ahead with developing new nuclear weapons
{Independent).

Express and Hail wax eloquent against the Right of Reply Sill
which is exected to be killed today.   Telegraph says it would be
foolish to assume that the threat of legal restriction on the
press is at an end, even though Downing Street apears content to
do business with the very newspapers which most offend public
taste.

Government is unlikely to be ready to announce inquiry into media
law today during report stage of Right of Reply Sill (FT).

Tiny Rowland may be called before law lords to explain his
company's conduct in Harrods affair (Times).

PSA staff sent details of radical reorganisation which is clear
prelude to privatisation (Times).

Farmers paid to end milk output may get production quotas
following EC decision (Times),

Alliance & Leicester given go ahead for bid of £130million for
Girobank.

Channel Tunnel may lose £4b±Ilian in first full year, according to
Centre for Economic Policy Research (FT).

Government leaders in Lords embarrassed and angry when Companies
Sill debate was brought to premature end because 30 peers could
not be mustered for a vote (FT).

Spitting Image makers win Queen's Export award - one of 156.

Today hails as triumph for home buyers Lords judgement that they
can sue building society surveyors who miss major faults in house
checks.

Home buyers face increased charges for property valuations as a
result {Times),
                                  5.                21 April 1989

                             PRESS DIGEST


 Law Society report says racial discrimination in the legal
 profession must be tackled if more lawyers from ethnic minorities
 are to be attracted (Times).

 All party committee of MPs back Government’s determination to
 introduce local pay flexibility throughout health service (Times).

 Flexible pay may increase the health service wage bill - commons
 Social Services Committee warned yesterday (I n d e p e n d e n t ) .

FT leader on NHS review warns that fragmentation of health service
and direct competition between hospitals may not raise quality and
reduce costs. It argues the US, with the most competitive system,
has by far the highest costs: it spends around 12% on GDP on
health care compared with 8-9% in Europe,

Sale of human organs to be outlawed.

John Gummer attacked by Age Concern for claiming woolly jumpers
are "the best central heating".

Army to spend extra £5million on recruitment because of shortages.

On TV John Nott reveals he thought it crazy to go to war over
Falklands, But according to A1 Haig it was a strategy which
played a major part in restoring West’s pride and self respect.

Labour pledges to create strongest environmental protection agency
in Europe (Times),

Labour MP Dr Alan Williams interviewed after tearing down Tory
posters in Vale of Glamorgan.

Over 150 GPs in Vale of Glamorgan tell electors not to vote
Conservative at by-election because of NHS reforms (Times).

Conservative MPs are going on the offensive to sell NHS reforms
(Telegraph).

G7 ministers and creditor bankers will meet in New York on May 15
to discuss US plans for cutting Third World debt,

West German firms have been linked to helping Pakistan develop
nuclear weapons technology (Independent >,

52 die in landslip in Georgia.
                                   6.           21 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

 Sakharov elected to new Soviet Parliament,

Sun attacks £300 fines in Transvaal on two Afrikasners who beat a
black worker suspected of theft, tied him to a tree and left him
to die.

Huge asteroid said to have narrowly missed planet Earth and
causing world’s largest tragedy.

India wants us to return Koh-i-Noor diamond.

Sun has an unhelpful piece about how you "keep Queen in her
place", though it says you have a deep and genuine respect for the
Throne.

HILLSBOROUGH COMMENT

     says it is quite understandable Liverpool people are incensed
at police complaints about the behaviour of fans but it is useless
to pretend that the allegations were never made.

Mirror says the Government takes a fortune out of football and
puts back empty words and insults, It is outrageous to link
membership cards and deaths of 300 fans over 40 years. It has no
new proposals to help with high cost, all-seat stadiums> You
ought to put more money where your mouth is.

MEMBERSHIP SCHEME

Today and Star ignore issue- Sun "1 won't delay cards, vows
Maggie” ~ you warn rebel MPs not to block your campaign to end the
rising death toll.

Mirror - No hold up on ID cards.

        ~ Maggie defies rebel MPs in soccer ID row - but you delay
and this is likely to satisfy most Tory MPs.

Times page 1 ~ Your determination infuriates Kinncck but most
Tories appear to be satisfied with compromise and whips are now
happier,

Telegraph page 1 - Thatcher delays ID legislation.
                                      7.                  21 April 1989

                                PRESS DIGEST

SdSEffldSSi - Cabinet has given Tory whips 2 w eks to           «
rebel backbencher's be forft nT.0(!0j                   beat off
thrown                    ® pressin^ on with the Bill’s passaae
through Parliament. At Question Time yesterdav you a r a u e H J *
the Bill would provide the best vehicle for implementing 1
recommendations from Lord Justice Taylor.       P       ng any earl*

™ ~ C o m p ro m ise o n f o o t b a l l B i n
avert backbench r ^ i u ! !             ,      txmxng. Government moved to
timetable.                                relaxing rxgxd parliamentary


Guardian says ”So the lady is for turning after all”.
                                                                     ANNEX


 M M S1ERSJ.UK VISITS. SPEECHES WTCS

 DOE:    Mr Ridley launches Civic Trust Environment              Awareness   Week
          London
 DTI:    Lord Young addresses 1992 Club, Ashford, Kent
 FCO:    Sir Geoffrey Howe addresses Stanford University          Centenary dinne-
          Grosvenor House Hotel, London
 HO:     Mr Hurd attends Association of Chief Police Officers conference on
         Drugs, Hutton
 DES;    Mrs Rumbokl visits and addresses the Schools            Examinations and
         Assessment Council
 DH;     Mr Meflor attends launch of DH/BSCC Taking               Cervical Smears'
         video
 DH:     Mr Freeman attends Worcester Health             Authority Mental Health
         Symposium, University of Birmingham
 DOE:   Mr Howard performs official opening of Hythe Long Sea Outfall
 DOE;   Mr Trlppier addresses Manchester and District Housing Association
        on "housing"

DOE:     Mr Moyniham chairs Oxford University Boat Club 150th anniversary'
         lunch. Savoy, London
DOE:    Mrs Bottomley addresses Future of Local Government conference
DTp:     Mr Bottomley addresses the English Historic Towns Forum, Hereford
HMT:     Mr Liliey visits Cardiff local VAT office
SO:     Mr Lang addresses Rating and Valuation Association conference.
        Hospitality Inn, Irvine

SO:     Lord James Douglas Hamilton performs A96 Bvpass, sod cutting
        ceremony, Inverurie

WO:     Mr Roberts addresses National Council for Vocational Qualifications.
        Cardiff; later presents prizes for the Hewlett Packard/Heriot Watt
        Computer Competition, Cardiff
^O:     Mr Grist addresses Institute of Housing, Wales Branch, Cardiff



MINISTERS (OVERSEAS VISITS
        Mr Clark attends informal meeting of Trade Ministers, Madrid (to
        22 April)
                                                            ANNEX




TV AND RADIO
’Hard News’; Ch 4 (17.30) repeat
’The Thatcher Factor; An Englishwoman Abroad’: Ch 4 (20.00) In the third
programme of the series, Hugo Young looks at the Prime Ministers record on
foreign affairs
'Any Questions?’; BBC Radio 4 (20.05) with Peter Bottomley, Paul Foot,
Jonathon Porritt and Barbara Amiel
’Law in Action’: BBC Radio 4 (20.50) Legal issues
                                                               24 April 1989
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS

The Duke of Edinburgh attends European-Atlantic Group dinner to
commemorate the 40th anniversary of the formation of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation, Guildhall, London
The Prince of Wales visits Derbyshire
EC: Foreign Affairs Council, Luxembourg (to 25 April)
House of Commons Defence Committee visit USA (including King’s Bay) (to 28
April)
Turkish Under Secretary for Defence visits UK (to 28 April)
Hearing of the Jens Saering Extradition Case at the European Court

STATISTICS

HO:    The time taken to process criminal cases in the Magistrates *
       Courts (October 1988}


PUBLICATIONS
HMT:         Economic Progress report
PARLIAMENT
CammQW

Questions:       Transport; Wales; Energy
Business:        Social Security Bill: Progress on Remaining Stages
                  Motion on the Food (Northern Ireland^ Order which is a
                  Consolidation Measure
Adjournment Debates:         Tenant farmers (Mr R Alexander)
Select Committees:     EMPLOYMENT
                       Subject; Legionnaire’s Disease
                       Witnesses: imperial College; The Science Museum; Jones,
                       Laing, Wotton; The Meridian Hotel; Nottingham Health
                       Authority
                       PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                       Subject: British Nuclear Fuels
                       Witnesses: Sir Peter Greesors, KCB, Permanent Secretary,
                       Department of Energy
                             2.              24 April 1989


PARLIAMENT   (Cont'd)


Lords   Starred Questions
        Official Secrets Bill: Third Reading
        Police Officers (Central Service) Bills Third Reading
        Disabled Persons {Northern Ireland) Bill: Second Reading
        Parking Bill (L. Teviot}: Second Reading
        OQ to ask HMG whether, before proceeding with the Dock
        Work Bill they will refer to the Monopolies and Merger
        Commission the allegedly restrictive labour practices in
        docks covered by the Dock Workers (Regulation of
        Employment) Act, 1946



MINISTERS    -   See Annex
                               3.              24 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Observer poll puts you 3 points ahead 42/39.

Newspapers heralding "bad" trad© figures on Wednesday to hype up
story about Chancellor fighting to keep interest rates down.

You and President Bush to make a determined effort this week to
avoid worst split in NATO for 40 years over SNF modernisation.
Genscher and Stoltenberg in Washington today. You urge Bush to
resist German pressure for negotiations on a cut in short range
nuclear weapons.

FT says you are awaiting results of today’s Washington exchanges
before deciding how firm an approach to take with Kohl next
weekend.  Leader says it would indeed be fatal for NATO to agree
the elimination of short-range nuclear forces while leaving Soviet
conventional superiority intact; but argues for linkage in arms
reduction talks.

independent says Kohl prompts fear of NATO split. You are
expected to take a hard line with him next weekend. Ministers
fear that Gorbachev and Kohl between them are presenting you with
an uncomfortable domestic political dilemma;  leader says Kohl’s
U-turn is a panic measure and a bad decision.  It could lead to
the destruction of NATO, Western Europe’s security and the arms
control process.

With West German opinion polls showing strong opposition to
modernisation, your chances of success in changing Kohl’s mind
next weekend are not considered good (Times).

Mail says you have told the Cabinet to take a tough stand on the
economy, industrial unrest and with disgruntled professions.

Ministers confident Chancellor can face next crucial week of
pressure to hold interest rates but he faces further complications
with return of Alan Walters next week as your economic adviser
(Times).

BBC journalists go on strike for 24 hours in support of pay claim
for 15%; offered 7%; Today programme off the air. Sun notes BBC
staff created a terrible fuss when they were banned frosts
broadcasting IRA propaganda; but now they threaten to halt the
entire network. What a bunch of hypocrites.

Leaders of Underground workers to decide today whether to stage
all-out strike.
                               4.               24 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

And British Hail union leaders threaten trouble over 7% offer.

University vice-chancellors likely to ask Government this week to
finance local pay deals with lecturers to divide union and lift
threat to degree exams {Independent},

British productivity, hour for hour, is 50% above that of Japan
but 5% lower than West Germany and 32% lower than US, according to
Treasury’s Economic Progress Report (FT).

Economy will grow by less than 3% a year until at least 1992,
according to Treasury survey of independent forecasts (FT).

Hail leads with alarmist methods being used by GPs to fight
proposed NHS reforms; Leader attacks propaganda embellished with
skull and crossbones.  It says it is utterly unimpressed with the
tut-tutting of the BMA over such campaigning excesses, Surgeries
should remain politically sterile.

Meeting of BMA junior staffs committee urges all NHS doctors not
to co-operate with implementing NHS reforms until Government
enters into negotiations {FT).

Some football fans - from Millwall at West Ham - ignore the
minute's silence in memory of Hillsborough dead and keep up
chanting at Saturday’s matches;  Intiependent speaks of "chants of
hate ’’.

Sun notes that about half the people are in favour of soccer
membership cards notwithstanding the barrage of propaganda from
fainthearted Tory and Labour MPs. Government should press on.

"Walker’s winning ways” is headline on feature in Times on the
Tories main by-election weapon in Wales. Local government officer
says Peter Walker is best thing that has happened to Wales for a
long time, but that some of his claims are pure packaging. Labour
supporters too admit he has done well, but few consider changing
vote.

Telegraph leader on Government presentation headed ”Ministers must
speak”, says almost every key policy the Government is trying to
implement has been sabotaged by poor communication. The problem
is daunting. Your search for unswerving loyalty when filling
senior posts will not always provide politicans equipped
temperamentally to excite the public imagination. The likes of
Heseltine and Walker may not always be right but their style is
more in need than ever before.
                               5.              24 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Kinnock in trouble for providing jobs for his cronies - big row
among full-time agents over appointment of close friend as South
West regional organiser,

Meacher says Labour will restore secondary picketing, eliminating
restrictions on number of pickets.

But Independent says Labour staged swift damage limitation
exercise after Meacher indicated Labour would restore right to
secondary picketing. Times says Meacher has infuriated party
hierarchy.

Ashdown urges Labour to back electoral reform but Labour's policy
review seems certain to bar consideration of proportional
representation (Independent).

Paddy Ashdown launches joint attack accusing you of using Scotland
as a vivisection laboratory and of demeaning, insulting and
ignoring the views of its people; and Labour as sectarian,
arrogant, resistant to change and capable only of knee-jerk
reactions in the Conations (Times).

Chunnel rail link in Kent shakes Tory lead in county council
elections. Meanwhile reports say that it could be last county
council elections because of plans your policy unit has for
abolition of county councils if you get back for fourth term
{Times).

Paul Channon wins strong Cabinet backing for massive injection of
public money into spending on roads (Times).

Britain attacks American proposals to impose its own security
requirements on foreign airports and foreign airlines
(Independent).

Lockerbie investigation uncovers international network of
organised crime feeding funds to terrorist cells throughout Europe
(Times).

Row over Government!s plans to authorise radiation of food;
Consumer’s Association demands more research.

Government secures devaluation of green pound to help British
farmers.

Egg sales still about 20% down on same period last year, according
to British Egg Information Service (FT).
                                                24 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Jaguar reports record sales in first quarter of this year.

BIM says take home pay of top company directors rose 26% last
year.

National Association of Estate Agents, representing 7,000, to
introduce new scheme to cut price of house purchase and eliminate
gazumping (Today).

Governeomt to end compulsory membership of National Union of
Students - closed shop to go.

Express says a series of superschools is to be set up across the
country to cream off brightest 5%; it counsels caution because of
the pace of educational reform.

Three wards at Middlesex Hospital to be closed, according to
Mirror, because of a lack of cash.

About 30 Tories will tonight try to force the Government to index
link child benefit.

Labour to table clause in Social Security Bill to ease benefit
rules for 16 and 17 year olds unable to live at home or unemployed
{Independent}.

Today makes big fuss over discharge of sewage into sea in Torbay,
with colour pictures.

Louis Blorn-Cooper suggests Lord Jenkins to head review of press
law (|^}.

Claims that British Satellite Broadcasting is to screen soft porn
from Paris.

Robin Day to leave BBC TV Question Time.

XBA to announce first franchise winners today for new commercial
radio stations {Independent).

Conservationists want you to make energy saving centrepiece of
global warming seminar.

Much is made by some papers of Lord Whitelaw* s memoirs' claim that
he avoided mixing with you socially.  "1 don’t like Thatcher, says
loyal Whitelaw", is Express headline.
                                7.             24 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST


3 Ulster Loyalists and American arms dealer arrested in Paris and
charged with trying to sell Blowpipe parts to South African
diplomat. Sura wants the truth from the South African government.
Express says it looks as if Pretoria has been meddling in
Britain's internal affairs.

Labour to press for Commons statement on South Africa and Ulster
Loyalist arms-for-secrets deal. Diplomatic confrontation expected
between Britain and South Africa. At least six people were killed
in Northern Ireland last year with South African supplied weapons
{Independent),

You are sending a message of good cheer to Nelson Mandela via our
Arabass ador {Mail),

American attempt to change naval rules of engagement so that NATO
could fire first under certain circumstances shelved after
European opposition (Independent).

38 injured in Gaza Strip clashes, including 24 youngsters.

Soviet troops arrest 47 demonstrators in Moscow commemorating demo
dead in Georgia.

Younger members of the Royal Family call in PR firms to help with
their image {Express).

Chinese wave of protest over pace of democratisation spreads to S
cities.

Snow whites out cricket.

EC

Mirror leader says Britain is in danger of being left on the
sidelines because you and Chancellor deny us our place of
influence in Europe because you claim closer ties means automatic
Socialist rule. You are sabotaging the EC.

Times leader discusses Europe under heading "Bruges Two" saying
however Europe develops, one thing is certain; Britain will
always be disagreeing with its partners. Since your Bruges speech
last September, the Government has been seen as intent on revoking
its commitment to the Single European Act. The Government’s most
serious error in dealing with Europe is to pretend that issues
raised by its opponents can be ignored. The Bruges speech left
several insistent questions unanswered.
                               8.              24 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


YOUR TEN YEARS

Mail feature on Thatcher *s Children - 16-25 year olds - finds it
is "An Age of Burning Ambition”.
                                                                       A a S is^ A .



MM ISIEESilJK V7srrs. SPEECHES ETC)
DEM:    Mr Fowler attends International Stock Exchange dinner. House of
        Commons
DES:    Mr Baker visits St Maiylebone School Maiylebone High Street,
        London

DOE:     Mr Ridley and Mr Gummer meet Association of British Chambers of
         Commerce re the business rate
DTI:    Lord Young and Mr Clark meet US Senators Danforth and Chafee
DU:     Mr Newton gives Manchester Business School lecture on "Urban
        Development and its Creation"
DTp:    Mr Channon addresses the Freight Transport Association dinner,
        Hilton Hotel, London
FCO:    Sir Geoffrey Howe addresses Commonwealth Press           Union, Stationer
         Hall, London
DH:     Mr Mellor attends reception for Brighton Health Authority and
        Pentagram Health Ltd

DOE:    Mrs Bottomlev addresses          Developer     Funding   for     Archeology
        conference, London
DOE:    Mr Trippier attends Estate Action conference and visits gypsy sites
        in the North West
DOE:    Lord Heskeih lunches with Country Landowners Association

DOE:    Mr Chope visits PSA sites in Shetland (to 26 April)
DTI:    Mr Maude addresses International Securities Regulators meeting,
        Wilton Park, Sussex; later opens White City Exhibition, Shepherds
        Bush, London
DTI:    Mr Forth visits Warren Spring Laboratory
DTp:    Mr Bottomley launches National "Belt-up” Week, Charing Cross
        Hospital, London
MAFF:   Mr Thompson visits South West region
QDA:    Mr Patten hosts lunch for Portuguese Under-Secretary of State for
        Co-operation, Dr Durao Barroso, London
SO:     Mr Lang addresses Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, Glasgow
WO:     Mr Roberts attends Freight Transport Association dinner, London
                                                                                    A NN EX


   M m n E B S J O V ERSEAS VISITS)

   MOD:         Mr Younger visits Sweden (to 25 April)
   DES:
                a J lo g n ? ® addresses Ai& o-Gcram Seminar on Higher Education,
   FCO:
                Ap?i!)CiiaIker aU&nds Foreign M M ts Council Luxembourg (to 25


  M E m m SiE lE ^saE E H E SS)
  HO:
                Mr Hurd appears on "Open to Q uestion' BBC 2, G lasgow {recording)
  DH;
              “ ogr™ ™        S“ e ™ OTed for                London Radio 'O n The T racfcf

  DOE:
             Mr C r n e r interviewed by BBC Radio Kent on community dmi*e
 DOE:        Mr Momihan interviewed by Arena Magazine
 DOE:
                                                             C11*5 s “ ).           castle (The




him about S i   Labour f a ^ s l u t u r e 5^   ’   ^ BC 2         young people interrogate

 Trading Places: Thames ( 29,00) France faces the challenges of 1992

5echos!ovakia30n* Tbmnss (2030) Gavin Hewitt on slow political changes in


documentary onthe b S e d ^ a l S e t? ^ 1 Rua:                             Kenneth Griffiths's
                                                                 25 April 1989
FBXMB MINISTER


MAIN gVEHTS


Prime Minister meets Hungarian State Minister, Mr Imre Fozsgay
Cphotocal.ll and attends reception for "Britain salutes Hungary*
sponsors

TUC Conference on Information Technology, Congress House, London
fto April 2 ? I

EC; ECO-SOC Committee Plenary Session, Brussels {to 27 April)
DES: Announcement of increase in higher education fees from 1990

STATISTICS
BSA:       Building Societies monthly figures (Mar)
CBI;      Industrial trends survey (2nd Qtr)
OFCS:     Electorial registration statistics 1989


PUBLICATIONS

DEM x     Development of the Oil & Gas Resources of the UK, the
          *Brown Book*

DE M :    ACAS annual report

DE S :    HMX report on the education of physically disabled pupils
HOx       Metropolitan Police Fund Estimates 1989-90 White Paper
mo?       Housing Association Grant


PARLIAMENT



                Health f Education and Science; Prime Minister
                10 Minute Rule Bill; Unique Personal Identity Number.            (Mr
                Jacques Arnold)
                Finance Bill; 2nd Reading
                Motion, relating m the Mines (Safety of Exit) Herniations
               bates:       The impact of the standard Community Charge on
                            die Isle of Cumhrae (Mr B Wilson)
                                    2.                    25 April 1989



PARLIAMENT   {Cant'd 5



                  Subject; Developments in the European Community
                  Witness: Rt Hon Lord CocMield
                 MEMBERS INTERESTS
                 Subject: Parliamentary Lobbying
                 Witnesses: 1. Mr la s Fmdlay, D irector            and   Chief
                 Executive, Bophuthatsw&na International Affairs
                 2, Mr Peter Fry MP

Lords:   Starred Questions
         Electricity Bill: Second Reading
         UQ to ask HMG what actfon is being taken on the Regort of the
         Animal Procedure Committee for 1987, the Statistics of Scientific
         Procedures on Living Animals for Great Britain of 19S1, and the
         Code of Practice of the Housing and Care of Animals used in
         Scientific Procedures 1988. (L. Houghton of Sowerby)




MINISTERS    -   See Annex
                               3.              25 April 1989

                          PRESS BXSBST

Main News

Japanese Prime Minister announces his resignation over the Recruit
scandal.

Qualities, Express, Mail give extensive coverage to US/UK efforts
to deal with German engineered crisis in NATO and their search for
negotiations on SNF.

You are heading for showdown with Kohl.

Prince Philip, at NATO celebrations, says we are seeing a
remarkable shift in strategy and policy but it remains to be seen
whether there is any change in ideology,

You reprimand du Plessls over South African efforts to get their
hands on Blowpipe technology,

Liverpool gives vent to disappointment that no senior member of
Royal Family is to go to Saturday’s memorial service; Duke and
Duchess of Kent to go there - he .is president of PA.

Jimmy Reid, in Sun, commenting on response to tragedy, says
Liverpool AFC are now in danger of becoming an object of
unbridled, unhealthy worship.  Exaggerated emotions must be
curbed now.

Home Office confirms that three ambulancemen were assaulted at
Hi 1Isborough disaster {Tliaes).

House prices still buoyant in North but are falling in many
pai'ts of the South.

Clive Soley HP claims sharp rises in mortgages and rents are-
making more families homeless and was now reaching major crisis
proportions. The IIS,000 homeless families going to councils is
gross under-estimate as it does not include between perhaps
100,000 and 300,000 who are living in parks or on streets (Times),

Scottish Law Society says unscrupulous estate agents are passing
on to sellers only the names of people who have taken out
financial packages with them.

Express, interpreting Treasury Progress Report, says Britain's
workers have turned into world beaters because the Government bas
smashed the unions-
                               4.                25 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Beconsideration of full membership of the SMS is taking place
within Whitehall. 5$ith discussion on the Delors Report imminent,
yoti might coma to see the EMS as a useful economic discipline
without loss of sovereignty {independent).

Lord Plumb says Government should stop interfering with European
monetary union; praises Delors and CockfieitL

Britain to lead drive to stamp out £5biXXion EC fraud.

Sir John Hoskyns calls for "real debate" on EC monetary union at
Madrid susimit in June; but accuses Delors of suffering from
political eguivalant of merger ssania (FT).

Scottish Tories acknowledge need for stronger campaign to defend
the union {Guardian).

Threat of all out Tube strike for next Monday.

Left in AEU scuppers proposed merger with EETPU;   voted down by 3
vote majority.

Now Sill Jordan says he is considering calling a ballot of all AEU
members.

TUC calls on Norman Fowler to support ACAS move for a settlement
to the docks dispute (FT).

TUe promises full support to dockers as they prepare for showdown
with port employers {Times).

Telegraph says if University teachers dispute leads to end of
national pay bargaining it would foe an uncovenanted gain.  It
would also confirm impression AUT members who voted, to continue
dispute are not only insensitive to public opinion but lacking
tactical Intelligence,

Mirror says miners will he offered shares in their pits before
they are privatised.

Sun, commenting on Meaoher’s plan to restore sympathy strikes and
secondary picketing, says a vote for Labour is a vote for
Industrial anarchy,

SBC union leaders meet today to consider further 24 hour strikes
and blackouts of live sports programmes.
                                 5*              25 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Charles Wheeler, veteran broadcaster, tries to persuade
Kilroy-Silk not to cross BBC picket line to attend social function
at BBC, News reader Nicholas Witehell atttracts abuse for
continuing to read news without pay.

80% of viewers thought cartoons better than Breakfast Time
{Today}.

Today says BBC employees are underpaid because they work for an
inefficient, overstaffed and outdated organisation. They will
never achieve parity until BBC lives in real world.

Express says seeing the likes of Derek Jameson and Anna Ford
supporting inflation busting pay claims is enough to make the Japs
think we are back in the kamikaze game. Those who have a
protected life at the BBC had better come to terms with reality.

Hail says if threats of industrial action seem as depressing as
the sleet let no-one underestimate how such worse it could be if
Kinnock were to come to office.

British Coal announces closure of two pits in Scotland ~ Bilston
Glen and Monktonhall (FT)-

independent leader looks at the various areas of industrial
disruption and concludes that there is no fear of a summer of
discontent. But there are reasons for some concern, stoked isainly
by the fear of inflation.

Times leader says not for the   first time Michael Meaoher has
proved a better friend to you   than to Kinnock, Just as the
Government is sailing through   rough political and economic waters,
Mr Meaeher has undermined his   party on one of its most sensitive
fronts,

Study of airline meals shows high Incidence of salmonella.       One
expert says it is higher than in eggs (Independent),

Sun says doctor who issued anti-NHS propaganda under skull and
crossbones emblem needs a large dose of commonsense three times a
day before meals.

Government served another blow over NHS reforms as consultants in
Wessex region vote to reject proposals for self—governisig
hospitals (Timas}„
                               6,              25 April 1989

                          PRESS PXGI5ST

Ogwr Council in mid-Glamorgan faces default action by group of
bankers over funds owed under controversial interest swap
agreements (F T }.

Lord Beaverbrook, in letter to FT, defends Lord Young over Lords
embarrassment on Companies Sill (FT).

Teachers may boycott royal garden party as DBS tells councils to
invite teachers who are likely to behave properly (Times),

Conservative revolt against non-Indexation of child benefit fails;
19 break ranks but Government still has majority of 100.

State school in Peterborough asks parents to contribute £200 a
year per child to maintain present standard of education
^Independent) ,

DES confidential report proposes major shake-up of research
councils, including abolition of five individual councils
(Independent),

Scientists will tell you this week that the worst of the
greenhouse effect can be avoided if programmes to install
energy-saving technology are adopted almost immediately (Times}.

Transport Secretary reveals new measures to tighten up airport
security,

Metropolitan Police internal report urges big shake-up of policing
methods, which could be a pattern for other forces throughout
England & Wales {Independent)-

West Midlands police force raises recruiting age limit for both
men and women from 30 to 45 to try to attract those who want a
change of scene.

Home Secretary is drawing up plan to recruit 66,000 Neighbourhood
Watch scheme members as Specials,

Home Office refuses to alter polio© entrance test which puts
ethnic minorities at a disadvantage because it cannot afford the
£170,000 to change it {Independent),

Wife of drugs baron who escaped police custody jailed for 7 years
and ordered to forfeit £2,5million or face another 6 years in jail
for cocaine dealing.
                               7.                 25 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Legal history made in Scottish criminal court as woman accuses bar
husband of rape in their home (

Government expected to announce on Thursday significant changes to
its plans for cable and microwave television. Ministers will
confirm they have dropped proposals in the White Paper that cable
operators should not also he able to retail programme services
(FT).

Today says a Royal maid stole Princess Anne'sletters     and sent
them to Sun; she is to be sacked.

David Mellor accused of telling Swedish audience that if we had
all followed Sweden’s example in last war we would still be living
under Hitler.

Gorbachev planning a satellite pop concert for the world,
according to Star from Cannes Festival.

Americans form a Denis Thatcher Society    formen withwives
in public life.

Chinese students call all out strike in effort to oust country's
leadership,

Jordanian Prime Minister steps down after price riots
<



King Hussein expected to appoint transitional Government to
supervise first parliamentary ©lections since Arab-Israeli war of
1967 (FT).

EC foreign ministers agree to freeze trade links with Romania over
its human rights record {Independent),

Political crisis in Hungary after public row between the Party
leader and the Prime Minister

SMF

Star and S « virtually ignore issue,     Mirror prints Prince
Phi lip's cat*tious remarks,

Today ~ You are preparing for a showdown with German leaders over
future of NATO.
                                s*               25 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Express says FDP have been Instrumental in forcing Kohl into a
U-turn which threatens MATO with its most damaging split for manv
years. This is what proportional representation brings.

Mall page 1 lead - NATO fury at Germans* Haggle heads for nuclear
showdown with Kohl, Paul Johnson on the MATO split that can alter
Europe’s balance of peace as Russia woos her old enemy Germany,

Telegraph page 1 lead - Thatcher seeks NATO support against
Germans. Bonn fails to persuade US to begin new talks over
missiles.

Guardian, page 1 — US resists Kohl's plea on nuclear talks.
Feature says nostalgic British bullying will no longer bring Bonn
into line.

FT - US and British Governments erabark on a diplomatic offensive
within MATO aimed at putting pressure on West Germany to abandon
its call for talks with the Soviet Union on reduction of
short-range nuclear weapons in Europe,

independent ~ Bonn’s nuclear shift hits stiff US opposition,
Genscher and Stoltenberg said to be informing rather than
negotiating in Washington. But the situation in Bonn is chaotic
and fears remain that Germany could isolate itself within
the Alliance.

3*^5!®® page 1 - You and President Bush running Joint effort to talk
Bonn out of policy switch over SNFs as alarm grows that West
Germany might be about to break ranks with NATO. Genscher in
Washington says talks had been very friendly, intensive and in an
atmosphere of mutual trust. He hopes the Alliance will be able to
present unified front at next month's NATO summit;    leader
discusses the electoral vulnerability of Chancellor Kohl7 The
sursmit will provide an opportunity for the majority of NATO to
explain to Germany what is at stake, it may he that forthright
explanation is now snore impox'tant than any single election result,

Meanwhxle NATO's Secretary General says reliable deterrence and
defence is as necessary today as it was yesterday {Times ),
                                  9.             25 April 1989

                             PRESS DIGEST


Thomas Kielinger, editor in chief of the German national weekly
Rhainischer Merkur, discusses in the Times the political problems
facing Kohl and the efforts he is making to improve his
popularity at home ahead of the general election. But he has
chosen to risk all and lose all, For if, as it seems likely, his
Cabinet Ministers return from Washington empty handed, he will
only have strengthened In Germany deep seated resentments towards
the alliance and the West as a whole.

TREASURY SELECT COMMITTEE

Star - Lawson warned on perils of another rise in interest rates.
Last year’s tax cutting, Committee says, caused present
cii.£ ficu11ies.

Son - Chancellor rapped for underestimating scale of trade gap.

Mirror - Lawson’s blunder's have put Britain on economic tightrope.

Today - Chancellor has only himself to blame for spectre of higher
interest rates. He blocked the Budget in 1988.

Express - Don’t put up interest rates MPs plead with Lawson,

Mail ~ Lawson "walking finance tightrope".    MPs warn of danger of
new slump.

Telegraph   - MPs attack tightrope economy.

Guardian ~ Errors leave Lawson walking on a tightrope,

TCSC warns Chancellor that he is relying on an ”ambitious
reversal" of import and export trends just to hold the UK trade
deficit stable in 1989 {FT),

Tiimes - Chancellor is walking dangerous tightrope with his
attempts to curb inflation through high interest rates and has to
accept some of the blame for the present economic problems
{Times),

LIVERPOOL MEMORIAL SERVICE

Star says senior Royals must attend. There cannot be a repeat of
Lockerbie, Nation would not tolerate another such snub.
                               10.              25 April 1989

                          PRESS m O E ST

Mirror says "this is a blunder by the Palace. Who on earth is
advising the Queen? And in what planet do they think they live?
To blunder once is bad enough. To do it twice is careless of the
nation’s feelings.

SOUTH &FRXC&K AKMS ROW

How refuses to expel South African diplomats over arms deal
{Independent)♦ Leader says the South African government are fools
as well es knaves to have jeoparised your support, tod it
criticises Sir Geoffrey Howe for not condemning the principle of
bad behaviour for fear of prejudicing the fair trial of the
individuals involved.

Independent gives breakdown of price paid by three Ulster
loyalist groups to South African agents for arras consignment
delivered In January 1988.

YOUR TEN YEARS

Express serialises Andrew Thomson's book under heading "Compassion
behind the iion mask"„
                                                                   AHNEX



DEM:    Mr Fowler addresses Careers Service national conference, London
        (prov)
DEN:    Mr Parkinson addresses Foreign Press Association, London
DOE:    Mr Ridley meets delegation from Devon County Council and Robin
        Maxweli-flyslop MP re low cost housing m rural areas
D ll:   Lord Young addresses Institute of Personnel Management, on
        ’Britain’s performance • opportunities and challenges of Europe’,
        Cafe Royal, London
WO;     Mr Walker opens Caradon Elliot new factory, Newport; later opens
        Bailey Homes corporate headquarters, Cardiff and opens Form and
        Surface Grinding Ltd extension, Pontypridd
CO:     Mr Luce addresses launch         of media    programme       for business
        sponsors, Derby
DES:    Mr Butcher visits Northumberland Local Education Authority
DOE:    Mr Gummer meets delegation from Bath City Council and Chris
        Fatten MP re capital finance arrangements
DOE:    Mrs Bottomley lunches with         John    Bows   MP       and   the   Lead
        Development Association
DOE;    Lord Caithness attends Environment Foundation Awards ceremony
DOE;    Mr Trippier lunches with Manchester branch of the Institute of
        Marketing, House of Commons
DTI:    Kir Forth launches Young Consumer of the Year competition, Hilton
        Hotel, London; later speaks on Enterprise/Industry Partnership,
        Romford

DTp;    Lord Brabazon attends the General         Council of British Shipping
        lunch, London
DTp:    Mr Bottomley gives press conference on changes to the Orange
        Badge Scheme* for the Disabled, London
HO:     Mr Patten ooens British Retailers Association security conference,
        Institute of Directors, London
HO;     Mr Hogg addresses Release conference, Cafe Royal, London
WO:     Mr Roberts addresses Careers Service conference, London:               later
        addresses Business in the Communi ty
                                                                      A HH EX




FCO:       Mr Waldegrave 'visits Poland (to 28 April)
MOD:       Lord Trefgame visits Munich, West Germany




MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS
DOE:       Lord Caithness lunches with Sheila Gunn of Hie Times




W AND RADIO

‘The Thatcher Decade: Batting for Britain’: BBC Radio 4 (19.20): Last of
three programmes. The PM’s performance on the world stage, examined by
Gordon Clough

'After Dread and Anger’:       BBC Radio 4 (20,30). Last of six documentaries oa
the State and race relations
Taking Liberties’: BBC 2 (21.45) the Privy Council and hanging in Jamaica
                                                                   26 April 1989
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS


Global climate seminar

TDC General Council

England v, Albania World Cup qualifier




DOE: Construction and new orders (Feb)
DTI: Trade figures (March)
DTX/CSO: Balance of payments current account and overseas figures (March)
HO:     Deaths reported to Coroners in England and Wales 1988____________


DES:        HMI report on Local Education Authority training grant 19S7/88
HO:         Independent Police Complaints Authority annual report 1988

P A R L IA M E N T



                     Environment; Scotland; Foreign and Commonwealth
                     10 Minute Rule Bill: Waste Recycling (Papers) (Mr Keith Matts)
                     Social Security Bill: Conclusion of Remaining Stages
                                C o n d itio n s fo r   p lan n in g   co n sen t   in   W ales
                                (Mr T Janman)
                          AGRICULTURE
                          Subject: Land-Use and Forestry
                          Witnesses: School of Agricultural and Forestry Sciences,
                          University of North Wales; Department of Plant Sciences,
                          University of Oxford; Department of Forestry and Natural
                          R esources, University of Edinburgh; Departm ent of
                          Forestry, University of Aberdeen
                          SOCIAL SERVICES
                          Subject: Resourcing the NHS: The Government WMte
                          Paper; Working for Fadents
                          Witnesses; Professor Brian Jarman, St Mary's Hospital
                          Department of General Practice*, Dr Eric SMar, Dr Judith
                          Langfidd and Dr Kevork Hopayian
                                     2.                     26 April 1989



PARLIAMENT f€onf<tt
Sdgcl.Q%nmittees: EMPLOYMENT
Usa sfiD          Subject: Part-time Employment
                  Witness: Low Pay Unit
                   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                   Subject: Support for Defence Exports
                   W itness: P eter Levene, fCBE,         C hief   of   D efence
                   Procurement
                   TRANSPORT
                   Subject: Roads Cor the Future
                   Witnesses; Institute for Transport Studies, University of
                   Leeds
                   TRADE AND INDUSTRY
                   Subject: Information Technology
                   Witness; Rt Hon Lord Young of Graffham, Secretary of
                   State for Trade and Industry
L sak    Starred Questions
         Debate to call attention to the "The Press and the People", the 35th
         Annual Report of the Press Council 19S8
         Debate to call attention to the size of Britain’s manufacturing base
         in the light of the balance of payment situation
         UG to ask HMG whether they will consider, as a matter of urgency,
         the Index-linking of pensions of retired British citizens living in
         Canada                                                          45



MINISTERS     -    See hnn&x
                                3.              26 April 1989

                           PRESS DIGEST

Main News

110 of the old guard in the Kremlin go, including Gromyko; as
perestroika gets a boost with younger blood, Gorbachev
strengthens his hold. Hail; Gorbachev axe falls on yesterday’s
sen.

You warn Kohl of risks to NATO in West Germany’s SNF stand and
will appeal to Germans on TV.

Express says Kohl is due some sympathy, but not much because he
refuses to fight for what he believes in.

Oenscher claims US is prepared to reach compromise over NATO's
future short-range nuclear missile policy,, adding that he was
optimistic that understanding would be possible in time for NATO
summit. US, however, says rift over short-range missile talks
might drag on for some time and again reject $est German proposal
for speeding East-West negotiations to curb the weapons (Tiroes).

John Keeganf in Telegraph, says Gorbachev is likely to try to win
further favour in Western Europe by announcing even larger
unilateral withdrawals, MATO should forestall him and demand he
dismantle military installations in East Germany and
Czechoslovakia.

Guardian says senior NATO officials claim UK and US will have to
give ground,

Bonn officials go on the offensive, hitting out at "excitability”
and *ignorance” in Britain over West Germany *s nuclear disarmament
move. You show the House you are ready to do battle with Kohl
(FT).

FT says US is preparing to shift its policy towards the Soviet
Union from an almost exclusive concentration on anis control to a
broader approach focused on regional conflicts and reforms in
Eastern Europe,

Electricity bills to soar as a result of £2hiIIion power station
clean up - one of the preview stories of the global climate
conference,

Gang spiking baby food strikes again in Portsmouth, Shoreham and
Isle of Wight against Heinz and Cow & Gate,

More evidence Government's economic meastjres are beginning to work
from CSX and Building Societies Association.
                               4.              26 April 1989

                          PRESS B1GSST


All out Tube strike called for May 8; Nim threaten strike ballot
over 7% pay offer. Sim attacks Tube workers’ refusal to allow
talent to toe promoted and their insistence on Huggins’ turn.
Meanwhile ACAS says merit rises are rapidly replacing national
pay increases.

SBC union planning further inaction after Monday's 24 hour strike
over pay.

Claims that Xilroy-Silk crossed BBC picket line to negotiate a
much more lucrative deal.

Mirror leader claims Government is heading for a Summer of Strife,
The pendulum against unions has swung too far. In these
circumstances Labour must find the right balance but so far
Keacher hasn’t «

Express leader says the difference from 10 years ago is that
companies have been given the legal means to fight back against
strikes on behalf of their customers and they have a duty to do
so.

Queen makes known, so Express says, her deep dismay over
controversy about Royal Family’s representation at Hillsborough
Memorial Service,

Sun leads with Prince Charles snubbing Liverpool Memorial Service
by going to Italy to take part in TV interview; he will visit
Anfield next Wednesday.

Hail feature says Royal Family’s image is at its lowest since
abdication crisis.

Independent leader says it is unfair to blame members of the loyal
Family for not attending the Liverpool Memorial Service. It is in
accordance with convention. But it suggests that the convention
itself needs changing. And above all there needs to be better
communication of the convention with the public.

FA say Liverpool have until weekend to decide whether to complete
FA Cup competition ~ or it goes ahead without them.

Crown Prosecution Service said to be infuriated by South Yorkshire
Police decision not to take any further action because of traoir
circumstances against some of the 34 arrested at Hillsborough for
drunkenness and hooliganism.
                                  5,                26 April 1989

                             PRESS DIGEST

Police investigating Hillsborough disaster receive 2,000 calls
within four hours of opening hotlines.

You indicate that Government would look sympathetically at any
danger of payments to Hillsborough disaster families resulting in
their losing social security benefits, but general rules could not
be changed (Tiraes),

Campbell-Savours claims Tiny Rowland associate tapped two
telephones belonging to Al-Fayed brothers in 1985 {Independent)-

Small breweries against MMC plan to force sale of 22,000 pubs
owned by giants to help smaller firms.

Head of BM A ’s scientific division says introduction of food
irradiation would be a confidence trick {Independent ’?♦

Consumer and business groups welcome British Telecom's decision to
change London telephone numbers (Times).

John Major tells MPs that 1,300 small firms are being set up every
week (Times).

Manager of NHS South-East region to be chief executive of Guys
Hospital if it goes self-governing in 1991, with a £100,000 salary
funded by private donations (Independent}.

Bexley Heath Authority sets up health screening programme for
private sector in order to raise money for NHS patients ( T i m e s ) .

Peter Jenkins, in the Independent, says that the BMA’s
unscrupulous and mendacious campaign has begun to backfire. Its
notorious pamphlet contains blatant misrepresentations. Kenneth
Clarke will press on with his reform but the public still prefers
to believe the doctors. Mr Clarke can win his battle with the BMA
by steamrollering through his campaign but will he, in the
process, lose the war and the General Election?

Kenneth Baker reforms higher education fees system to bring market
forces to bear; Jack Straw calls it a ^sinister „,. incremental
privatisation of our education system” {Independent},

gaardiaa describes the Baker plan as "thus far, a happy
compromise”.

FT leader welcomes proposed increase in tuition fees as an
admission that committees are not necessarily the best means for
allocating resources.
                                  6.               26 April 1989

                            PRESS DIGEST


More parents sacrificing holidays, housing and n ew cars to pay for
private education (Express).

Near-record increase in pupils at private schools, bringing the
total above 7% compared to 5.8% when the Conservatives came to
power (Independent:)*

Chairman of Head Masters Conference says Government’s attempts to
revolutionise state education pose no threat to booming
independent schools {T i m e s ) ♦

E x p r e s s leader castigates Labour Party for failing to turn up for
child benefit vote in which 19 Tories rebelled; Opposition, it
says, claims to be the party of compassion and caring though it
seems to be all mouth instead of all heart.

Claims that cyanide fumes from anti-graffiti paint killed at least
23 of 31 King!s Cross tube fire victims*

Star advocates a national police force end is thereby critical of
Borne Secretary for shrinking from it.  Mail says Home Secretary
is right to question police efficiency and is right to seek to
increase the number of Special Constables,

Government; report on racial attacks due out next month watered
down after intense lobbying by some departments (Independent).

Lord Cockfield says EC will have to have a single currency by the
end of the century.

John Hoskyns attacks Chancellor’s policy of making the pound
shadow the mark as a misguided move that has lost the country two
years in its battle against inflation {Times),

Press Council chairman signals his support for single law to
protect people from defamation and invasion of privacy by the
media {Time s }.

Arrestsd loyalist is missile unit senior MCG in Territorial Army,
Kevin -McNamara calls for MOD investigation into possible
connections between the TA and paramilitary groups {Independent)»

You hail Hungary as a trail blazer for freedom at reception - Hail
gives it big coverage with picture,

Mr Thatcher joins campaign against slow golfers - picture in
                               7.                2£> April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Takeshita quits with apology but no contrition, hoping to limit
political damage, But most analysts agree that the LDP will lose
its overall majority in the Upper House elections in July or
August

PLO will propose multi-national force to supervise West Bank
elections at its next round of talks with US officials in Tunis ~
a response to Israeli proposals for Israeli-supervised municipal
elect ions {independent}.

ENYXRONMENT/CLXMM’E

Star - Government’s £2billion plan to stop acid rain is welcome.
But why does electricity customer have to pay. Sill should foe met
out of taxes.

Hail - Disaster alert for Maggie on pollution.

Telegraph, leader heartily welcomes today’s seminar. But it claims
Messrs Parkinson and Channon are still saying the evidence is not
strong enough to require action, They are out on a limb and
should admit it. Measures like a crash nuclear programme,
development and renewable energy sources and measures to enforce
improved car economy should foe held in readiness.  If you are to
retain credibility on green issues you and your colleagues will
have to grasp the nettle,

Guardian says you will foe told today that 24 nuclear power
stations could tee built over the next 30 years to combat the
greenhouse effect.

FT feature on greenhouse effect claims that today’s paper from the
Energy Technolgoy Support Unit will say that emissions of carbon
dioxide might be halved by the year 2020 if abatement measures are
taken - but it can only be achieved at the expense of major
investment and innovation.

              Ministers consider next step in fight against global
warming. You would like to bid for international leadership in
this field, but if Britain is to set an example, it would go
strongly against the grain of rigorous free-market energy policies
spearheaded by Cecil Parkinson {Independent),

ZlE§® ~     programme to combat pollution in atmosphere has been
agreed by ministers as you launch a Downing Street summit today on
the greenhouse effect.
                               8.              26 April 1939

                          PRESS DIGEST

YOUR TEH YEARS

Today story headed “Maggie may be immortal" says Lord Whitelaw, on
TV tonight, says you could have superhuman powers.

Express continues its serialisation of Andrew Thomson's book with
the spotlight on your family.

FT diary reveals that, in conversation with Joe Rogaly at Airey
Neave Trust, you recalled your debt to M m for his organisation in
the Tory leadership campaign*

POLITICS

Times leader discusses th© political situation. Although
Government remains well placed in opinion polls the immediate
difficulties are serious; notably water and electricity
privatisation, community charge and NHS reform all of which are
seriously influencing public opinion. You still, however,
dominate British politics- If you evoke little warmth, you have
no rival or even close to comparable stature. Many of the Cabinet
Ministers are competent managers but since demise of Mr Tebbit it
is hard to think of any who has shown the particular political
skill needed to point a way forward or convince public opinion.
It is not too soon for you to start thinking about how you will
re~cast your Cabinet. You probably have a difficult summer ahead.
You should use it well to relaunch your Government this autumn to
a fresh and more effective second half.
                                                                   AHHEX



MINISTERS fUK YiSrO ,..SFEECH ES..EIQ

DEM:    Mr Fowler addresses Small Business Bureau conference lunch, Surrey
DOE;    Mr Ridley and       Mrs Bottomley attend      Climate Change seminar,
        London
DEM:    Mr Lee visits Stoke on Trent (tourism)
DEM:    Mr Nicholls addresses Offshore Contractors seminar on ’’training",
        Aberdeen
DES;    Mrs Rumbold addresses IPM Conference on Improving Performances;
        Education/Industry Initiatives, Cafe Royal, London; later visits
        Kingsthorpe Grove Lower School and The Early Childhood Centre,
        Northants
DH:     Mr Meilor visits Mendip District Council re health promotion
DH:     Mr Freeman addresses the Crossroads Care Week organised by the
        Association of Crossroad Care Attendence Schemes Ltd, Royal
        Horseguards H otel London
DOE:    Mr Moynihan attends launch of Horse Trials Committees’ new
        ambulance; later attends DOE conference of sportsmen and women
        with disabilities
DOE:    Mr Gummer meets Peter Bottomlev and Greenwich Council re the
        levels of Need Assessment and future of Community Charge
DTI:    Mr Maude attends reception for           opening of Swiss Banks House,
        London
DTI:    Mr Forth launches "Wealth From The Oceans" Advanced Technology
        Programme, London
DTI:    Mr Clark addresses Electronic Engineering Association annual
        dinner, London; later meets M Olhaye Djibouti, perm anent
        representative to the UN and Ambassador to the US and Canada;
        later addresses Management Training Course for Soviet Managers,
        London Business School
FCO:    Mrs Chalker addresses Small Business Bureau national conference on
        "1992", Surrey
HO:     Mr Hogg visits Dover, on Drugs
HO:     Mr Patten attends Business and Crime Prevention press launch, CBI,
         Centre Point, London
MAFF:   Baroness Trumpington visits Vale of Evesham NFU
                                                                           m mx
                                                          (Cont,dJ

  MAFF:       Mr Thompson visits National Pig Fair, Sttmdeigh
  MAFF:
             m      ilt     **** * * * * * 0f ^ o c e iy W«rfbu«e» Training Centre,
  ODA:
             World Bank, L o n d o n ™ ^ f° ? ^        Barber Conab!e» President of the
  SO:
             t a d ^ f g Peif0fmS kmich of               L a n c ia ! Enterprise Year Book,
  SO:
             ^ l e y S t h t o S S t f S S S Sl a n l                                Fonh



 ^ 0 S 3 1 E H Q Y EE.SEAS v rsrm

            27Apri?)t0mley VBItS Pam t0 see how the French tackle litter (to

            (to Z JA p il)6^ ^ 6 aUendS War Pefls‘ons Committee meeting in Dublin

 MOD:       Mr Hamilton visits Iceland (to 27 April)




IXAmjgaDiQ
‘The Thatcher Decade: Batting for Britain’: BBC Radio 4 (16,05) repeat


                               4   K   b   e   l   S    f f i f f f i j " * 2 (2a°°> L0rt
‘Dispatches’: Ch 4 (2030)
                                                                27 April X989
F&X&S MINISTER


MAIN EVEKTS


Prime Minister meets Sultan of Brunei {photocall)

The Queen opens the Equine Fertility Unit of the Thoroughbred
Breeders' Association, Mertoun Paddocks, Hewiaarket* Cambridgeshire

Wales TUC annual conference, Swansea (to April 29}

EC:      Telecommunications Council, Luxembourg

ECi      Informal Ministerial meeting on Equal Opportunities *
         Toledo (to April 28}

BMA national conference on MHS Review

CTATfcnrx

CLSB:        Quarterly house purchase finance statistics (1st qtr)
DEN:         Energy trends (Feb)
DTp:         New vehicle registrations (Mar 1988)
OFCS:        Marriage and divorce statistics 1987 (prov)

m E U A & m m



Qagsilaas:        Agriculture, Fisheries and Food; Treasuxy; Prime Minister
Business:         Children Bill (Lords); 2nd Reading, Money and Ways and Means
                   Resolutions
Adjournment Debates:           Attendance allowance - the case of Mrs D Moran
Select Committees:       COURT OF REFEREES
Lords:       Starred Questions
             Security Service Bill: Third Reading
             Companies Bill (HL): Third Reading
                               2-              2? April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Muclear power option gets most prominence in reporting of global
climate seminar. Greens angary and Paddy Ashdown calls for ban on
nuclear power by 2020, Labour calls for major energy conservation
programme.

’’Good” trade figures - lower deficit than expected - eases
interest rate rise fears.

Advertising survey claims that millions of people are tearing up
credit cards because of higher interest rates.

FT says Delors report has re-opened high level debate In British
Government over full membership of EMS. Both Chancellor and
Foreign Secretary share concern that if Britain remains outside
ERM we will be in weak position to influence debate on report.

SC and Japan expected to be put on US trade enemies list and
subject to trade sanctions if they fail to change "their unfair
policies {Times).

Thatcher heads for new row with EC. You prepare for all-out
conflict over proposals by the Commission for worker participation
on company boards which could be drafted by the end of next month
(Independent:).

Thatcherite "No Turning Back” group calls for untrammelled
free-market Europe leading to the withering away of centralised
European institutions {Independent).

FT feature examines battle royal brewing between economists who
think something really has changed in Britain over the past 10
years and those who believe we are back to stop-go,

Big row over disclosure that police have known about food
terrorism for several weeks but kept quiet about it? so far at
least 43 cases of spiked baby food; John Patten says evidence
suggests food spiked after leaving factories.

Heinz and Cow & Gate offer £100,000 reward,   Heinz receives
£lmillion blackmail demand.

Today says blackmailer has already received £500,000 through an
intricate web of building society accounts,

Gas safety alert shuts down St Fergus terminal;   wide economic
implications if prolonged.
                               3,              27 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Kohl expected to "defy" you today and in statement to Bundestag
declare his support for talks on SNF,

Hail says Denmark and Norway lined up behind Kohl.

Tiffin says the key to a compromise between the pro-negotiation and
anti-negotiation support in the now heated alliance debate over
short range nuclear missiles lies in the text of a "watershed"
communique produced by NATO foreign ministers in Reykjavik in June
1987,

Profile on Genscher in Times under heading "Master of the
balancing act” says hie single-mindedness is currently frustrating
you and President Bush, But if, as Is most likely, a compromise
on negotiations over short range nuclear weapons is found in order
to avoid an open split in the Alliance, his track record indicates
that he will still be preaching Genscherisis for a long time.

Independent - Genscher telephones Howe to say he cannot come to
London, with the implication that Germans are in no mood to back
down. President von Weiszacker makes thinly veiled attack on you,
saying "it would be good if NATO countries were left to speak for
themselves instead of through representatives who have no mandate
for doing so”.

Peter Jenkins, in the Independent, says that your position on
defence is simply not sustainable in the changed world. But the
Germans do not have it right either: denuclearisation is not a
good idea. NATO needs a new doctrine of minimal deterrence and a
new vision. It should stop talking about ending the division of
Europe and start talking more openly about the right to
self-determination.

EC announces plan to send another £50million to combat fraud in
response to your campaign.

AEU puts strong pressure on Labour to back electoral reform - the
first party affiliate to make such a proposal {Independent).

Gallup poll says electricity privatisation is opposed by 80%;
only 20% plan to buy shares.   But 50% say they are willing to pay
for a cleaner environment.

Labour threatens legal action to halt rise in government-sponsored
and pre-privatisation advertising {Independent),
                               4,               27 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Powergen and British Coal to collaborate on Grimethorpe fluidised
bed combustion project (FT),

BBC unions postpone full industrial action after management letter
suggests improved offer. Sun thinks it a pity journalists have
delayed their next strike; it: would prefer then? to go on strike
for good.

British Rail to meet unions on Wednesday in shadow of threatened
strike.

Telegraph says the Government must convince public that any
inconvenience caused by strikes over pay is nothing to the harm
that would be done if the demands were met.

Airlines throughout Europe struggling to cope with big increase in
number of delayed flights which is said to be more than one in
five (Times),

Nissan to double UK car output ~ to 400,000 cars by the late 1990s
(FT}.

Lord Young called before Commons Select Committee after Government
rejects virtually all of its recommendations after concern about
£2.2billion information technology deficit last year (Times).

Minorco secures 54% of Consgold; but US legal fight is to
continue.  F T ’s Lex believes that although the distance between
Minorco and its target has shortened appreciably, it could still
prove too far.

John MacGregor expected to bow to SC pressure and recommend
irradiation of certain foods {Independent}.

Independent leader says it is the unhygienic farmers, dilatory
wholesalers and sloppy shop manageers who put their convenience
before consumers’ interests who stand to gain more from the
legalisation of irradiation.

FT leader argues that, despite last week's EC farmprice agreement,
there is a long way to go to curb the cost of agriculture.

Lawyer acting for families of King’s Cross fire victims, calls for
inquiry to be reopened following claims that most died from
cyanide poisoning caused by anti-graffiti paint (Times).

CS1 claims workplace crime is costing Britain ESbillion a year.
                               s.               27 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

CSX putting pressure on Government to make computer hacking
illegal (Times),

Kenneth Clarke makes a last ditch appeal to GPs to accept new
contract on eve of crucial GP meeting in London (Times),.

Clarke rules out delay of Bill to change NHS, but indicates he is
willing to continue negotiations on new doctors’ contracts
(Indpandent).

Newcastle health managers proposing to divide tip city's health
services into five separate self-governing trusts (Independent),

US scientists question cold fusion claims (FT),

Telegraph urges Lord Taylor to exercise a first hand to prevent the
Hillsborough inquiry becoming protracted by adversaries; no need
for long inquiry with so much on film.

Hillsborough disaster fund tops £2million.

Government says there is no question of beneficiaries being
deprived of social security if they accept payments from the fund.

Today accuses Bert Millichip of crass insensitivity for ordering
Liverpool to stake up its mind about continuing with FA Cup
competition.

West Midlands police ask Home Secretary for special help with the
multi-million pound cost to force of Hillsborough disaster
(Time®}.

Court told how a violent, close-knit group of football hooligans,
supporters of Manchester City, waited outside matches to attack,
intimidate and terrorise supporters of opposing teams (Times),

Times leader says that the call by Liverpool politicians for a
senior member of Royal Family to attend memorial service is a
miserable campaign which ill befits a great and grieving city.

White parents attack Waltham Forest Council for introducing three
new "ethnic holidays” - Diwali Day; Guru Nanak's birthday; and
feast of Eid.

Nottingham Labour-controlled council bans children from taking
part in mock job interviews for BSC TV programme "Maggie’s
children", a title which it thinks tendentious,
                               6.               27 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Labour selects Left-wing union official to fight Glasgow Central.

Education reforms demanded by teachers profession itself are now a
significant source of teacher stress {Times),

School trips being cancelled because new legislation prevents
schools from charging parents full cost if they are a necessary
part of school lessons (Times),

Serious staffing difficulties and lack of cash in university
legal departments are threatening to undermine the teaching of law
and quality of next generation of lawyers {Times),

All party Disablement Group of MPs warn that charities and
voluntary organisations could be harmed by new legislation
requiring people to prove they are actively seeking work before
they can draw unemployment benefit (Independent),

Lord Stevens calls for action to curb excesses of irresponsible
press in Lords debate,

Soviet Union has for first time linked its refusal to grant visa
to Times Moscow correspondent-designate with Britain’s refusal to
permit entry of a journalist from a leading Moscow economic daily
(Times).,

Ron Brown accused of theft from his researcher’s flat in St
Leonard’s.

Gunmen get away with Elmillion after ambushing a security van in
Ilford.

Pol ice Complaints Authority accuses police of being rude and
aggressive to public.

Britain protests over expulsion of 18 Britons from Iran in
tit-for-tat episode; one of 18 being detained.

Mail says it is costing £1068 a day to guard Rushdie;   cost so far
£70,000.

Treasury expected to encounter all-party disapproval of move to
cut its contribution to MPs' pensions (Times).

Robert Maxwell, at launch of Kreisky report in Brussels, speaks of
the ’’moral outrage” at 20 million unemployed in Europe.
                               7.               27 April 1989

                          PRESS PXSEST

Gorbachev launches fierce attack on lazy workers and partv
bureaucrats in speech to Central Committee -

Hr Gorbachev says shortages of housing, food and basic consumer
goods are growing in Soviet Union despite his economic reforms
(Times}*

MAG to investigate details of Britain's £15billion arms deal with
Saudi Arabia and report on implications for state financial policy
(Independent)„

FQOP BLACKMAIL

Star accuses authorities of "conspiracy of silence” over
blackmail. Police should tell us the full facts now. Children's
lives are more important than tactics.

Sun, asks "What the hell is going on?” At least a dozen babies have
narrowly escaped death.

Mirror wonders what possible excuse there can be for not alerting
the public and why Heinz and Cow & Gate did not clear shelves.
Only way to beat blackmail is by telling the truth.

Express - Only by extreme good luck has no child been seriously
hurt or killed. But luck can run out. Minister’s statement will
have done little to comfort mothers. Option of withdrawing
products must not be ruled out further if gruesome sabotage
continues.

GLOBAL CLIMATE SEMINAR

Mirror, Star, Express ignore it,

    ~ Maggie’s at green for go. You pledge urgent action to save
world from greenhouse effect. It could mean jsore nuclear power,

Today page 2 - Maggie gives nuclear power green light. David
Cope, one of participants, says he is impressed by your
commitment, having previously been sceptical. Leader says there
are signs that the Green Bill will take the first crucial steps
towards cleaning up the country and safeguarding the future of the
world,

     ~ Nuclear growth to beat pollution ~ major expansion of
Britain’s nuclear power programme signalled.

Telegraph page 1 - Nuclear power to beat global warming.
                               8*              2? April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


guardian - Nuclear hint at Prime Minister’s seminar - no
announcement of initiatives but a hint public attitude to nuclear
power may have to change.

FT - Prime Minister told that nuclear power is needed to cut
global warming. It was made clear that, if necessary, the
nuclear element in electricity generation should exceed the 20%
envisaged by the Government,

Times - Britain likely to concentrate on expanding nuclear power
capacity to tackle ”greenhouse effect” after seminar at Downing
Street,

Independent report tucked away on page 2. You want to take the
international lead in combating the greenhouse effect, and are
likely to choose the Commonwealth summit to present a report on
its effects.

ECONOMY

Mail leader says on the basis that it is better to be hit over the
head by a 2-lb than a 3-lb hammer, yesterday’s trade figures were
worth a gasp of relief. But the trade gap is still running at an
horrendous rate. Chancellor knows Government are still in one
hell of a tight spot. On reaching 10 years it can hear you saying
"time enough to rejoice when w e ’re in the black and inflation is
less than our rivals".

            - Trade figures ease pressure on interest rates. But
several city economists said they still believe base rates will
have to rise to 14% in the next couple of months to support the
pound.
                                                                              ANIiEX
 M ^ m E S j m . m i XS^SP£HCHES E T Q
 DEM;
                                                   dimer    0n   f00d 315,1 0ther “
 DH;
                               Mellor- mef *&: Spanish Health Minister; Mr
          Mellor later attends reception tor Victor Flintham of the National
          London^ Croup        Equal Opportunities for Women in the NHS^

 DTI:
          <?S vNf T 01?                   ^ ^ s tria l   M ission     Association       on   “UK
          Shipbuilding in the 1990s"
 FCO:     Sir Geoffrey Howe addresses Policy Studies Institute on ’’Europe"
          Reform Club, London                                           F ’
HMT:
          ffo te f U m d o n ^ ^ 565 ^    Amer*can CJiamfeer of Commerce, Savoy

MOD:
         f^LJn  °JtnFrr re5eives, M r EY&zns, Belgium Foreign Minister
         (designate), London; later receives M r D ndul, Turkish Under
         secretary tor Defence, London
DEM:     Mr L«e opens new London Wall                    ofHce      of Montrose Technical
         Recruitment, O ty of London
DES:     Mrs Rumbold visits schools ra Leicestershire
DOE:
                                                                 on "Creating the Living

DOE:     Mx Howard gives opening address to Building a Better Britain
         fn S fw            ? e ««fation Exhibition, Islington; later presents
         Supplier and Subcontractor of the Year awards
DOE:     Mr Gumraer meets Geoffrey Fattie MP re Community Charge
DTp:
         c i B p f £ tGmley   ^aunc^ es    Birm ingham 's     Child     Pedestrian       Safety

MAFF:   Baroness Trurapmgton addresses Gram and Feed Trade Association
        annual dinner, London
MAFF:   Mr Thompson visits Veterinary Medicines Directorate, Weybridge

GAL:
        M lu G X ri^ S S n 5^                 TlmeS WjterC0l0“           m   ‘m i o n    diraer’
ODA:
        o ! m 3 tte e London6* Caribbean ^ ^ e n t a x y            Group and- West India

WO:     Mr Roberts addresses Tenby and South Pembrokeshire Hotels and
        Restaurants Association silver jubilee banquet, Saundersfoot
                                                                   AHHBX




DEM;        Mr Nieholls and Mr Uojrf <DSS) attend EC informal meeting on
            Women s Issues, Toledo, Spam (28 April prov)            g
DTI:        Mr Atkins attends Telecommunications Council, Luxembourg




JYA M D   RADIO

S h S o ^ o n h e m ila ^                  Sn0d# °f * “   FbmU Times looks ■*

o S d i l e l f t p S S Wa" CrUnlWeS': BBC Radi°          4 <2a°0) Graha“
This Week;; Thames (20,30)
‘Mature’: BBC 2 (2230) Saving Ireland’s peat b o p
40 Minutes: BBC 2 (2 0 0 ) Jimmy Saviie on reforming Broadmoor

2 d Brian WolfsonBBC1 ^22'00^          iohn MacGregor, Jack Dromey, Sara Parkin
                                                                    28 April 1989
PRIME HI MISTER


MAIN EVENTS



                                                                             A/'"**
Priiae Minister meets Mr De Mita {photocall}                                 ^

Prince Edward visits Manchester (to 29 April)
Judgement Likely in Hevsel Trial of Liverpool football supporters
DSS: LOP (Income Support) goes live m pilot offices
Preliminary hearing of Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster      ___________ _________________ _______ ____________________
s ia h s u c s

D U : Engineering sales and orders and current and constant prices (Feb)
HO: The time taken to process indictable cases in the Magistrates’ Courts
    (October 1988)

PA R LIA M EN T

Commons

Buassss;          m m m .MEMBEES’ BILLS
                  Hearing Aid Council (Amendment) Bill; Remaining States (Mr
                  lexian Wyn Jones)
                  Animal Protection. Bill: 2nd Reading (Mr Greg Knight)
                  Abortion (Right of €onscience)(Amendment) Bill: 2nd Reading
                  (Mr David Amees)
                            Government aid for India and Nepal (Mr N Thome)
                               2.               28 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main. News

Spiked baby food dominates the pops as 220 cases are now reported
and copycats begin wave of terror, They spotlight individual
cases *

Detectives confirm blackmailers are same gang which tried to
extort money from i^eicester shire pet food plant last year*

Star "undercover" reporter walks into Heinz factory unchallenged
and was able to loiter alone near a vat of food; leader attacks
company for lack of security.

Heinz slam TV—AM for showing millions how baby food jars can be
opened, tampered with and resealed.

Kohl’s major policy speech ensures a showdown this weekend when
you try to change his mind over short-range missiles.

You signal you are ready to take on the oil giants who are
squeezing motorists with the high petrol prices,

London underground agrees to meet rail union leaders next Tuesday
for talks aimed to head off strike (FT).

Brewers’ Society attacks MMC report on brewing industry (FT).

Mail ~ Prince Charles delivers unprecedented attack on Coflanunists
in Rumania in one of his most outspoken speeches accusing them of
wholesale destruction of its towns and heritage.

Mail ~ You are coming under increasing pressure to link pound with
EMS, Heavy campaigning by Chancellor and Foreign Secretary has
produced new converts to European cause, leaving you more and more
Isolated,

Robert Cottrell discusses EMU in the Mail under the heading "A
golden egg we shun at our peril". He says that by announcing a
policy of obstinate Isolation you and the Chancellor threaten to
manoeuvre Britain into a situation from which it could only emerge
with its reputation or prosperity severely diminished.

You step up attack on EC monetary union; and Foreign Secretary
opens a new offensive against impending plan to impose worker
participation on company boards (Times),

Canada dashes your hopes of landing a £4billion contract for
nuclear submarines as their budget is leaked.
                               3.                  28 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Express ~ Government makes first move to bring peace in NHS row
with Kenneth Clarke hinting he is ready to compromise with GPs;
leader warns doctors that wild accusations can damage their case
and acting like militant and irresponsible trade unionists will
be bad medicine for them.

Today - Hebei doctors vote to work~to~rule if Government forces
through its NHS shake-up; leader says that 40 years ago doctors
wanted to take action to scupper the setting up of the NHS. Now
they say they must act to preserve it. Government has made a bold
bid to improve NHS and if doctors take industrial action their
patients will suffer.

'Teachers to get pay rises of between 6 and 15%.

Labour accuse Kenneth Baker of misleading the Speaker. They say
his office did not reveal a plan for a press conference before a
Parliamentary announcement on university fees {Guardian}.

Ballot papers will be sent to 9,400 registered dockers tomorrow.
Bill Morris of TGWU says strike seems inevitable (Times).

Engineering Employers’ Federation report warns that output from
engineering industries will come to a virtual halt during the
second half of this year (FT).

Gas plant closure may hit oil output, as BP *s Magnus field is
unlikely to be able to continue present production unless gas
processing is quickly restored at St Fergus (FT).

DTI announces steps to break British Gas’s monopoly in industrial
gas market by insisting that 10% of gas from new fields should be
sold through other suppliers (FT)♦

ILO says government’s trade union legislation has flouted
international employment conventions and should be amended
{independent}.

National Consumer Council backs Government’s legal reform
proposals,

Government drops study into possible sixth TV channel.

Media Institute study attacks bias in Murdoch’s papers’ coverage
of satellite TV. Study financed by rival satellite group BSB
(Guardian)„
                               4.              28 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Two workers at Short Bros, who are shortly to emigrate to South
Africa, given IS minute notice to leave the plant. Company say it
is common security practice (Independent).

Treasury advising civil service personnel managers to be more
flexible about family leave entitlement in order to increase
public sector appeal for older workers (FT).

European Commission warns that EC governments have no right to
regulate air fares between countries; and that practice will be
considered illegal after 1992 (Times).

Labour discloses leaked document showing Britain fell from 2nd to
6th place in the European poverty league during your terra of


Birmingham University report shows mortgage default is fastest
growing cause of homelessness.

Joe Haines, in the Mirror, under heading of "Thatcher’s disaster
decade" admits that some of the bodies you privatised deserved it;
some of the unions needed their wings clipping;  and some of the
changes you made were necessary but says you can't stop doing
things and demanding your own way.

George Gale in the Mail says your record already establishes you
as the best peace time Prime Minister this century. If you beat
inflation, preserve the advance in our prosperity and keep the
Western alliance on an even keel, you will rank with Gladstone -
with whom, among all our Prime Minsiters, you are most fit to be
compared.

Serialisation of Andrew Thomson’s book on you continues in the
Express looking at the 1983 General Election.

Confidential memorandum from Home Office lawyers shows hundreds of
people illegally deported since immigration rules changed nine
months ago {Independent).

Labour protests that Government has refused to allow Commons time
to debate regulations which implement poll tax {Independent).

Tories fear a dose of mid-term blues in Glamorgan with MORI poll
giving Labour 8% lead-
                               5.               28 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Mall says extraordinary attack by Lord Crickhowell on Peter Walker
looks like destroying Tory chances in Vale of Glamorgan
by-election.  In a speech in Cardiff tonight he will say that
Peter Walker’s contribution to the principality is about as
"durable as the morning mlat",

Scotland may seek own diplomatic representation at EC if Labour
win next election (Guardian}.

Michael Heseltine and Norman Tebbit are among 129 Tory
backbenchers who want fines imposed on universities and colleges
that do not maintain free speech on campus (Times).

London School of Economics* decision to elect PC Blakelock's
killer as honorary president of student union described as "sick
joke”. Union says it is a vote in favour of justice.

Sun leader says even sewer rats will find it distasteful to go
near LSE today.

Star headline describes it as "Sick"?    leader asks when will they
learn sense?

Labour frontbencher Stuart Holland quits as MP to take job with
European University Institute in Florence.

World Health Organisation; claims more than a million cases of
salmonella food poisoning and several hundred deaths occur in
Europe each year (Times).

MAPF announces plans to ban sale of cracked eggs (Times)«

Poll shows mothers are losing battle to control their children's
sweet-eating habits.

Today - Government turns down demands for a national police force
to clamp down on pollution.

Times leader' says most important conclusion to emerge from the
Downing Street seminar is that exceptional measures will be needed
to deal with global warming; but formulation of national and
international strategies cannot wait until all the evidence is
in. You have been convinced that we already know enough to
foresee potential catastrophe. Government’s domestic policies
will be scrutinised as the litmus test of its international
commitment.
                                                28 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST

Telegraph leader does not share the scepticism over your
conversion to green policies- But it says you have a difficult
decision over whether to go for more nuclear power which is still
politically unpopular in this country.

Letter in Guardian says it is heartening to see Government rising
to challenge of the greenhouse effect - but conservation is left
too much to individuals and companies.

Joe Rogaly, in FT, looks at where greenery in politics is leading,
and asserts that the world’s poor must: either grow richer through
the use of clean energy or they must not grow rich. At the next
election you may discover that you cannot have global leadership
and Thatcherism too.

New explosives detector to be installed at Gatwick this summer
{Independent},

Belfast Court told that Gerry Adams was refused compensation after
a Loyalist gas attack in 1984 because he had been a member of the
IHA (Telegraph),

Guinness case opens at Southwark Crown Court.

Law sentences and acquittals expected in Heysel verdicts today
{Times).

Fennel dismisses Times allegations of cyanide cause of deaths at
King's Cross as "pure speculation”. But he admits that some of
the primary evidence about the causes of the deaths was inevitably
lost during the fire-fighting process.

You back sale of £450 million hi-tech equipment to USSR despite US
objections that it could have military use (Guardian).

Express diary says President Bush will be visiting Messing in
Essex in search for his roots.

Guardian has full-page feature on Sultan of Brunei, including his
close ties with members of the British establishment-

Pope threatens serious deterioration in relations with the
Anglican Church if it decides to ordain women (Independent).

Students win battle of Peking in triumphant display of defiance
and political will. At least 150,000 students, teachers and
ordinary citizens took part In march - the most resounding popular
rebuke to the leadership In 40 years {Independent }.
                                 7.             28 April 1989

                          PRESS DIGEST


Death toll from Bangladesh tornado feared to be 1,000, with 30,000
left homeless (Times).

Syria backs call by Arab League for immediate ceasefire irs Beirut
(FT).

Field Marshall 2eid bin Shaker   sworn in as Jordanian Prime
Minister (FT).

CH&HCELLOH KOHL

Mail - Foreign Secretary warns that West Germany’s stance on
nuclear weapons is a recipe for disaster and makes it clear that
Kohl should brace himself for head-on clash with you this weekend?
leader says in their present frame of mind the Germans are more
ready to be seduced by Gorbachev than they are to trust Bush or
you, concluding that the rogue ally is unlikely to take kindly to
lectures from the maverick European.

Chancellor Kohl defies his critics and makes it clear that the
West German Government is determined to press for early
negotiations on SNF reductions (Times),

Charles Moore, in the Express, says the message to Kohl, you and
Bush is simple. Take nuclear weapons out of Germany and you do
not make it a son© of peace; rather, you put it up for grabs*

              Kohl calls for NATO understanding and publicly calls
for early negotiations between NATO and Warsaw Pact on reducing
SNF;  leader blames the current NATO crisis on the second zero of
the INF treaty. Kohl is being hypocritical in asserting his wish
not to eliminate SNF entirely. But if a compromise is to be
found you will have to show more understanding for Kohl’s
political difficulties.

West German Government bitterly rejects claims that it is failing
to respect its NATO responsibilities (FT).

De Mita is expected to outline Italy’s position as a possible
compromise to NATO row over SNF modernisation when he meets you
today. He believes negotiations on SNF reductions should not
start until it is seen how much progress can be made on
conventional arms talks; and that no decision on modernisation
needs be taken before 1992 (FT).
                               8.              28 April 1989

                          PBESS DIGEST

Kohl wins all-party support for his insistence on SNF
negotiations;  "We do not want ultimatums from US and Britain" he
tells the Guardian.

NATO sources suggest two-thirds of members are against SHF
ssodemation (Guardian)? leader says US and Britain are now
isolated in MATO. Germany is now starting to act as a truly
independent state.

BABY FOOD

Tiroes - Home Office holds crisis meeting on baby food; leader
claims it is counter-productive to keep the British public in the
dark about such terrorism.

Kail - Sickness in modern society underlined as police reveal hunt
for blackmailers is being hampered by wave of copycat saboteurs.

Express leader calls for a separate Ministry of Food now with
clear and all-embracing responisiblxty for the safety of our food
as at the moment no department feels responsible.

Mirror says police are hunting an evil couple who have already got
away with £18,000 through earlier blackmail and are now demanding
£lmillion, Leader criticises police for not telling public
earlier saying it stinks of a cover-up.

Today - Furious row breaks out as supermarkets refuse to clear
shelves of baby food; leader says we are faced with an epidemic
of terror and calls for all baby food to be removed from shelves
so that not a single baby is harmed.

Independent - Police question scale of baby food sabotage.
Manufacturers convinced widespread sabotage to their products is
impossible at the factories. But consumer protection officials
admit jars of British food would fail to meet US safety standards;
leader criticises government and the manufacturers for not going
public weeks ago on the baby food scare.
                                                                         AHNEX


MINISTERS (\ IK VISITS. SPEECHES ETC)

DTfc    Lord Young visits Ribble Valley
DTp:    Mr Channon opens         the M63/M66      Fortwood     to   Denton     Link,
        Manchester
HO:     Mr Hurd visits HM Prison Hull and Selby Police
SO:     Mr Rifkind and Mr Lang meet Convention of Scottish Local
        Authorities, St Andrew's House, Edinburgh; Mr Lang later addresses
        Society of Local Authority Chief Executives, Hospitality Inn, Glasgow
DEM:    Mr Cope attends press launch of Training Agency Interactive
        Training by Satellite project, Plymouth
DEM:    Mr Lee opens Lloyds Bank Financial Centre, Liverpool
DH:     Mr Melior visits Merton Sutton and Wandsworth Family Practitioners
        Committee; later attends Mersey region’s dinner for district Health
        Authority Chairmen
DOE:    Mrs Bottomley addresses People and Places conference, Manchester
DOE:    Mr Howard addresses Planning Inspectorate ACM, Bristol
HMT:    Mr Lilley attends       the 6th    Form     conference,     Central    Hall,
        Westminster
         Mr Hogg visits HM Young Offenders’ Institution, Hatfield, Doncaster
(HO:    Lord Whiteiaw opens HM Prison, Garth, Leyland)
MXFF:   Baroness Trumpington meets Israeli Minister of Agriculture, London
         Lord Jam es Douglas        Hamilton    opens    Queen’s Cross        Housing
         Association, Glasgow
         Lord Sanderson addresses Scottish Tourism Co-ordinating Group,
         Highlands and Islands Development Board, Inverness
WO:     Mr Roberts launches "Street Sense" schools video, Carmarthen; later
        visits Dvfed fire brigade control room, Carmarthen
WO:     Mr Grist launches Glaxo Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Support Intercalated
        Degree Students, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff; later
        addresses Association of Crossroads Care Attendant Schemes, Brecon_____



         Lord Caithness attends meeting of European Environment Council,
                                                                 ANNEX




TV AND RADIO
*Hard News’: G i 4 (17.30) repeat
T he Thatcher Factor:      The Way We Live Now’:            €h 4 (20.00) in final
programme of series, Hugo Young looks at changes in society
"Any Questions?’: BBC Radio 4 (20.05) with Teddy Taylor, Beraie Grant, Mary
Holland and novelist Jennifer Johnston
‘Law in Action": BBC Radio 4 (20.50) Legal issues
