T u r p
1llL K



Press digests,
January 1990
  Image © The Margaret Thatcher Archive Tnm
     A content € : the copyright owner. 2009
                                                                                      January 8, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS

EC: FCO open day for European Democratic Group M£Ps, London                                  ________
STATISTICS
CSO:                         Retail sales (Nov-final)
CSO:____ Credit business (Nov)                          _________________________
PARLIAMENT
Cjnmmcmn
^386^»^W M 8B383«Jft«3a08a                              ^ •
                                                                                                  ,;a
                                                                                                   *




Questions:                         Social Security: Attorney General; Foreign and Commonwealth
                                   (Overseas Development Questions)
Business:                          Until about TOO pm Pensions {Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill:
                                   2nd Reading and Money Resolution
                                   Afterwards, Government Trading Bill: 2nd Reading and Money
                                   Resolution                      , -
AdjVjurnmeat Debates:                          Smoking in public place* (Mr A Amos)
                                2.              January 8, 1390

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Confusion over what, if anything, the Government is prepared to do
   way of a higher offer to ambulancemen. Express says Government
is prepared to offer 8% - up 1.5% - and foreshadows a settlement.

Telegraph says Government and unions taking tentative steps
towards breaking deadlock.

Roger Poole, NUPE, agrees to meeting after report of an 8% offer.

Unions said to recognise they will not get pay linked to firemen,
arbitration or a review body. Mail: unions ready to back down on
key pay link.

Some newspapers -• eg Mirror - have Kenneth Clarke battling for his
political life. Kenneth Baker says Cabinet is 100% behind Health
Minister, but Express claims number of disgruntled Conservatives
grows daily.

Pressure mounting on the Government to commit itself to
substantial pay rises for teachers in State schools (Times).

Mystery bug kills six babies in Brampton heart and iung hospital.

Gorbachev sends troops to Georgia to keep peace between rival
ccmmunities,

Lithuanians planning a big demonstration to coincide with his
visit this week,

Times leader sees Gorbachev taking a small carrot and a weak stick
to Lithuania, Having, according to Lithuanians, already conceded
the principle of independence, what Gorbachev needs is tiise, ie to
persuade the Lithuanians not to secede before the 28th Congress of
the Soviet Union nestt ftutumn. 8y an ironic twist of history,
Gorbachev's political future could lie in Lithuanian hands.

East Germany ’s h?ew Forum threatens a general strike if the
Communists do not loosen their grip on power.

3,000 students demonstrate in Btseharest for a share of power.

Fourth day of protests in Bulgaria opposing restoration of Muslim
rights>

FT says Chancellor is to review and possibly change monetary
policy as part of preparations for Budget.
                                               January 8, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Sir Robert Reid to criticise Government's handling of railways in
speech today calling for considerably more financial and moral
support.

Government will write to every business in the country to explain
the new uniform business rate in an attempt to calm those facing
1arge increa ses {Times}.

Telegraph leader, rehearsing political accountability arguments
for community charge, says there are many more pressing issues
which require the attention of Tory Backbenchers.

Threat of water shortage in South-East.

The Centre for the History of Science Technology and Medicine says
Government's approach to investment; in scientific and research
education is damaging British Industry’s ability to innovate
{Times),

Westland wins £20million order for tyre pressure indicating
systems for Airbus.

Times editorial previews Japanese Prime Minister Kaifu’s visit
this week to East and West Europe, suggesting that Japan has a
financial and developmental role in the rebuilding of Eastern
European economies. The real challenge for the Japanese will be
in also finding ways to import more of what Eastern Europe
produces - perhaps raw materials represent the best hope here.

Scotland Yard fraud investigation leads to closure of 200 ’paper
hanks’ in Montserrat (Times).

Su% backs the idea of an elected second chamber on the lines of
the American Senate.

Kenneth Baker attacks Labour’s new Eights Charter proposals,
saying they would mean more Government and more expense.

Paul Johnson in Mall says Labour's Charter of Rights campaign is a
phoney because it rests on the lying assumption that you run a
Government which has slashed freedom. Kinnock is emerging as the
great chameleon of British politics, busily trying to rewrite
history, particularly his own.

yoday leads with family Budget to increase mortgage tax relief and
cut stamp duty and restore child tax allowances.  Leader calls for
50% increase on alcohol, and tobacco duties.
                               4.              January 8, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Norman Tebbit says he could not afford to succeed you as Prime
Minister.

Professor Black, one of the Government's most Influential
advisers, has criticised the GCSS’s reliability as a means of
testing children’s knowledge {Independent),

Royal College of Art has retained its popularity despite
introduction of charges for courses {Independent),

Family Policy Studies Centre says school-leavers who can’t get a
job are left destitute if their families won’t keep them; forces
them to sleep rough.

Some say Sir Percy Cradockvs mission to Peking was snubbed by
China. Express says Sir Percy must get tough with frightened old
men of Peking, Times says there have been reservations about the
visit.

Telegraph says the trip has backfired because it has caused fresh
consternation in Hong Kong,

Independent editorial on Foreign Secretary’s forthcoming visit to
Hong Kong says that the most important issue is now
democratisatxon. He should stand firm on this issue. All we can
do, it says, given the uncertainty of futux'e Chinese policies, is
what we think is right. The more we do, the more the Chinese have
to un-do; more difficult for them, more honour for us.

Two British Parliamentarians arrived yesterday in Hanoi to
question 51 Vietnamese Boat People repatriated against their will
last month.

Police investigating a young insider dealing ring in City.

Home Office has been given new evidence on the Birmingham Six, one
element of which is understood to contradict police evidence in
the case, according to Independent. It says it is likely there
will be a limited police investigation before possible referral to
Court of Appeal.

BS8 completes its financial package for an April launch of
satellite TV.

How over Dave Allen using bad language on BBC before 10pm in
recorded show- Mirror says BBC should clean up its act.
                               5.               January 8, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Lech Walesa accepts £750,000 for film rights on his life.

Chariots of Fire film star Ian Charleson dies of AIDS, 40.

Lord McAlpine of Moffat dies, 82.

American warships patrolling sea off Colombia on anti-drugs
patrol.

            concludes that it would be tragic if the opportunity
developments in Eastern Europe present to reduce military force
levels were to be squandered because the US military lobby were to
find an alternative fix in cocaine.

Independent has picture of HMS Andromeda with its two laser
projectors circled. Labour Party will call for more light to be
shed on weaponry,

France restores links with Kabul.

In unconfirmed reports, the Khmer Rouge claim to have attacked
Cambodia's second city, Battanbang, in a dramatic escalation of
the war between the Resistance and Hun Sen forces.

RMBUL&NCEMEN

Star p2 - Mercy pay storm, Clarke under fire.    Confusion reigns
as be denies more money is on offer.

Sun p2 - 999 union admit they will have to back down. Clarke
hints at pay deal. Union admits it would not get pay linked to
firemen's pay, arbitration or a review body. Leader wants to know
if the Cabinet supports Kenneth Clarke, It thinks the silence of
Kenneth Baker a little strange but the buck still stops with
Kenneth Clarke who should offer the ambulancemen 9%.

Mirror p2 - Clarke battles for his future over 999 men. Quit
calls as be does a U-turn.  First he hinted at a higher offer;
then he denied it.

Today p4 ~ High fliers' pay boost traps outcast Clarke - it says
pay review award of 7.7% to top salary people will put him in
trouble. Leader says Kenneth Clarke’s handling of dispute has
bean abominable. But his colleagues have made It Mission
Impossible by failing to back him up.  It will be the kiss of
death for the Government if Cabinet members are more interested
in manoeuvring for the succession than backing each other up.
                               6.              January 8, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Express pi ~ Clark© set to pay 8% to 999 crews; leader says
Kenneth Clarke’s unsuspected capacity to toe misunderstood has
haunted him throughout the dispute, fcihat we need now is
understanding and the dispute to be settled sensibly and quickly.

Mail pi - Unions in 999 dispute ready to back down on key pay
link. Leader headed "The same refrain more softly sung" says
Kenneth Clarke has not changed his tune but has sweetened his
tone, It advocates an increased offer of between 1 and 2% and
more stress in future on reward for training.

Independent pi lead - Ambulance peace hopes ©merge following
tactical blunder exposing the Government’s bargaining hand. Mr
Clarks now seen as being willing to pay more if demand for
index-linked pay is dropped.

Tim&s - Government will today come under pressure from Tory MPs
for an "honourable draw" in ambulance dispute, in the wake of a
perception Government has lost the "hearts and minds" battle
against the unions. Clear signals in Whitehall on how the dispute
could be broken, following hints fro® Mr Clarke that stalemate
could be ended if unions demands for index-1inked pay were
abandoned.

Telegraph pi lead - Clarke calls for compromise by ambulance men.
Government and unions taking tentative steps towards breaking
deadlock.

Guardian pi lead ~ "Offer” row isolates Clarke - unions condemn
confusion. Quotes an unnamed Conservative Backbencher as saying
"This is getting close to terminal for him (Mr Clarke)”, Leader
headed "Clarke in a corner” says he needs Cabinet friends to help
hisa find how to get gracefully off the hook. Everyone knows there
must be concessions.

FT leads with MPoole prepared to negotiate to end ambulance
deadlock"-
                                                                             Amsx



MmismmjuKvmm.smEaiFsmc)
DU:       Mr Ridley and Mr Redwood attend NEDC meeting
FCG:      Mr Hurd addresses Rotary Club, Windrush Valley on "East-West"
DES:      Mr Jackson attends European Democratic Group open day at FCO,
          London
PH ;       Mr Freeman visits National Biological Standards Board; later meets
           Michael Shersby MP and GPs, Hillingdon
DTI:      Mr Hogg visits Westland      1 ico p fc ers
WO:      Mr Robert visits Antur Dwyryd Enterprise agency,
          Fenrhyndeddraeib; later addresses British Hotels, Caterers and
_________ Restaurants Association conference banquet, Llandrindod Wells
TV AND RADIO
"Behind the Headlines" BBC 2 {16.30} Jeremy Paxman introduces a new series
looking behind current news stories
Tm oram a" BBC 1 (2130) jin k in g to o Sqoalor* Repo rts from Manchester and
Canterbury into the effects of tightening public speeding
                                                                      January 9, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIM EVEHTS




BOE:         Capital issues and redemptions (Dec)
CSO:         Personal income, expenditure and savings (3rd Qtr)
CSO:         Industrial and commercial companies (3rd Qtr)
DOE;         Housing starts and completions (Nov)
DSS:         National Audit Office Invalidity Benefit report      ____________ __ _____
PUBLICATIONS
HMT:         Financial reporting to Parliament: White Paper       __________ ________

PARIIAMENT
Commons
Questions:         Defence; Prime Minister
                   Enterprise and New Towns (Scotland) Bill: 2nd Reading, Money
                   and Ways and Means Resolutions
                               The form of agreements made under SI of the Mobile
                               Homes Act 1983 (Mr R Morgan)
Sateet Committees:             STANDING COMMITTEE A                  ~ rr T
                               Further to consider the COAL INDUSTRY BILL

                               STANDING COMM1TEE B
                               Further to consider the EDUCATION (STUDENT
                               LOANS) BILL
                               STANDING COMMITTEE D
                               To consider the PROPERTY SERVICES AGENCY AND
                               CROWN SUPPLIERS BILL
                               STANDING COMMITTEE E
                               Further to consider the NATIONAL HEALTH
                               SERVICE AND COMMUNITY CARE BILL
                               STANDING COMMITTEE F
                               To consider the BROADCASTING BILL           ...... ........
                               2.              January 9, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main Hews

Duncan Nichol rejects idea of further talks with ambulance unions
unless the unions drop destands; nonetheless some papers
foreshadow a settlement.

Unions to meet today to consider next moves.

Jerry Hayes MP claims to have set up a channel of cosmtunication
between management and unions.

Mail presents Govt as digging in its heels. Chancellor
interviewed on Newsnight to say he was not in the business of
funding inflationary wage claims.

Times says the time has come for Kenneth Clarke to return to
negotiating table.

Graham Mather, general director of the Institute of Economic
Affairs, writing in the Times, looks at how six West Midland
Councils are running their own ambulance service sayng this could
provide an escape route from the economic and political corner in
which Kenneth Clarke has become wedged. The councils involved
have unwittingly endorsed several eminently market-re!ated
principles.

BBC claims 80% of Britons including 66% of Tory supporters, hack
ambulance crews.

Ballet dancers vote 5-1 to take industrial action after rejecting
15%,

North London Polytechnic tells lecturers they must give
undertaking to resusse all their duties, or forfeit 20% of their


BAe unions threaten to escalate strike action in campaign for
shorter working week (FT),

Sir Robert Reid accuses Govt of starving railways of cash and
sjoral support. Press tells Govt to listen and act on his
strictures - and Sir Robert that it is a pity he did not say all
this until just before he is to retire.

Hail says Reid caused outrage among Tory MPs. John Prescott
describes Heid-s change of heart as an astonishing "deathbed
repentance”.
                               3,              January 9, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Trouble in Azerbaijan1s border with Turkey - Russian
demonstrators tear up border barriers <

100,000 protest in Leipzig against Communist party and
resux'rection of secret police.

Ukraine calls for 300 mile human chain across country this month
in campaign for greater autonomy.

Independent editorial says reformers in Eastern Europe have little
to fear fromn forthcoming elections: the Polish experience
suggests there will be an unequivocal rejection of Communist
candidates. But it remains desirable that the Communists should
contest elections so that the ghost of their rule can be properly
exorcised.

East German Communists claim rapid rise in neo-Nazi activity.
Point to links between West German Republicans and like-minded
groups in East- (F T ).

Express leads with Japan’s whaling fleet arriving in Antarctic to
begin another slaughter in defiance of world ban. You will raise
it with Kaifu this week. Leader says you must leave Kaifu in no
doubt about Britain’s attitude.

Nakasone named in new share purchase scandal. News threatens to
damage Japan's Liberal Democrats in next month’s election {FT}.

1989 West German trade surplus likely to set record of £46billion
(FT).

Oil prices fell yesterday, raising hopes that further petrol price
rises might be avoided.

Express foreshadows increase in average earnings above 10% after
re cen t se t fc1©ments.

John Smith says Labour would insist on right to introduce credit
controls if needed - interview in Telegraph.

Citibank and First National of Chicago cut interest rates 0.S% to
10 %,

Express calls for- abolition of stamp duty on sale of homes above
£30,000,

Estate agents claim house prices in London and SE have fallen 20%
in 18 months.
                               4.              January 9, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Pressure growing on Govt to offer tax incentives to ”green”
motorists in Budget in spite of fears that cars converted to
unleaded fuel could suffer costly damage (Times),

US Ford chief warns of 20% over-capacity in world car market next
year. Attacks 'over-expansion* by Japan in Europe and elsewhere
(FT).

Eurotunnel reaches partial agreement on cost-cutting deal with
contractors. First step to ending financial crisis (F T ).

Contractors digging Tunnel suing Eurotunnel for non payment of
£40million.

Companies face administrative nightmare under community charge.
They must deduct complex arrears from pay of defaulting employees
(FT ) ,

Times reports your speech at Warwick university saying you spoke
of industry and universities working more closely together than
ever before.

Nicholas Ridley admits you are less popular at home than abroad
but blames Labour for your image. He defends you from insults and
slanging.

Hugo Young, in Guardian, says indiscipline is at the heart of
Xinncck!s most consistent and pervasive weakness.

Independent, reviewing Islamic Party of Britain's intetion to
contest local and general elections, says on© probable consequence
would be the election of more Tories, Muslims should not adopt
separatist policies as this will only alienate: far better that
they are accommodated within the mainstream of British politics.

Labour will attempt to block Student Loans Bill today by calling
for an adjournment when the Committee meets {Times},

Home Secy announces new inquiry into case of Birmingham IRA six.

Bun leader tells Irish Govt that instead of meddling in these
matters it should clear up its own mess, like giving sanctuary to
IRA terrorists.

Irishman released from explosives charge excluded from Britain for
at least 3 years.
                                 5.               January 9, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST

Danny Morrison, Sinn Fein publicity officer,held by RUC after
police operation in Belfast, with other IRA men.

Independent: claims Loyalist extremists were tipped off in advance
of raids by the security forces, meaning that a number of those
sought were not available when police arrived, at their homes, All
told 14 men taken into custody for questioning on allegations of
collision between loyalists and the security forces.

5 killed, 11 injured in M25 crash involving 45 vehicles.

Ford Halewood assembly workers stole car parts worth hundreds of
thousands of pounds because of a ban on body searches agreed
between management and unions.

11 of 15 criminals tagged in Nottingham have absconded or
committed new crimes; scheme to be abandoned early.

Labour to publish "shadow” Stfhite Paper next week on criminal
justice which will include cutting the prison population by nearly
20,000 (Times).

Today leads with report that Chris Patten backs a ban on smoking
in shops, restaurants and cinemas/theatres; it could be
introduced by the autumn. Today leader says Govt will make a big
mistake if it ignores call for smoking ban.

BBC apologise for Dave Allen's bad language on TV.

Soviets halve order for Morning Star - roughly 25% ofpaper’s
circulation.

British Heart Foundation research has identified a defective gene
which causes high cholesterol levels, which in turn could lead to
better screening of those more vulnerable to cardiovascular
disease {Independent).

widespread speculation Nelson Mandela will be released soon -
after his wife visits him in prison.  Independent says de Klerk
has concluded Mandela is a black leader he can do business with.

Norman Tebbit, writing in the Tiaaes under the heading ”No fudging
on this Euro mould”, urges a tough line against those Tories who
would sacrifice our national sovereignty for Europe.

Ex~E€ Ambassador to Washington attacks jslhitehal 1* s”insular
disdain" towards Brussels officials (FT).
                                                 January 9, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Lord Gardiner dies, aged 89,

Death of comedian, Terry Thomas, 78.

Lord Ennals and Tin? Raison say returned Vietnamese boat people
have not been put under any pressure since their return.

Vietnamese say China has made first gestures of peace in 10 years,
including proposed attendance at UNESCO seminar in Ho Chi Minh
City (independent).

Peace bid by Security Council permanent members as Cambodia
fighting intensifies. They meet in Paris next Tuesday (FT).

Cambodia to receive an extra Omillion of aid. Mrs Chalker
defends aid given to camps In Thailand saying she had received
assurances of none reaching the Khmer Rouge {Independent).

Britain and Soviet Union will take their first step today towards
patching up an acrimonious dispute which caused cancellation of
important human rights talks in Moscow In September (Times).

Colombian parties unite to condemn US navy drugs blockade (FT),

First signs of dissent in the likely debate over US Defence policy
emerged when retired chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff advocated
discussions with USSR on elimination of tactical nuclear weapons
fro® surface ships (Independent),

&MBULSMCE

Star - 999 sen on brink of wage row deal - ready to accept
improved wage offer.

Sun - 999 crews set to go back by end of week.

Mirror ~ Peace snub to mercy crews,

Today ~ Clarke snubs 999 peace bid.

.Express ~ Onion bid for 999 peace fails ~ hopes of an immediate
end to dispute shattered.

Hall ~ Mo mercy from Chancellor as 999 crews seek face saver.
Govt digs in its heels.
                                7.              January 9, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST

Independent - Exchange of letters on the ambulancemen’s dispute
has done little to dampen the political row over the Govt's
handling of the issue.

Telegraph pi - Ministers take tough line on ambulancemen; hopes
of strike breakthrough, fade- Leader welcomes the Govt’s
reaffirmation of "no more money”. It is to hoped Poole, NOPE,
will recognise the need for a change of position. This is too
critical a time for the Govt to buy itself out of national
bargaining. This is a time for Govt to close ranks.

Guardian pi lead - Clarke sets tough terms   for pay deal. Govt
wants productivity to fund ambulance rise,

Peter Jenkins, writing in the Independent, says the Govt has got
itself into a deplorable mess over the ambulance dispute, with the
chief fault lying with you and Cabinet for not joining     MrClarke
in his fight with the unions. Identifying the reasons      for the
Govt’s stand, he criticises Mr Clarke for taking the wrong line
with the press. But, irrespective of Mr Clarke’s difficulties,
the real battle in this dispute is for the control of inflation -
to win this battle the Govt must make this abundantly clear.

Times - Plea for new ambulancemen talks rejected but pressure on
Govt is maintained after several Conservative MPs support what
they consider to be a conciliatory move by union leader Roger
Pools. Leader says the Govt has been right all along to argue
that the ambulancemen were much more akin to health service
workers than to firemen or policemen hut the time has now com© for
Kenneth Clarke to reshuffle the various elements in his previous
proposals and return to the negotiating table. Be should take
with him proposals for some new structured system for reviewing
their pay. And after a seemly moment of new negotiation, the
ambulancemen should settle.

RAIL

       says that yesterday after presiding over misfortunes of BH
for six years. Sir Robert Reid, on his way out, saw the light.
Why didn’t he ram his warnings clown Ministers’ throats years ago?

Today asks why did Reid wait until the eve of his departure to say
what he really thought about our railways. He carried out the
policy of a Govt in which he did not believe - a shameful failure
of responsibility- Let’s hope his succesor has aor© guts.
                               8.              January 9, 1930

                          PRESS DIGEST


Express says Sir Robert is off the rails. Customers will be
tempted to believe he protests too such. If BR had employed
greater business aggression and imagination it could have raised
significantly more cash from its real ©stage. Mediocre
management, lacking the will end skill to curb union restrictive
practices, must also take the blame.

Haii leader headed "The last strangled cry for assistance” says
Reid’s outburst, like the 9.51 to Charing Cross, has been subject
to considerable delay, Why did he wait until his swansong? Why
didn’t he have the guts to goad the Govt before? It is to be
hoped his successor will show more independence. In the run up to
the next election you must unsnarl transport priorities.

Times leader under the heading ’’Sir Robert’s Swan-Song" says there
have been suggestions that there are a number of issues on which
he feels rather more strongly. If that is so, he should seek on
occasion to say clearly what they are before he hands over in
March, An admirer of Dr Beecham's has no need of winks and nods.

George Hill in the Times says Sir Robert's speech was Much more
than an exasperated outburst.  It was an unapologetic apology for
a career which spans the whole history of nationalised railways in
Britain and an affirmation of his belief that a period of new
vitality for the railways is ahead, if Britain is ready to seize
the opportunity.
                                                                            AMflEX




 MINISTERS     ,




 DTp:        Mr Parkinson addresses Institute of Economic Affairs

 FCO:      | J nfo n d 3ddresses Eur°Pean Parliament/US Congress meeting,


 ^         G r a v S H S I S r i t y ^ 0^ ^                  of Dambrd “ ■*

 DTI:       H ot«fdWO° d prcscnts tl5e        Achievement Award 1989, Berkeley

DU:        Lord Trefgarne launches PIMS Eurodirectory, EC offices, Loudon
DTp:       Mr Atkins attends Kent County Council car litter bag promotion
WO.        Mr Roberts launches Satellites in Education video for schools,
            i runty College, Carmarthen


I3LAND.BAD][Q
Advice Shop" BBC 2 (17.00) Rural Action Project in Northern Ireland
Taking Liberties" BBC 2 (20,00) Compensation for military incompetence
"Drink - Under the Influence" Ch4 (21,00) The costs of alcohol misuse
                                                               January 10, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


HAXN EVENTS


STATISTICS
DEM;        Overseas travel and tourism (Oct)
PEN;        Advance energy statistics (Nov)
PARLIAMENT
Commoas
                 Foreign and Commonwealth
Business:        Until 7,00 pm Aviation and Maritime Security Bill: 2nd Reading
                 and Money Resolution
                 OPiPQS ED PRIVATE BUSINESS
                 Associated British Ports (No 2} Bill Motion on the
                 Cooperative Development Agency (Winding-up and Dissolution)
                 Order
                             HMGs policy towards Cyprus (Mr M Knowles)
Select Committees:           WELSH GRAND COMMITTEE
                             To consider the matter of the FUTURE ECONOMY
                             AND ENVIRONMENT OF NORTH WALES
                             TRADE AND INDUSTRY
                             Subject: Company Investigations
                             Witnesses: Mr Michael Gillard, Ms Barbara Conway,
                             Mr Clive Woliman and Mr Christopher Hxrd,
                             journalists
                             ENERGY
                             Subject: The Fast Breeder Reactor
                             Witness; The Central Electricity Generating Board
                             HOME AFFAIRS
                             Subject: Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
                             Witnesses: Mr G Ansel, Mr A Cogbill - Home
                             Office, Mr G Aitken f D ~Scottish OfSce
                             SOCIAL SERVICES
                             Subject; Abortion Act 1967 'Conscience' Clause
                             Witnesses: Officials from the Department of Health
                             COMMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                             KING’S CROSS RAILWAYS BILL______________
                                               January 10, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Telegraph leads with British and Irish Governments prepared to
abandon Anglo-Irish Agreement provided devolution and cross-border
co-operation can be agreed.

Times leads with Peter Brooke's speech urging talks on devolution.
 His comments reflect a general underlying sense of optimism in
Ulster political circles that talks might be possible soon. The
positive evidence for this has been the mounting sense of
impatience with the political deadlock and the steady apparent
dilution of Unionist pre-conditions for opening negotiations.

Danny Morrison, senior Sinn Fein official., charged with others
with terrorist offences.

ROC denies allegations, in Yesterday’s Independent, that there was
a leak prior to their raids on loyalist extremists {Independent).

National Council for Civil Liberties criticises expulsion of
McBrearty saying it has reopened old human rights wound in Irish
affairs (Independent}.

No 10 make it clear there is no more money available in ambulance
dispute. You call on unions to settle.

Your praise for K25 disaster ambulance men widely reported.

Tory MFs try - and fail - to end deadlock;   positions appear to be
hardening.

London ambulances immobilised to prevent them being used by
strikers for fund raising and other purposes.

Guardian claims top salaries report will recommend a £4,000 a year
pay increase for Duncan Nichol.

Ron Brown’s conviction for criminal damage ~ which he claims as a
moral victory - and the row in the House, reported in yobbish
terms, dominates the front pages of the pops, Star calls Brown a
"daft publicity seeker". Sun says Brown is a disgrace to the
Commons. Today says that when you pay peanuts you get monkeys and
that is how Parliament got Brown. Express thinks Brown is facing
de ~seI ect ion.

Sharp slowdown in UK economic growth foreshadowed by figures
showing record gap between what companies earn and what they
spend. Analysts say Investment will have to fall in 1990 (F T K
                                  3.           January 10, 1930

                          PRESS DIGEST


Ministers concerned about the level of pay settlements -
fears they will break 10% barrier,

Today says ”We have never been better off, according to CSO
statistics”.

Ford to offer, it is expected, double figures today after
rejection of 9.5% offer.

NALGO expected to claim 11-13%.

Production of the Airbus to be halted within next few days as a
result of the strike at BAe, resulting in the likely laying off of
thousands of workers in France and West Germany. BAe strike could
damage reputation of Airbus after a record year for sales in 1989


Pound gains further ground as mark and yen deteriorate (Times).

Association of Graduate Recruiters warns that there are lean times
ahead for graduates; the days when they could walk into a job in
the City at a huge salary have gone {T imes}.

Estate agents see signs of recovery In the housing market (Times).

Shell to cut diesel price by 9p after sharp fall in spot prices
but to go ahead with 5.5p rise in petrol.

■Gorbachev was ill over Christmas and may even have been in
hospital, possibly with back trouble, according to Lithuanian
sources.

More trouble for Gorbachev in Azerbaijan where Moslem
demonstrators set fire to border posts and tear down fence with
Iran, Ma.il headline:  ”Gorbachev at bay".

And Lithuanian nationalists call demo to coincide with Gorbachev’s
visit against wishes of Lithuanian Communist Party,

Czechoslovakia calls for withdrawal of Soviet troops.

Soviet people in panic buying of gold and jewellery as hedge
against rising Inflation, Government raises price by 50% in bid
to stop the rush (FT).
                               4.              January 10, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Social Democrats in both East and West Germany claim DM200billion
(£72blllion} is needed to develop cleaner energy and provide
better water and sewage systems in East Germany. Their claims are
seen as indicative of the huge scale of investment needed to
modernise and clean up Eastern Europe {Independent),

Radical calls for reform of Comecon from Polish, Hungarian and
Czechoslovak Prime Ministers during meeting in Sofia
{Independent).

All party group of MPs call on Robert Maxwell to apologise to East
Germans for trying to prop up Honecker and to donate a substantial
sum to help restore democracy.

Express says Albania is banging student protestors in the streets,

Express leader says Britain should aggressively be showing Eastern
Europe how to develop a market economy.

US Secretary of State Baker to visit Moscow early next month to
try to remove obstacles to a US-Soviet treaty cutting long-range
nuclear missiles {Times).

Prospects for Japanese investment in Eastern Europe grow as Suzuki
agrees on £85million joint venture in Hungary. Could produce up
to 100,000 cars a year (FT).

General Staff want to use any surplus troops arising from
conventional force disarmament agreement to strengthen SAS and
SBS.

Guardian claims that B/Rall has begun cutting ack and deferx-ing
capital spending because of Government’s new financial regime for
’90s.

Michael Hates introducing Private Member’s Bill allowing firms to
charge interest on unpaid bills.

Government turns down Select Committee idea of resuming stamping
eggs with little lion to show they are British and, by
implication, freer of salmonella.
                               5.              January 10, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Times leader says if Caramon Market eggs upset British stomachs,
they deserve the worst than can happen to them - which is to
remain in the shops, unbought and uneaten. Having put their
domestic henhouses in order, the British are entitled to demand no
less from the egg importers. And there is no better lever than a
market force to make them comply. But the public has to be taught
how to tell one from the other.

The interim report of the Tyrell Committee has recommended urgent
research into BSE {mad cow disease); Government to implement
research package costing £2 .2million over 1990-91 (Independent).

Major repairs fox' French nuclear power stations - eighteen month
programme to put right important metal components in 14 of
country’s newest PWBs (FT ).

Wakefield Council cut:s its rents for 7 weeks to avoid losing
housing subsidy.

West Wiltshire Council Chief Executive suspended following
privatisation of local software company (independent),

The Conservative Council of Hereford and Worcester is to defy
Government and run its own scheme to finance schools; it claims
it will be unable to teach the national curriculum if it accepts
the Government’s ruling on school budgets {Tisses),

There has been significant fall In visitors since six national
museums began charging for admission, report published today says,
Report’s publication coincides with expected recommendation, by
Select Coismittoe, that ail museums charge entrance fees
{Independent),

Lighting on motorways to be reviewed after M25 crash which killed
5 in fog.

Times leader discusses how new technology sdgbt be developed to
Improve safety.    Without such a new approach   it says there willbe
another dossen or" so such crashes in fog by the end of the century.
It concludes that the question is whether the community should
continue to regard this frightening prospect     as tolerable, or
whether the timehas com© to design motorway madness out of the
system, even if the cost of doing so is high.

Sun says Sir Robert Held, BKf should not moan about lack of
capital on railways; he has done his share to block privatisation
which would liberate railways.
                               6.              January 10, 1990

                          PHESS DIGEST

Under the heading "Labour’s half-hearted step to a Bill of
Rights", Julia Meubei'ger, founder member of Charter 88, looks at
their proposals in the Times saying she finds the charter partisan
and full of holes.

Hail leader says Britain’s still a tip - why do we foul our own
nest? it welcomes Government’s legislation and Lady Porter’s
efforts and wants a debate on Lady Porter’s idea of a plastic
identity card so that names and addresses of litter louts and fine
defaulters can be logged.

BBC to screen all night Commonwea 11h Games - first venture of its
kind for them after £2milllon deal with Hew Zealand TV.

Peter Jenkins, writing in the Independent, uses the dispute over
Mr Clarke’s Sunday lobby briefing to review the lobby system. He
concludes that there is a need for a means of circulating private
intelligence, and that there is nothing reprehensible in this.
However, he advocates that the daily lobby briefings should be on
the record, with scope for an unattributable gloss though
Individual contacts. He believes the systematic use of widespread
collective non-attributable briefing is wrong,

Independent editorial comments on Mr Hurd's two recent speeches
which it sees as beginning to map out the future of a Europe
recently transformed by events in the East. On this subject Mr
Hurd is criticised for not going far enough: he should clearly
spell out the Government's position on this soon - perhaps an
appropriate occasion would be during his visit to East Berlin.

Times leader on Douglas Hurd's speech on Europe under the heading
"Mr Hurd’s Balancing Act” says a change in tone may not, however,
be enough to reassure Britain's dispirited posse of MEPs who are
to meet you on January 24.

Today calls for perestroika from Kaifu, Japanese   Premier, by
stopping slaughter of whales in Antarctic, This    would be a good
start in persuading Britain that Japan Is not so   different, Mail
sends Kaifu an open letter on "slaughter shaming   your land”,

Express claims Japanese ere slaughtering 40,000 porpoises a year
for meat.
                                                  January 10, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Brian Bridges in the Times looks at Prime Minister Kaifu?s whistle
stop tour of Europe saying for much of the 1980s the Mest European
countries wex'e seen by the Japanese as incapable of adjusting
their economies to the challenge of the high technology era- But
over the last couple of years that perception has changed and this
has attracted increasing number of Japanese traders and, more
significantly, investors.

At least 6 killed, 18 injured, in most violent of recent labour
disputes in South Africa - in clashes between rival groups of
workers.

Hong Kong's Executive Council rejects draft Bill of Rights,
arguing that it was inadequate to protect people's future freedoms
under Chines rule. Bill now likely to be delayed for several
weeks (Independent}.

Cambodian Government flees capital, according to Pol Pot's
guerrilla forces,

FT editorial backs a strong UN role in Casibodia ~ perhaps a
peacekeeping force.  If that Idea fails,, the civilised world has
no sensible immediate option but to isolate Pol Pot and support
Hun Sen. Pol Pot has had his turn at power and disqualified his
regime for all time.

Bush backs down over taks force for Colombia, as US appear to have
shelved temporarily plans to despatch a flotilla of warships to
the Colombian coast {Independent),

&HBUL&NCE

Star p2 - Maggie praises mercy heroes of M2 5 horror.

Sun p2 - That’s your lot’ Maggie tells 999 craws there is no more
cash.

Mirror pi - Sick I Bosses take the keys out of 999 vehicles. Two
page feature trying to demonstrate Kenneth Clarke’s "professional
drivers” are much more than that.

Express pi? - Premier praises skill of 999 men.

Hail pi ” Motorway 999 crews praised by Maggie.

Independent ~ Ambulance dispute reaches new deadlock as Government
stands firm and union leaders refuse to spell out concessions
until negotiations begin.
                                 8.                   January 10, 1990

                            PRESS DIGEST


Times - Ministers continue to take a tough line in ambulance
dispute yesterday although Conservative MPs maintain that an end
to the 18-week struggle was in sight.

          p2 - Tory MPs try to end deadlock.

KOW IN HOUSE

Star - Yobbo MPs in TV ’’riot" shame.

Sim - small piece - '.Animal* J'-JPs in TV turmoil.

Mirror p2 - Jibes at Tor’
                        / spark TV fury.

Express p4 - Uproar as MPs show their true TV colours - first full
scale eruption on TV.

Mail ~ Camera catches Commons chaos.       Colin Welch says he 'thinks
Speaker saw visions of anarchy.

independent - Uneasy truce In the Commons, looking suspiciously
like a hasty retreat by Sir Geoffrey Howe; restores order after
uproar over ”smear” against Minister,

Telegraph p7 - "jungle” uproar forces Speaker to halt sitting.

Guardian pi - MP challenges Minister over business links,         P2 ™
"Sleaze factor rouses MPs".
                                                                         ASINEX




MINISTERS (UK ¥ is m . SPEECHES ETC)
DES;       Mr MacGregor meets Commander Saunders Watson of the History
           Working Group, London
DTI;      Mr Ridley attends NEDC meeting; later, with Lord Trefgarne meets
          Sr Ruggiero, Italian Trade Minister
DEM:      Lord Strathclyde draws winning ticket for Ciao Italia prizedraw,
          London
DES:      Mrs Rumbold opens Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Alford,
          Lincolnshire
DES;      Mr Jackson attends National Economic Development Council on
          Higher Education Policy, London
DH;       Mrs Bottomley attends the launch of the CHlAC computer system.
          Price Waterhouse, London Bridge; later attends dinner with 'UKCC
DH:       Mr Freeman attends Eurodiabeta press conference, St Thomas’,
          London
DSS;      Lord Henley visits Doncaster, as part of the Inner City Task Force
          Initiative
DU:       Mr Forth visits AMG Resources Recyling Plant, Hartlepool
DU:       Mr Hogg visits Boat Show
DTp:_____Mr Portillo addresses British Transport Police Federation conference
MINISTERS (PRESS INTERVIEWS)
DES:      Mr MacGregor interviewed by Kathy Milton of The Scotsman
DEM:     Lord Strathclyde interviewed for European Tourism Year Lifestyle
 _______ programme____________________________________________


"Q.E.D," BBC 2 (2130) Report into Friedreich’s Ataxia and the research needed
to combat the disease
"Dispatches” CM (20,30)
                                                                  January 11, 1990

PRIME MINISTER


m m    EVENTS




HO: Probation statistics, England and Wales 1088




Commons
Questions:      Agriculture, Fisheries and Food; Prime Minister
Business:       Opposition Day (2nd Allotted Day)
                Debate on an Opposition Motion." The subject for debate to fee
                announced
Adjournment Debate:        H e funding of police costs of annual party
                           conferences (Mr F Pike)
                      STANDING COMMITTEE A
                      Further to consider the COAL INDUSTRY BILL
                      STANDING COMMITTEE B
                      Further to consider the EDUCATION (STUDENT LOANS)
                      BILL
                      STANDING COMMITTEE E
                      Further to consider the NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE
                      AND COMMUNITY CARE BILL
                      SIXTH STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATUTORY
                      INSTRUMENTS ETC
                      To consider the draft DRIVING LICENCES (COMMUNITY
                      DRIVING LICENCE) REGULATIONS 1980
                      SECOND STANDING COMMITTEE ON EUROPEAN
                      COMMUNITY DOCUMENTS
                      To consider EUROPEAN COMMUNITY DOCUMENT No
                      7871/89, RELATING TO PROTECTION OF ANIMALS
                      DURING TRANSPORT
                      COMMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                      KING’S CROSS RAILWAYS BILL
                                  2,             January 11, 1930

                             PRESS DIGEST

Main News

The focus today is on the level of pay settlements after your
Telegraph interview (which is widely picked up) and Ford unions'
rejection of 10.2%, Fears that this will be used as abenchmark
by other negotiators.

Hail headline "Even 10% Is    not enough".

The latest move is seen as    a blow to the Government’s
counter-inflation effort,

Chancellor warns of job losses if there is no pay restraint;
higher pay deals will prolong high interest rates,

Times says senior Tory MPs are backing the Chancellor's insistence
that pay rises have to be bought with productivity gains,
Ministers are taking the political risk of fighting the ambulance
pay dispute so hard because they fear a high deal will trigger a
rush of other pay claims, soaring through the 7,7% inflation
rate.

Independent says the Ford offer revives the prospect of another
rise in interest rates and mars Budget preparations.

NUT threatens to disrupt schools if it does not get 20% and will
put pressure on Tory -MPs in 50 marginal seats.

Some production work on Airbus nsay be switched abroad as a result
of engineering workers' strike at S&e. Increased flexibility at
BAe?s UK plants, and more manufacture of components overseas could
put thousands of jobs in the OK aircraft industry at risk


Times leader criticises Bill Jordan’s handling of the B&e strike
saying he might be wise not to plan any fraternal visits to plants
in Hamburg, Madrid or St Nasalra just at the moment as solidarity
has its limits. One reason for the resurgency of inflation is the
inadequacy of industrial productivity in this country compared
with that of our competitors, A reduction in working hours would
almost certainly lead to Increased overtime, which would inflate
wage bills and raise British wage costs.

1,000 electricity managers accept individual contracts in move
against collective bargaining. They will get pay rises of up to
£2,000 in return (FT).
                               3.               January 11, 1930

                          PRESS DIGEST

Commons to debate ambulance dispute today, Oxfordshire gets
injunction preventing staff from using ambulances in defiance of
managers.

Guardian leader sets out what it thinks Kenneth Clarke should say
in today *s debate - concede that there have been mistakes on both
sides; and to offer to negotiate and be flexible.

Sir Gerard Vaughan MP attacks Government’s "insensitive" handling
of ambulance dispute.

Significant worsening of dispute as crews in Hampshire vote for
series of 24 hour strikes, withdrawing for the first time accident
and emergency cover (Times).

Today claims tax men and pollution experts are to get 20% to halt
"brain drain" from Civil Service,

West German economic growth at highest level for 10 years as
exports and investments boom {FT }.

France relaxes controls on foreign investment as liberal economic
thinking spreads through Socialist government (FT).

Leading American philospher, Noam Chomsky, forecasts that the US,
Japan and a reunified Germany will be the three superpowers of the
new roilleniura {Independent).

Sales of imported cars in Japan rose by 35% in 1989.   West German
vehicles are most popular (FT).

Cabinet's SMS enthusiasts say the lira’s move within EHM boosts
the case for full British participation (FT)♦

Comecon agrees to move from rigid central planning to market
-based trade system, But members still divided on how far and how
fast to go (FT).

Gorbachev due in Lithuania today    likely to meet large demo
calling for ix’sdependence,

East German Communist leaders under fire for setting up a new
version of security police.

East German governsent close to lifting ban on foreign investment
in step towards market economy <F T ).
                               4,               January 11, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Kohl warns East Germany to hold fair elections - or risk losing
economic help from the West (fT).

Western joint: ventures having little effect on Soviet
manufacturing- Disappointed Soviets consider offering more
incentives and simplyifying regulations to attract big Western
firms (F T }.

China lifts marshall law in Peking; Britain mounts two-pronged
offensive to improve relations with China while restoring
confidence in Hong Kong (F T ).

SSorld Bank likely to resume lending to China in next few weeks as
White House hints at backing for new loans {FT).

Foreign Secretary tells Tory Backbenchers Govt will go ahead with
plans to allow up to 250,000 Hong Kongers to live here and that
there will be no retreat over boat people. Mail says he was
”oommendably cool”.

Sir David Wilson, Governor of Hong Kong, rejects idea that Britain
is planning to sell out Hong Kong.

Xndepedent says growing numbers of Labour MPs appear ready to defy
the Party line, raising Govt hopes of pushing through legislation,
expected in April, to grant settlement rights to Hong Kong
Chinese.

China's two top men in Hong Kong to be replaced by hardliners with
little sympathy for the democratic aspirations of the territory
{Times}.

Guardian says Government has decided to put off further democratic
re forms in Hong Kong to avoid an t agon!sing Peking.

Mirror says Britain is to use ships and aircraft to repatriate
boat people from Hong Kong.

Express continues to focus attention on bloody repression in
Albania, raising fears of a bloodbath worse than that in Rumania.

Albanian communist party fixtsly rules out joining the rest of
Eastern Europe in introducing democratic reforms {Times}.

ICI tightens belt worldwide as it prepares for slower growth in
1990. Signs that consumer slowdown is spreading to other parts of
industry (FTK
                               5.              January 11, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Siemens! takeover of Nixdorf gives West Germany the largest
European computer company. Strengthens chance of industry being
dominated by big firms {F T ),

EC to take West Germany to court over dirty drinking water (FT).

GFGAS warns that high gas prices will damage industry’s capacity
to compete after 1992 (FT)♦

Britain may recruit US air traffic controllers sacked by Reagan
over pay dispute in 1982.

Record number of visitors to Britain last year - more than
15.Bmillion when figures are finally totted up.

MPs recommend all major museum and art galleries to consider-
charging.

Today claims consultants are moonlighting, pushing NHS patients to
one side, to make more money.

Express wants a closer watch kept on moonlighting doctors.

Gallup poll for Doctor magazine shows that out of 200 GPs only 16%
would vote Tory tomorrow, down from 61% at the last election.
Labour’s support has risen from 8% to one-third (rinses)»

National Audit Office says operations bought from private
hospitals, with, money from Govt's special fund to cut waiting
lists, costs almost twice as similar deals done within the NHS
{Indpendent}.

Extra £3Q0miIiion for disabled announced - Age Concern say it is
an insult to elderly.

Proper application of information technology could halve the
number of amputations related to diabetes each year, saving an
estimated £200million, experts at St Thomas's Hospital believe.

Mirror highlights the alleged dangers from salmonella in imported
eggs,

Social Services Select Committee accuses MAFF of not doing enough
~ and doing what it does in a vague and confusing way ~ to warn
people about the dangers of listeria.
                                6.              January 11, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Sam Brittan in FT looks at ways to help low xncostie families with
children and opposes both increase in child benefit and
x~eintroduction of child tax allowances.

Wary welcome for Peter Brooke’s efforts to get political talks
under way in Northern Ireland.

Mail leader, while acknowledging the weary cynicism over Ulster,
says the fury of the Protestants over the Ax'sglo-Irish Agreement
has given way to frustration over their self-imposed abstinence
from power, It is worth another try.

Independent editorial says it is unrealistic to suggest a solution
is in the offing. Although his assessment of the situation in
Northern Ireland is possibly too optimistic, the paper says Mr
Brooke’s judgment to resist the temptation to take dramatic
initiatives, is sound.

Times leader says there is no evidence in what Peter Brooke said
that the Govt is preparing to "abandon” the Anglo-Irish agreement.
It would be a disgraceful betrayal if it were,but the speech
bears no such consideration. It is hard to believe that its
general and innocuous phrasing could even be such a hint delivered
in code.

Guardian leader sees Mr Brooke’s speech as a signifcant, even
historic, event. There is a long way to go before there can be
talk of a breakthrough. Sut it is a sign perhaps of the
developing realism in Northern Ireland that the southern dimension
is no longer going to deter them from getting the show on the
road.

FT editorial welcomes Mr Brooke's speech. The onus is now firmly
on the parties in Ulster. Can they respond to an invitation to
sort out their own affairs ~ ox~ are they so steeped in .inertia
that stalemate has become a way of life? There does come a time
when the parties to a dispute recognise that it is pointless to go
on. That is what Mr Brooke is hoping for, if not banking on: he
is right to try.

Danny Morrison, Sinn Fein publicity officer, accused of conspiring
to murder and unlawful imprisonment.

Pallotine Fathers dismiss Father Ryan for "prolonged unlawful
absence”,
                                                 January 11, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST

Small quantity of eguipment, possibly used for bomb-making by IRA,
found near earlier discovery of Semtes in Pembrokeshire
{Independent).

Express political column concentrates on the changing times and
sayings of Kinnock.

Ron Brown MP faces demands for his resignation from a section of
his constituency.

Senior Tory MPs considering last minute appeal to you about the
amount of Treasury subsidy to cushion the introduction of the
community charge as Govt whips grow more worried about a
threatened backbench revolt next Thursday when the
revenue support trant settlement is debated (Times),

Home Office circular at the end of the month will lead to
Magistrates being told to make special arrangements to deal with
poll tax defaulters, to head off local authority fears that
’’community charge" debtors would clog the courts {Independent)»

Case of 5 Liverpool council workers who take 5 weeks to prune 6
trees until residents get District Auditor to work; performance
improves-

’’The Independent*’ makes £3.26s*iliion profit in year to 30
September 1989.

Guardian features media pressure on Ian Charleson, actor who died
of AIDS, during the latter stages of his illness,

BBC commissioned independents to produce film of Radio 3 which
produced a big row within BBC, with Radio 3 controller threatening
to resign if it were not edited, Sim: "Marvellous, isn't it? You
can cay what you like about the Be eh provided it is favourable,”

BBC plans to show play about homosexuality to children as young as
14 ~ MPs and teachers say it is irresponsible.

Express leader says plays about homosexuality are not suitable for
children and it is symptomatic of the BBC‘s contempt for the views
of values of the public it serves that it should insist otherwise.

Andrew Neil to give up executive chairmanship of Sky to return to
Sunday Times full time, Rupert Murdoch takes personal control of
Sky,
                                               January 11, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Mirror says any good Kaifu might achieve visiting Britain will be
lost unless he stops slaughter of whales.

Paul Johnson, in Mail, writes of "the other Incredible revolution”
in South Africa and expects you to go there this year,

Spanish police claims Colombians main drug ring in Europe has been
smashed.

Times leader on the increase In UK drug seizures announced
yesterday, says that congratulations should fee tempered by an
awareness of the realities behind the statitistxcs. It urges Govt
to concentrate on the consumers, because it is upon them, in the
end, that the drugs industry depends.

Independent says the credibility of Brazil’s political will to
prevent human, ecological and climatic catastrophe Is being
tested over the illegal mining going on in the province of
Rorairaa. The new President, Mr Collar de Mello, must prove his
commitment by sending in the army to oust the illegal miners.
                                                                                            ANNEX




DES:      Mr MacGregor attends Taylor Woodrow lunch with Professor J
          Ashworth reSalford University’s degree in construction

LPC:       Sir Geoffrey Howe addresses Centre for Policy Studies dinner,
           London.

WO:        Mr Walker and Mr Grist launch Health Promotion Authority for
           Wales strategy meeting, London; Mr Grist also has Healthy
           Breakfast”, Cardiff
           Mr Eggar visits B radford      ............ .... ...................... ...............
                      HOTTERVIEWS

WO:        Mr Walker interviewed by BBC Wales ’Farming in Wales
           programme

DH;        Mr Freeman interviewed by Case Weekly



TV AND RADIO,
'True Stories: Radium City* Ch4 (22,00) Effects of occupational exposure to
radiation in Canada
 ’’See for Yourself Licence payers talk to Michael Checkiand and Duke Hussey
 about the way they run the BBC
                                                              January 12, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS



Prime Minister has talks with and hosts a Xuiich for Japanese
Pruae Minister Kaifu? later appears on ’Wogan’ programme


STATISTICS

BOB:       Quarterly analysis of bank advances (Nov)                           <VV
                                                                               i
BSC/BISPA:      Usable steel production (Dec)
FARIXAMENT


                Debate on the Multi-Fibre Arrangement on a Motion for the
                Adjournment

A dSHaia^lLOshaie:      Sports and recreational facilities m London (Ms Kate
___________ ___________ Hoev)        ____________ ____________
                               2.                January 12, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Gorbachev announces he is to allow Soviet Republics to break away.

New Federation premised for Soviet Republics.

Some see this as the end of the Soviet Empire.

Gorbachev tells Lithuanians his own personal fate is linked with
outcome. Sun says if he fails, no-one could have succeeded.
Mirror describes Lithuania as his greatest gamble. Today says
Gorbachev's bravado is breathtaking and makes you and Bush look
like wiirsps, Mail, "a remarkable man".

Honecker threatened and pushed by fellow patients in lift at
hospital.

Internal NATO document says Soviet defence spending is double the
£79 billion admitted by President Gorbachev {Times).

Your warning against excessive pay increases strongly reported and
in crisis terms.

Byt Graham Mather, Director General of the Institute for Economic
Affairs, says the Government is unwise to blame employers for the
current crop of pay settlements, since it let the economy get out
of control.  It should keep monetary policy tight*

Meanwhile, Kenneth Clarke fights off calls for h,is resignation in
ambulance dispute debate which brings Government a majority of 80,
despite some 10 abstentions and one Tory voting against. Mirror
says ambulance management is asking B/Telecom to change phone
numbers so that doctors and others cannot contactstrikers direct
and prints Kenneth Clarke’s number.

"Mediator" Terry Hayes believed to be working on pay mechanism for
ambulancemen giving extra weight to better qualified crews,
Whitehall oxficial calls him ’’helpfully inclined if not a little
too enthu sias tic f! {FT }.

Barrow shipyard workers demand 15% as do MALGO. Teachers call for
20% and m m 12%. BBC staff call for 10% plus £500 "to boost
morale”.

Telegraph gives much of a page and an editoral to your interview;
leader says it was difficult to find the inspiration for another
term of office,
                                               January 12, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Joe Rogaiy, in the FT, says you have made mors effective personal
us© of Britain's "elective dictatorship” than any other peacetime
PM- To combat the recent strengthening of central government, a
new constitution, separating monarchy from Government, might be
needed (F T }.

Hitachi to build £125million microchip plant in West Germany {FT},

Daihatsu plan car assembly plant for Poland;   likely production
6,000 a year (F T )♦

Csech government to relax joint venture rules to boost foreign
investment {FT).

Channel Tunnel to cost £2.2billion more than planned, but new deal
ensures banks will continue to finance project {F T }.

As Kaifu visits Paris, French PM Rocard accuses Japan of not
playing by the same rules over trade. Open row between
protectionists and free traders in French government {F T ).

Times says that Mr Kaifu must be hoping for a more sympathetic
reception when he meets you today after being subjected in Paris
to a barrage of criticism by French Government over his country's
trade policies,

Political storm brews as Volvo sack 310 workers at Leyland Bus
despite pledge to retain workforce (FT)*

European Consumers' Bureau say British motorists are being forced
to pay a third more on average for cars than anyone else in
Western Europe,

Prospect of single market in cars receding as motor trade and
governments hinder imports across EC frontiers. Euro-Consumer
gx'oup calls for action from Brussels to open tip trade {FT) +

Restaurant fined £500 for advertising set lunches for £4.95
without mentioning 10% service charge.

Independent says government is struggling to contain a substantial
Tory revolt against community charge policy by the mainly
laftwing core of committed Conservatives. Opponents reinforced by
anxious MPs who want more help for those facing large increases.
F.obert Bunn and James Pawsey quoted as against the policy.

Today says special courts are to he set up across the country with
the power to dock wages if people do not pay community charge.
                                 4.                January 12, 1990

                            PRESS DIGEST


Local authority treasurers are privately assessing that they will
lose three times more through community charge defaulters than
they lost through rates non-payment (Times).

London University facing £43million debt {Times},

Mail notes Labour controlled Doncaster Council has decreed
children shall have "positive teaching” about South Africa’s
apartheid policies at the very time when they look destined to
disappear,

Professional Assn of Teachers condemns BBC’s decision to show
play about homosexuality to schoolchildren.

Seventeen of West Wiltshire District Council’s staff receiving
additional payments from the local computer firm privatised by the
council in June 1983 {Independent}.

Peter Kellner, writing in the Independent, says neither the Tories
nor the Labour Party have yet adjusted fully to the new-iook, more
democratic unions. While the success of your union reforms is now
posing problems for your Ministers, it is opening new
opportunities for Mr Kinnock. He can slip anchor on Labour’s past
and tell the party and public more clearly what he thinks,
Sceptics say he does not know what be thinks. This year gives his;
the perfect chance ot prove them wrong.

Norman Tebbit moves into top gear in attack against Kinnock -
"empty headed and overtongued" - and Battersley whom he describes
as "Billy Buntar and Baron Munchhausen”.

Today says Tebbit *s rebellion over Hong Kong immigration is
heading for "humiliating defeat”.

Charles Moore, in Express, says Mr Tebbit has over-reached
himself; British people are not impervious to the Government’s
case.

China tells Sir David Wilson, S o v e m o r of Hong Kong, that Britain
is fomenting protest. We should not imagine Peking will accept
increasing democratisation just because martial law has been
lifted in tbe capital.
                               5.              January 12, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Independent editorial says British policy in Hong Kong is of a
pre-emptive cringe in dealing with China. It discusses as minimal
Mr Hurd’s chances of persuading Hong Kong that we have its
interests at heart. Peking now sees Hong Kong as a liability and,
to avoid the possibility of collapse into chaos of the colony, we
should create rapdily democratic institutions, whatever the
objections of the Chinese.

Bush welcomes China's lifting of martial law as ”a very sound
step” - justifying his decision to maintain contacts (F*T}.

Under the heading ”Test of Integrity" Times leader says the task
of Douglas Hurd in Hong Kong this weekend will be to restore
confidence in Britain's honour. It urges a strong stance with
China adding that Hong Kong needs to foe endowed with firmly
entrenched democratic institutions making it plain Britain's
determination if necessary, to cut unilaterally.

Law Society backs appeal by 1,130 Hong Kong lawyers for priority
status for British passports {Times).

Case of £200 fine on unemployed youth, 17, for dropping & handful
of litter.

Woman posing as health visitor snatches baby girl, 36 hours old,
from St Thomas?s hospital.

Robert K.llroy-Siik in the Times wonders why the DPP is taking so
long to decide whether to prosecute those Muslims who have called
publicly for Salmon Rushdie to be murdered. What can he be afraid
of?

Police chiefs studying blueprint for a national criminal
investigation and intelligence unit (Times).

Leicestershire Police launch inquiry into allegations that
detectives from Nottinghamshire force helped to fabricate the
confession of an informer {Independent ),

Authorities knew loyalist terrorists had a security file on
McBrearty when they expelled him to Northern Ireland. McBrearty
claims this has increased the risk of his being assassinated


You pay tribute to brave journalists who risked their lives in
Rumania and other trouble spots in opening Scribes media club.
                               8.              January 12, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

RAF Molesworth to be converted into a new military intelligence
centre for US forces in Europe.

South African Minister rules out abolition of apartheid in school
(F T ).

UK ready to end ban on contact with ANC. Sisulu likely to meet
Douglas Hurd this month as belief grows that ANC’s guerrilla
activity has been suspended (FT ),

French Government approves joint missile venture between BAe and
Thomson CSF (FT).

Mexico agrees with banks on package to ease massive debt burden
(FT).

PAY

Star p>2 - Giant wage deals will put jobs on the line ~ Maggie hit
out as Ford workers say 10% offer isn’t enough, Leader says the
Government itself is responsible for some of the biggest wage
increases, Why should ordinary workers feel guilty when judges,
doctors, generals and Civil Service mandarins are coining it?

Sun. p2 - Wages stampede "is way to dole” - Maggie’s warning to
unions.

Mirror p2 - "Don’t blame me for pay row havoc” - it says you
blamed everyone but the Government for the growing crisis over
pay.

Today p2 - Jobs suicide as Imillion join pay stampede. Leader
says that like cavalrymen answering a bugle call, unions are
lining up for another suicidal charge over pay, You got to the
nub of the matter yesterday when you pointed out that Britain’s
wage costs are rising faster than any of our competitors.  If
union leaders have their members’ interests at heart they will
call off the pay charge.

           ~ Big pay rises will cost jobs warns Thatcher, Leader
says the Government must not slacken in the fight to bring down
inflation. It cannot allow money supply to expand to accommodate
wage rises or matched bv increased productivity.
                                               January 12, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Hail pi - Britain faces pay havoc - wage costs outstripping those
of competitors. Leader headed "Ford the wrong model for pay" says
the resulting twist in the wage spiral if others followed Ford
would nobble Britain’s recovery and cause needless loss of jobs.
Nor can Ford workers be smug when Euro car competition is hotting
up.

Independent says you stepped up the Government campaign against an
escalation of wage settlements by exhorting managements and
employees to show greater responsibility and moderation-  In the
face of your determination, ambulance union leaders faced growing
grassroots pressure for more stilitant action.

Independent editorial says the Government has little right to
expect its anti-inflationary policy to be taken seriously when it
has been presiding over a decline in sterling which has provided
many companies with a cushion against the effects of double-digit
wage settlements. The Government’s exhortations against such
increases would be snore convincing if its own policies had not
helped to shield companies such as Ford from the consegue nci es.

FT - Government voices concern over impact of high pay awards on
its economic strategy. You call recent wage increases "very
disturbing” as several ministers harden stance against demands of
the ambulancemen.

Tiffies - You issue stark warning that workers were pricing
themselves out of jobs with high wage demands. Leader under the
heading "Agenda for Chevening" says whatever the outcome at Ford,
the case for a tough Budget is strong. Mr Major has made it clear
that he believes in a firm fiscal policy to buttress a strong
anti-inflationary monetary policy. The Budget must see him
deliver.    It concludes that the most Ingenious and far-reaching
tax reforms will avail the Conservatives little at the next
election if the Government has failed to get inflation under lock
and key.

Independent ~ Managers in a range of industries are uneasy over
possible rush of ”me too” claims following rejection of Ford’s
10.2% pay offer. Elsewhere, Ford deal could mean wages bill
actually rising by well over 11%.
                               8.              January 12, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Telegraph pi - Cabinet toughens line on ambulance pay amid growing
concern over impact on economy of high wage settlements. Leader
says that the Government's proper response is perfectly clear; as
well as holding the line in the public sector it must make it
plain it is not prepared to underwrite unjustified wage inflation
with a weak exchange rate. The pound has fallen sufficiently to
provide a dangerous amount of head room.

Guardian pi - Chorus of wage demands fuels Thatcher’s fear of
inflation. Leader says there is an urgent need to devise a
counter cyclical boost in the budget to preserve the recent
buoyancy of manufacturing Investment and do something about
infrastructure and training before 1992.

FT editorial says John Major needs to convince people that the
Government is not just talking about "bearing down on Inflation”
but is prepared to actually to do so as the howls rise.
                                                                          ANNEX




 DEM,       Lord Strathclyde launches Selcare Trust Project, Manchester
DEM:       Mr Nieholis visits Training Providers and Civic Offices, Portsmouth
DH:        Mrs Bottomley visits Newcastle re Community Care; later addresses
           West Surrey Joint Consultants Committee
DTI.       Lord Trefgarne addresses Trade Associations and Chambers of
           Commerce, City Conference Centre, London
HO:        Mr Mellor addresses conference on the Broadcasting Bill and the
           future of European television, University of Sussex
WO:        Mr Grist launches Welsh Keep Britain Tidy campaign, Cardiff Castle

M m S TEES (OVERSEAS VTSITS)

           M? Hurd visits Hong Kong (to 17 January)
TV AND RADIO

"Any Questions?” BBC Radio 4 (20,05) (repeated 13/1.90. 13-lOhrs) with Ken
Lmngstone MP, Eric Pickles, Mary Kenny, Sue Slipman
 PRIMS MINISTER


 MAIN EVENTS

 EC: House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee visit Madrid re enquiry
     into the Single European Act (to 16 January (prov); alternative dates are
     22 to 24 January)

 EC: European Parliament Plenary, Strasbourg (to 19 January)
DTI: Launch of SMART 1990


C8I:         CBI/FT Survey of distributive trades (Dec)
CSO:         Producer price index numbers (Dec-prov)
CSO          Retail sales (Dec-prov)

PARLIAMENT
Commons

Questions:         Transport; Chancellor of the Duchv of Lancaster; Church
                   Commissioners
                   Environmental Protection Bill: 2nd Reading, Money and Wavs
                   and Means Resolutions
Adjournment Debate:           Industrial disablement benefit: The case of Mr Ronald
                              Davidson (Mr Alan M e a le )
Select Committees:            TELEVISING OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE HOUSf;
                              Subject: Assistance for the Deaf in following
                              Televised Parliamentary Proceedings
                              Witnesses: Royai National Institute for
                              the Deaf; British Deaf Association;
                              BBC; Independent Broadcasting Authority;
                              Sky Television

                              PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                              Subject: Text processing in the Civil Service
                              Witnesses: Mr J S Unwin, Customs and Excise,
                              Sir Michael Quinlan, Ministry of Defence
                              TREASURY AND CIVIL SERVICE
                              Subject: International Debt Strategy
                              Witnesses: War on Want (at 430};’
                              Oxfatn (at 5 1 '
Lords;                   Questions
                        afety Bill (ML): Committee (1st:
                  Trade Union Act 1984 (Amendment) Bill (HL) Committee
                               2.               January 15, 1390

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

MORI gives Labour a slightly increased lead over last quarter of
1989 - up 1% -to 8% (48/4G/SLDP 4/Green 4/SDP 2. Times says poll
shows Labour might be suffering from plateau effect.

Times leader describes the shift in public opinion against the
Govt In the last quarter of 1989 as hardly dramatic. It does not,
however, offer Kinnock safe insurance against a revival of
Conservative popularity if the economny were to Improve. Labour
is not finding it easy to break though to popularity in its own
right. Yet you have much more reason to worry about your party’s
position, now than during any previous mid-term shift of opinion.

SLDP poll says overwhelming ssajority of family doctors opposed to
NHS reforms,

S~tar poll shows more than a third say Govt should put sick and
those who care for them first.

Labour Party preparing for a General Election next year.

Mirror says   TGWJ andHUM are facing a cash crisis.

Ethnic rioting leaves 30 dead in Azerbaijan; Azeris go on rampage
hunting Armenians and plundering their homes.

TASS says situation in some areas is out of control. Threat of
civil war.

Three people said to have been burned alive in violence.

Armenian nationalists declare ’total mobilisation’; reports of
fighting between the two communities In Nagorny Karabakh and
outlying parts of Azerbaijan {Independent j.

Soviet Onion facing mid-winter energy crisis as north Siberian oil
fields shut down for lack of maintenance because of critical
shortage of aviation,fuel in region (FT).

50,000 Bulgarians demonstrate in Sofia calling for wider
democratic reforms and assurances about elections.

Romanian Govt in disarray after its decree outlawing Communist
Party is thrown in doubt.

FT says an Army coup cannot be ruled out In Rumania to
guarantee stabi11ty >
                               3.              January 15, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Rumours of an Army coup in Albania sweep Yugoslavia.

Several thousand of Mongolians stage rally in Ulan Bator calling
for end of Communist Party monopoly.

East Germany!s economics Minister explains economic reform
programme abandoning all talk of socialist market economy.

Independent editorial says in both Eastern Europe and the USSR,
Japan is preparing itself as a political as well as economic
partner, The Japanese have a lot to offer, but there is
tremendous opportunity for them too. As the Cold War ends Japan is
left with the power to play a global role: her leaders must now
accept the responsibility which goes with that power*

Extreme Rightwing Republicans demonstrate in Bavaria for unified
Germany, with capital Berlin.

Govt denies shoot to kill policy in Ulster after 3 men, habitual
criminals and carrying replica firearms, were shot dead by
undercover soldiers while robbing a betting shop in Belfast. Sun
says two had 36 convictions.

Host newspapers who comment understand, shooting; Guardian and
Independent want full statement and Independent an Inquiry.

Retired Chief Constable Hermon says he threatened to resign if any
EUC officers were prosecuted over shoot to kill allegations.

Ambulance crews at Crawlay decide to stay on strike after they
fail twice to answer emergency calls to man who died*

Ford craftsmen expected to walk out of Halewood and Bridgend
plants today in strike against 10.-% offer.

Claims that Ford failed to introduce all the efficiency changes
required to pay for its high pay deal in 1988.

General Motors sets up factory in Hungary to make engine.3 for
VauxhalX Astra and Cavalier*

Police issue photo likeness of woman believed to have stolen
36-hour old baby from St Thomas *s Hospital.

Korean Tebbit calls for referendum at ne^st general election as
plan to admit 225,000 Hong Kong people. He says plan could lead
to ethnic strife,
                               5.                 April 6, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Commons Cfctee to call for shake-up of Crown Prosecution Service,
with more cash and stronger safeguards against corruption
CIndepednent).

Govt decides to try to settle the abortion controversy by using an
unprecedented procedure which could mean MPs voting throughout the
night on a series of alternatives for changing the law (Times).

BBC reducing staff by 1,000 because income is failing to keep pace
with pay rises; up to 9,000 to go eventually.

Granada says there were ’’more than 20 half-truths and omissions”
in the police’s attack on their Birmingham Six programme
{Independent).

Provisional agremeent by staff and management to buy out New
Statesman & Society.

Hon Brown MP de-selected in Leith.

Writs and allegations of conference packing halt selection of
Labour candidate in Southall where Syd Bldwell seems likely to be
de-selected.

Parliamentary Labour Party spending rose by 20% in last year
{Independent}.

Sun priases Bishop of Durham for advocating disestablishment of
Church of England.

Lithuanians hint at compromise over independence (Independent ).

UK in first tentative contact with Lithuanian leadership while
William Waldegrave warns the Soviets not to thwart Baltic
independence {Independent}.

Times says that the Soviet Union and its former East European
satellites are set to agree to establish free enterprise and a
complete range of economic reforms designed to allow the private
sector to develop and to encourage foreign Investment.

Solidarity shipyard at Gdansk to be privatised.

Lothar de Maiziere appointed Prime Minister of East Germany.

East Germans demand 1:1 currency conversion rate.
                               6.              April 6, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Times says that majority of Kohl’s govt was understood to be in
favour of ignoring some of the Bundesbank's demands and seeking a
wider one-for-one conversion of East marks for West marks when
German monetary union goes ahead.

West Germany to present plan for economic union with East soon
after Easter, Complete authority for monetary affairs to be held
by Bundesbank says Finance Minister Waizel (Independent)»

Mail claims 1. Smillion are suffering from exposure to radiation in
Chernobyl area.

de Klerk and Mandela get together and put political negotiations
back on the rails.

Times leader says that the time is fast approaching when Mandela
will have to test the strength of his popularity against the
warring ANC factions and the township mafias as well as against
the traditional white enemy« Otherwise the negotiating space he
and de Klerk have constructed between them will be obliterated by
those on both sides of South Africa’s racial divide who believe
that conflict is the only path to victory.

Czech armed forces may have sent illegal Semtex supplies to Libya,
on top of official exports (Independent ).
                                                                       Kmmx

M m m m M m v is m , s p e e c h e s    F m

DEM:    Mr Howard addresses Institute of Personnel Management Oxford
FCO;    Mr Hurd attends Anglo/Argentine conference, Westwell

         ^ n g n d S ^ H ^ 100 ° penS factory ext€ns*ort at James Stroud Insulations,

HMT:     Mr Major addresses RAF Benevolent Fund, Guildhall

LPC:    Sir Geoffrey Howe addresses National Conference on Alcohol, Oxford
SO.     Mr Rifkind^ performs Next Steps Agency launch. Department of the
        Registers ot Scotland, Meadowbank flouse, Edinburgh; later, with Lord
                                  nteets COSLA convention on RSG settlement
        1991-92; Mr Rulund also addresses 8MA dinner
DEM; Lord Strathclyde opens new Granada Studies, Manchester
DEN:    Mr Morrison tours British Nuclear Fuels Ltd, Sellafield
DH:     Mrs Bottomiev visits Kent community care facilides

DSS:    Lord Henley visits Doncaster East Local Office and the Doncaster
         inner City Task Force

DTI.    Lxjrd Trefgarne visits Derby and addresses Business in Derbyshire
         USSR1 !at£r meetS Mr Panichev< Machine Tools Minister from' the

FCO:    Mr Sainsbury meets the prospective Nicaraguan Foreign Minister, Sr
        Emilio Alvarez

MAFF: Mr Curry tours Fishing '90 Exhibition, Glasgow

SO.     Lord Sanderson visits Fishing '90 Exhibition, Scottish Exhibition and
        Conference Centre. Glasgow

*0.     Mr Grist addresses        Federation   of   Civil    Engineering Contractors'
        dinner, Cardiff                                        w        s




DH:     Mr Freeman visits Spain

FCO:   Mr Maude visits Hong Kong (to 11 April)
FCO:   Lord Brabazon visits Botswana. Lesotho and Zimbabwe (to 9 April)


FCO:    Mr Hurd interviewed bv Radio Oxford
                                                                     &HNEX




IY A H D _E A G ia

H od glo™    Papers Say" BBC 2 ^7'1S pm)           Introduced by freelance Godfrey

                                    4 < * * P « 1 W i* Chris Patten, Gerald Kaufaaa,
               o “ t h f n h « ,i n f f „ vf P » By «“ * J » « * e r of Federal P oito
A S lc o -in S 's io ^            Democrats) and Howard Danes (Controller of the

Survival Special” - The Elephants of Tsavo:      Love and Betravai fTV (Q An nm\
Report ?rom the Tsavo National Park in Kenva              **trayai i r \ (9.00 pm)
                               1.              April 11, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

France comes in for severe press criticism for trading 3 Mirage
fighters in return for release of hostages and praising Gaddafi
for his intervention,

Tom King, visiting Paris, welcomes a certain rapprochement in
Anglo/French relations in light of changing defence needs
(Independent)♦

New trouble in prison; warder held hostage at Shotts prison in
Scotland. 4 warders at Strangeways injured when 19 inmates still
holding out as seige enters 11th day, throw missiles at them.

Today calls on Govt to end the incident by force.

Independent says senior prison staff at Strangeways resigned to
use of force against remaining inmates still inside the prison.
Scope of Lord Justice Woolf’s inquiry extended to cover other
prison riots.

Sun commenting on Archbishop Runcie*s shame at there being so many
prisoners in our jails, says it is shameful Britain produces so
many criminals. One reason for this is the decline in spiritual
and moral values.

Mirror calls for a sufficient show of force at Strangeways to
force those holding out there is no alternative to surrender.

Express also wants an end to ”this gruesome pantomime".

Lambeth becomes the 21st local authority to be charge capped.

Sun says Tory researchers have discovered that Labour’s roof tax
could cost up to four times community charge.

Lynda Lee Potter in Mail wants you to find the strength to admit
you were wrong over the community charge.

Telegraph leader comes out in favour of retaining the system but
introducing banding according to income.

Sir Alan Walters launches a stinging attack on EMS and rejects
full membership. He blames Nigel Lawson for high interest rates
for following D/Mark,

House prices slump across Britain.
                                2.                  April 11, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST

 Halifax Building Society say it is too early to say if bottom of
 housing market reached, but predict price rises next year


 NUR reject 8.5% as unacceptable;    ask for 10%.

 Michael Howard, in Express, commenting on Ford withdrawal from
 South Wales, says Labour would destroy confidence of foreign
 investors in Britain.

 M&AA says Dagenham workers have rejected an efficiency plan
 because it would mean the end of the traditional tea trolley.

 Next store group fall £4.7mili±on into red.

           says EC leaders are ready to steam ahead to full scale
 political una.on regardless of your agreement.

A change in 6th form courses is expected after recommendation, in
a Govt commissioned report, that all students should be tauqht
practical skills.

      calls for legislation of cannabis after Princess Anne, at
international drugs conference, outlined the pitiful legacy of
drug abuse. Local drug prevention teams to be set up in seven of
worst drug areas in Britain.

Ministers to examine a special child care allowance for single
mothers to help them return to work, according to Express.

Haughey to visit Belfast today amid Loyalist anger and likelihood
of demos - substantial security operation.

            editorial is critical of Mr Haughey »s comments that
court decisions have no effect on the IRA, saying his position is
cynical and contemptible. Meanwhile, the British Govt Is
hamstrung: until it scraps the Anglo-Irish agreement it will
prolong the uncertainty about the province’s future which feeds
IRA hopes. Concluding that if you cannot understand the IRA’s
motxves, it is no wonder you fail to appreciate the constitutional
framework needed for their defeat*

     calls ^or Channel 4 to be shut down for using actor husband
of IRA bomber to get round ban on televising Sinn Fein; he will
speak words of Gerry Adams in 16 minute Interview.

Channel 4 says it has stuck to the law and the programme is a
serious piece of journalism.
                                3.                April 11, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST


Sun says no doubt Channel 4 thinks it a neat trick.     in truth
their behaviour is outrageous.

Today says the sight of Adams mouthing to camera while an actor
does a voice over would be hilarious if it were not so stupid.
The law should be changed so that Sinn Fein/IRA can condemn
themselves out of their own mouths.

Mail heading:   TV ?dirty trick’ show to go ahead.

Adams, in interview, says talks with British Govt would bring end
to terror campaign.

Telegraph leads with IRA being told by Govt that an end to
 v
 iolence is a precondition for talks.

Peter Jenkins, writing in the Independent, previews the talks in
Bermuda saying that since President Bush’s inauguration the
balance of Atlantic and European power has shifted dramatically
with Germany the dominant European power, and Britain looking
increasingly isolated. He concludes that you will slowly and
reluctantly come to terms with the realities of your power
position.

Chairman of Reed Employment said to be about to mount a rescue of
charity War on Want.

British Allies offer to take up to 225,000 Hong Kong people.
Express headline - "West to rescue Maggie on Hong Kong". Its
leader describes it as an encouraging breakthrough.

Gibraltar scrapping military governor - civil replacement.

Gorbachev threatens to impose direct personal rule on Lithuania;
Foreign Secy urges USSR not to use force.

Independent says likelihood of economic sanctions against
Lithuania grows, with possibility of emergency presidential rule
to restore Moscow’s authority.

Soviet Union accepts your version of "a great alliance for
democracy from Atlantic to Urals” (FT).

Walesa says he will run for President of Poland.

9 die as black violence flares in Johannesburg.
                                 4.                 April 11, 1990

                            PRESS DIGEST

ANC announce Mandela to visit nine countries, but Britain not on
11st (Independent).

BSC cricket correspondent to be sued for libel by West Indian Test
umpire .

HOSTAGE RELEASE

Star - Freedom at a price- Cost was 3 jets. Leader says that
while the release is wonderful news the price is too high and it
backs the British stand.

Sun - The lot swapped for 3 jets.

Mirror - Free I   Baby born a hostage.     France rapped over jets
dea 1.

Today ~ Libya hostage Sophie is swapped for jets.

Express - Free at last.    Toddler who was b o m a hostage.

Mali - Gaddafi’s price over hostages was return of his warplanes.
Leader finds no joy in the deal that oiled the key in the lock.
The gratitude of the French Foreign Minister to Gaddafi is
sufficiently cloying to turn all but the strongest stomachs. The
odd woman out in this shabby world is Britain’s Prime Minister.
We would not have our Prime Minister act in any other way.

Independent ~ Paris praises Gaddafi’s role as couple return to
France with daughter born in captivity.  Editorial comments that
hostage deals are wrong and erode the credibility of the legal
system.  It concludes the balance of arguments lie on the side
of principled reluctance to deal with terrorists, agonising though
this must be to hostages and their families.

          ~ Hostage-born baby free.

Times ~ Hostage deal gave Gaddafi Mirage jets.

FT - French praise Libyan role in hostage deal.

Guardian - Hostages fly to freedom from Beirut.
                                                                April 18, 1990
PHIME MINISTER


MAIM EVENTS

Houses of Parliament resume
Government Response to Select Committee Report on ONESCO
Prime Minister sees Swiss Finance Minister, Dr Stitch and Mr Lusser
Belgium Foreign Minister, Mr Eyskens visits London

NEDO Public Procurement conference, QEII Conference Centre, London (and 19
April)_____________  •______                                   ____________

STATT.ST1.CS.
CSO/DEM:         Index of output of the production industries and unit wage
                 costs (Feb)              _       ______
CSO:             Retail sales (Mar-prov)
DOE:            Housing and construction statistics part one   number 40 (Dec
                Qtr 1989)___________ _________________________________________
PARLIAMENT
Commons

Questions:      Trade and Industry
Business:       10 Minute Rule Bill: National Lottery (Mr Ken Hargreaves)
                Courts and Legal Services Bill (Lords): 2nd Reading
Adjournment Debates:        Compensations for Vaccine damaged children (Mr A
                            Bun)

Select Committees:

Lords:    Starred Questions
          Debate to call attention to the problems affecting the tenant tanner
          Debate to call attention to the forestry industry in the United
          Kingdom
          UQ to ask HMG what proposals they haveto prevent                          the
__________exploitation of tourists and of the public by ticket touts_________ ________
                               2               April 18, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Lithuania urges America to support them against Soviet threat to
cut energy supplies. USA waits to see what Soviets do.

Bush says US will make appropriate responses if threat
implemented, contrasting starkly with his Administration's
formerly muted criticism.

Today says we should call Gorbachev’s bluff by supplying
Lithuania.

Teachers get a hammering in editorials for threatening national
strike over local redundancies. NAS/UWT to vote today after NUT
conference rejects executive advice against action. Today says
one million children have been targetted.

NUT also votes by a big majority to explore ways of banning tests
for 7, II and 14 year olds.

Charge capped councils expected to challenge in the courts the
education cuts {Independent).

FT leader on the curriculum says your criticisms of your own
policy are largely sound. The Govt should not abandon its
curriculum but it needs to find a more flexible means of pursuing
national educational goals.

Xinnock comes in for critical attention over his alleged black
power salute at Mandela concert. He denies it was such a salute;
says he was simply expressing jubiliation. Press and Tory MPs
have a go at him.

Sun feature: Short fuse Kinnock always puts his foot in it. Sir
Cyril Smith calls it childish conduct. Express political editor:
"Fatal flaws of the eternal bayo" - the perpetual student
activist.

Express leader headed ”Mandela must deliver more than cliches"
says the ANC has yet to prove its good faith. There can be no
question of your going to South Africa until it does.

You make it clear you will go to South Africa as and when you
decide; your objective will be to speed the end of apartheid.
Mirror describes this as a snub to Mandela. Independent says HO
10, stung by Mandela's comments at Wembley, says he should get his
own house in order before offering advice toyou.
                               3.               April 18, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

da Klerk rejects concept of outright majority rule in South
Africa. Times - Power sharing only alternative to apartheid.
Simplistic majority rule would lead to the suppression of
minorities.

33 die in Zulu clashes in Natal.

Viewers condemn BBC for coverage of Mandela concert accusing it of
misleading public and political indoctrination.

Guardian leader says de Klerk showed yesterday that nothing is
going to be given away free in negotiations. Mandela will need
his tactical skills in the coming clash at the negotiating table.

Telegraph leader says that of more importance than the Wembley
jamboree is how Mandela is going to use his megastar status back
home. His refusal to see you is an indication of the constraints
on him.

FT leader on Mandela questions the value of our unilateral action
in lifting the sanctions on new British investment in the
Republic.  Pretoria’s appreciation is doubtful; the damage to
relations with most South African blacks is plain. Any future
moves should be taken in concert with EC and Bush. Which may seem
unfair to de Klerk who has taken bolder and more radical steps
than any of this predecessors. The ANC could improve the climate
by suspending the nearly dormant guerilla campaign and dropping
the rhetoric of the armed struggle. International goodwill will
eventually be eroded if the ANC comes to be seen as disorganised,
obdurate, and unreasonable„

Jesse Jackson under fire for taking up case of three men jailed
for murder of PC Blakelock in Broadwater Farm riot.

Express leads with story headed "Mind your   own business Jackson ”;
its leader says Jackson obviously believes   the road to the White
House runs through Broadwater Farm, Hence    his impudent and
irresponsible support for campaign to free   PC Blakelock's killers,

Mail leader says that on the principle that nothing succeeds like
excess, Jackson compared the release of Mandela to the
resurrection.  But what is intolerable is that in search of
publicity in this country he should choose indecently to intrude
into a brutal crii^e which is none of his business.

Walter Somers fears it may have supplied Iraq with a recoil
mechanism for big gun, Express ”The doomsday gun con”.
                               4.              April 18, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Independent savs Customs & Excise are under intense political
pressure not to prosecute the two British companies involved in
the "Iraqi Supergun" affair, to avoid details of the extent of
Govt involvement in the deal according to Whitehall sources.

Labour Party runs full page adverts trying to identify the Tories
as the party who conned the nation in 1979.

Meanwhile, R W Johnson, Fellow of Magdalen, says what looms most
clearly from Labour policies at the moment is a return to the
’60s, a prices and incomes Keynesianism tempered by Civil Service
rule and the politics of Box and Cox.

Seven prisoners still holding out at Strangeways reported to be
weak, Sun says Governor should send in the Army.

Lawyer claims that at least five prisoners were murdered during
the riot and that bodies have been incinerated.

Bail hostels and accommodation for recently released prisoners may
be privatised while probation officers concentrate on other work,
under Home Office proposals {Times).

Tory Party whips will today embark on a final attempt to limit the
size of the expected backbench rebellion over Hong Kong passports
(Tiroes}.

Cream of US business world praise John Smith and Labour’s economic
ideas (Mirror).

Kinnock to visit Washington possibly as early as July to build on
improved relations between the Bush administration and the Labour
Party (Times}. Leader discusses the relationship between Bush and
Labour Party saying the domestic policies of an ally are not the
business of the US, except to the extent that they affect its
external relations.  The Americans, however, will want to know
more about Labour’s true state of mind on NATO, the British
contribution to it and its attitude to the nuclear umbrella. They
will not find much by combing Labour’s policy documents and
statements.

Independent editorial says President Bush's remarks, that he would
be happy to meet Kinnock should not be taken as an endorsement of
Labour’s economic policies, rather that the perception in the US
is that Labour no longer represents a unilateralist threat. Going
on to analyse Labour’s tax politicos, and referring back to their
analysis of this in February, the paper concludes a more detailed
examination might raise rather than resolve doubts.
                                5.              April 18, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Labour Party planning to limit employers’ use of the courts to
frustrate strike action by trade unions (Times).

Guardian previews Labour Party campaigning document on "flagship
policies" - economy, opportunities, environment, democracy and
arms.

FCO and European Commission to launch a recruitment drive to
persuade British graduates and job seekers that working in the
Commission can be a worthwhile career {Independent).

Honda will build new car for Europe in UK after Rover deal
(Times),

Inflation fear resurfaces in the markets after Easter break.
Concern not only about OK where inflation due to peak this summer
but also about US where inflation is runing at 8.5% (FT).

French inflation up slightly to 0.3% (FT).

Airbus to deliver its 500th aircraft today - Mail leads with this
news under heading "Triumph in the air”.

Treasury to be asked to approve plans by CAA to spend extra
£400million on new capital projects over next decade as part of
European efforts to end delays and congestion in the skies
(Times).

Gateway supermarket now offers paternity leave to men as part of
competitive pay and conditions fight in retail trade.

British and Commonwealth brought to brink of collapse by
disastrous losses at a computer leasing subsidiary.

Guardian. says London Ambulance service is to foe effectively
privatised.

Michael Portillo seems to rule out any prospect of a govt subsidy
for the Channel Tunnel high speed rail link {Times).

The full Eurotunnel board will consider this week new estimates o
costs for completing the Channel Tunnel {Times).

Guardian claims EC is ready to help finance London/Chunne1 rail
link.
                                               April 18, 1950

                          PRESS DIGEST

Dismay among environmentalists at President Bush’s remarks at
White House conference on global change on the need for a better
scientific basis before costly measures proceed.

Times says significant differences between the US and European
countries about how to tackle the greenhouse effect emerged again
yesterday when President Bush opened his conference-

Star, continuing its campaign against Sellafield, reports a plan
to fly nuclear waste from Japan to UK. Sellafield transport
director accuses Star of ignoring Press Council’s call on it to be
accurate, fair and balanced.

Mail pictures Kenneth Baker doing his turn as a dustman in
Westminster as part of local election campaign.

BMA poll shows that public opposition to Govt's health service
reforms has reached new heights with 77% disapproving, 6% more
than similar poll in January (Times}.

Warnings that Neurofen, popular painkiller, could damage kidneys.

Chicago scientists claim a specific gene may be responsible for
alcoholism in some individuals.  It was found in 77% of 35
alcoholics who died but was not present in 72% of a sample of
non-alcoholics {FT ?.

Church of Scotland Committee criticises the Govt's social
policies, saying those most in need often cannot get the help they
need {Independent}.

SBC expects to receive an unexpected bonus worth £10million a year
due to an apparent change of heart by the Govt over the licence
fee (Times).

Jill Morrell, girlfriend of John McCarthy, hostage in Lebanon,
calls for Govt action to free him; time Govt was more flexible.

Ronald Butt writing in the Times under the heading "Germans find a
substitute for abandoned patriotism" reports on the reason
underlying Kohl’s concern for closer European integration.

One third of Yugoslav companies are on the brink of bankruptcy
<FT).

Law officers in USA order 173 banks in 23 States to give details
of accounts into which £.240miilion of drug profits are believed to
have been deposited-
                                               April 18, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Belgians obsessed with identifying a UFO of which there have been
more than 800 sightings since December. Air Force flying
reconnaissance missions (FT).

Two Canadian airforce jets collided over Karlsruhe yesterday
killing one pilot and badly injuring another. Crash likely to
fuel controversy about foreign forces on West German territory
(FT).

TEACHERS

Star p2 - Teachers ticked off for banning tests, Harry Greenway
says it will hurt children. Another story prints a picture of a
woman Militant pledged to inflict strikes on children.

Star leader says NUT Is a bunch of chumps,  Its leaders have lost
control of Leftwing loonies who could not give a damn about the
pupils. They care only about disruption and power.

Sun p2 - Teachers at war over school strikes vote. Action could
be illegal. Leader headed "The HUT~casesM says that as well as
harming children they are on course for personal disaster. When
will they ever learn?

Mirror p2 - No Sir! Union bosses defy strike vote. Leader says
teachers have a stack of genuine grievances but they will lose
support of parents and public if they listen to Militants. And a
national strike would cost teachers’ jobs.

Today p4 - Class war boast of Miss Militant - featuring Anita
Dickinson, Militant supporter, who teaches handicapped children in
Ealing. Leader says the sight of the HUT activists getting their
dander up is enough to make any parent feel sick. Genuinely
concerned teachers must realise that unions are no longer the best
means of influencing the education system,

Express p2 1 & 2 - War as teachers plit over school strike call.
Put pupils first says MacGregor,  inside feature on ’’Truth about
Reds in our classrooms”.

Mail pi - Threat of classroom war after victory for militants.
Leader headed "Lesson in how not to lead a union’* says the
irresponsibility of the majority of conference delegates is
exceeded only by the ineptitude of Doug McAvoy, general secretary.
The conduct of Britain’s largest teaching union is worse than
that of the ssost unruly class. Children deserve better.
                               8.               April 18, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Telegraph pi lead - Schools strike vote rejected by NUT
leadership. Leader says given the chance the NUT executive would
like to stay in business with this Govt and make deals with it.
It knows strikes are futile.

Independent pi - Teachers' leaders disown national strikes vote.
Editorial says the NUT vote was morally wrong and tactically
disastrous, and that the conference showed the NUT is an obstacle
to raising the standards in British schools.  It concludes that it
Is hard to avoid the suspicion that delegates must secretly have
intended to promote private education by discrediting the state
system.

Times pi - NUT leaders defy strike vote. NUT thrown into
confusion as conference votes in favour of national strikes to
support redundant teachers, a decision its president immediately
rules Illegal.

Guardian pi lead - NUT rules out Illegal strikes. Leader says few
professions would want to be judged by their annual conference.
Rarely have teachers had more genuine grounds for grievance. Yet
a national strike would be unsupported by mass membership,
financially, unsustainable and illegal.

FT pi - Defiant NUT members vote for strikes.
                                                                        ANNEX

MINISTERS a iK VISITS- SPEECHES E T O
DEM:     Mr Howard launches Devon and Cornwall Training and
         Enterprise Council, Plymouth
DTI:    Mr Ridley meets Lords Gowrie and Carrington about export review
        procedure, London
LPC:    Sir Geoffrey Howe addresses NEDG Public Procurement conference,
         London
DEM:     Mr Eggar chairs NEDO Public Procurement conference,                      London;
         later attends European Public Purchasing conference, London
DES;     Mr Jackson addresses Course Four European conference delegation
         of students from High Education Institutes in North West European
         Countries, House of Commons
DH-      Mr Freeman visits Dartford District Health Authority and District
         Headquarters. Darenth Park; later with Robert Key meets the doctors
         from SARUM 89, London
DH;      Mrs Bottomiev visits West Midlands re-launch of United Midlands
         College for Nursing and Midwifery, Wolverhampton
DOE;     Mr H eathcoat-A m ory        lunches    w ith    the      Country     Landowners
         Association
DSS;     Lord Henlev meets Lord Westbury and a small delegation from the
         Council of 'Care for the Elderly to discuss income support levels for
         nursing homes
DTI;     Mr Forth speaks at HR Industrial Recycling conference, London
DTI;     Mr Hogg and Mr Redwood attend Ministers Meeting Europe, FCG,
         London
DTp:     Mr Portillo visits British Steel, Workington
DTp;     Mr McLaughlin guest of honour             at    British    Maritime    Equipment
         Council lunch, London
HMT;     Lord Caithness      addresses    NEDG      Public      Procurement     conference,
         London
GAL;     Mr Luce attends        concert    by   BBC      Symphony      Orchestra,    Royal
         Festival Hall
• WO;    Mr Roberts presents liv e Wire Cymru Business Start-up Competition
         awards, Bangor
                                                                 April 19, 1990
 PRIME MINISTER


 MAIN EVENTS

    Prince of Wales hosts private EC/UK conference at Sandringham on
    agriculture and environment

    ? Voluntary repatriation of Vietnamese Boat People

    Anglo-Irish conference meeting in London

 STATISTICS

 BoEl             Institutional investment (4th Qtr)

 HMT/CSOz         Public sector borrowing requirement           (Mar)

         :        PCA annual report 1989


 POBLICATIQNS

                  Finance Bill at 9am and 7 press notices {3 IS, 4 C&E)

PARLIAMENT

Commons

•2 HS£tionsr      Agriculture, Fisheries and Food;           Prime Minister

—     — —                       c>rxa1it.y (Hong Kong) Bill: 2nd Reading

M l2 H £S S^t_Debatesi        The second Severn crossing (Mr R Hughes)

M g £ t _Coim ittees:         Commons Defence Committee reports on reliability
                              and maintainability of defence equipment

Leidsi       Starred Questions
             D av°nai Heakh Service and Community Care Bill:          Committee (1st
             Bromley London    Borough   Council (Crvstal   Palace)   Bill:   Second
             Reading
                                 2.              April 19, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Wain News

Russia cuts off oil to Lithuanian refinery;     Lithuanian Prime
Minister in Norway seeking oil supplies,

Times says it is possible that the move by Moscow reflects a fear
that oil supplies across the Soviet Union will have to be
suspended shortly if workers in the Tyumen fields go through with
their promise to strike.

Blockade of Lithuania could backfire on Moscow by affecting
supplies to Kalinigrad, in the Western Soviet Union, and possibly
encourage a tougher Western reaction (Independent).

James Baker warns that US/Soviet trade and commercial contacts are
threatened by failure to resolve Lithuanian crisis. Summit on May
30 safe (FT).

Soviet trade union federation has pledged to block any move to a
market economy which causes unemployment and calls for sacrifices
for the low paid (FT).

Sir Hal Miller twice warned Govt Depts on behalf of William Somers
that the Iraqi pipes might be for a gun; first time 2 years ago.

Gordon Brown says this "embarrassing episode" had made Govt
"object of ridicule".

DTI accused of "slackness and complacency of almost criminal
dimension",

Sun headline:  "It!s the big banger clanger".    Express - Ridley
hit by supergun recoil.

Mirror claims Nicholas Ridley is now fighting for his political
life.

Mail puts the question simply:   Was Britain tricked or did it turn
a blind eye?

Bgypt pressing for a ban on the spread of high-technology weapons
in the Middle East (Independent).

Mirror claims Whips have crushed the revolt over the Hong Kong
Bill,
                               3.              April 19, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Times leader says the practical help which Britain can afford to
Hong Kong in the years to 1997 must extend beyond that provided in
the Bill, and urgently. The attitude of the EC has been cautious
and if they continue to treat Hong Kong as a British domestic
concern, they will be taking a considerable risk with their own
immigration problems, It concludes that those MPs who vote
against the Bill should know that success for their obstruction
would spell the end of any hope of real help from Britain’s
friends. Little Englanders, Labour and Tory, should be well
satisfied with that; others must surely think again.

John Walden, former Director of Home Affairs in the Hong Kong
Govt, writing in the Times, urges Britain to restore confidence in
Hong Kong by standing up to China.

UN High Commissioner for Refugees backs legal action in Hong Kong
by which human rights lawyers aim to challenge the screening
system for Vietnamese Boat People, on the grounds it is in breach
of international standards {Independent).

Leading Hong Kong businessman says there would be a "terrible
legacy” if Hong Kong Bill is defeated today {Independent),

Tiananmen Square leader says students’ resistance In China is
still strong {Independent).

Star prints an article by Chief Buthelezi in which he says the ANC
is intimidating and scaring people,

Seven prisoners escape from Gloucester jail;   four - violent -
still at large.

Express says security operation surrounding the Strangeways selge
has been costing more than £100,000 a day.

Oxford Economic Forecasting Group predict current export boom will
continue; Britain will avoid recession; and mortgage rates could
be down one-third to 10% by end of next year.

Power workers vote 3-2 for a strike over pay; reject 8.5% offer.
£un says they will be offered 9.3% to prevent blackouts. Today
forecasts power cuts within four weeks.

Times says Govt’s programme to privatise electricity could be
affected by decision.
                               4.              April 19, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Independent says inflation fears mount as Govt figures show sharp
increase in manufacturing industries’ wage costs and the decision
by power workers to strike highlights the risk of a wage-price
spiral .

NALGO urges white collar NHS staff to stage lightning walkouts
over 7.7% offer.

Reward management consultancy group says managers are setting a
bad example with average rises of 11.8%. Today says the essence
of good management is responsibility.

Doug McAvoy, NUT leader, heckled by Left when he tells conference
strikes must be a last resort.

Times says the NUT is split. Meanwhile NAS/UWT decide to strike
in the autumn unless Govt restores teachers’ pay negotiating
rights.

Leftwing moves to force NUT to mount a campaign of mass
non-payment of the community charge rejected by the leadership
(Times).

Teachers, meeting in Scarborough to mount a campaign against
increased workload, which could scupper Govt plans for
Implementing the national curriculum (Independent),

London Underground increasingly confident Govt will support new
£1.7billion Tube line from Chelsea to Hackney to ease traffic
prob1ems {Independent),

Business travellers between London and Paris have been denied the
chance of saving £100 on a return air ticket by the obduracy of
the French Govt (Times).

General Motors announce a mass produced electric car.

Strong criticism of Govt's cut in collection of detailed
industrial statistics made at seminar organised by the Statistics
Users Council hy Sir Douglas Wass, former Treasury Permanent Secy
(Times).

Times says Labour sets out to turn local govt elections into a
national referendum on the Govt, with the community charge as its
centrepiece.
                               5.              April 19, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Labour would keep the community charge for at least 2 years and
possibly for good; they have failed to come up with a fairer
system (Express)-

Labour Party launches local election campaign accusing Govt of one
big ”con”.

Telegraph leader says Kinnock’s credentials should not allow him
through the door of No 10. Quite apart from his lack of
experience, his style is unsuited to government, He has yet to
prove he can master a brief or the saviour fair© to conduct
himself properly abroad.

Sarah Hogg, in Telegraph, reviewing Labour Party says the biggest
threat to Labour comes from the public sector, facing a choice
between alientating unions and agreeing to a pay explosion.

Kinnock confident of big local election gains ("a few hundred
seats”) as Tories accuse Labour of a "fraudulent” manifesto by
failing to spell out details of its alternative to the poll tax
{Independent).

Today says Labour will double the tax on company cars, VAT on
environmentally damaging products would be raised to 25% and water
shares will be snatched back at knock down prices,

Express leader says the Govt’s problems with Inflation, high
mortgage rates and community charge are bad enough, but Tory Party
is fast emerging as the biggest problem of all. Govt supporters
must keep their nerve and fight their corner. They must rally
round and take on the real enemy: socialism,

Comsmnlty Charge

   North Tyneside LEA is to challenge the decision to cap the
   local council’s community charge {FT).

   Sun columnist says the main problem is that local govt is
   financially and politically corrupt from top to bottom.

   Paul Foot, in Mirror, notes that Richael Heseltine voted for
   the Scottish community charge Bill.

   Police criticise SBC after middle aged disc jockey, John Peel,
   says he has a lot of sympathy with Trafalgar Square rioters.

   Bath traders revolt against unified business rate,
                                               April 19, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Hail feature on Mr (John) Smith goes to Washington and nobody
really notices. It says he missed Capitol Hill and met no one
with a household name in power.  It did not rate a single para in
a US newspaper or mention on radio and TV.

Royal College of Surgeons Is pressing for tighter controls over
junior doctors who carry out operations, and is recommending
consultants take greater responsibility for supervision of
trainees {Independent}.

Star continues its campaign to get Sellafield shut down - it says
this ’’nuclear dustbin" will reprocess mainly Japanese waste 10
times more deadly than anything handled before.

Independent editorial comments on President Bush's uninspiring
performance at the global warming conference, and comments that
the most realistic approach is for govts to encourage changes that
would be wise, come what may.

FT leader on the global warming conference says there is a danger
of the wrong signals emerging from the meeting as Bush cautions
snore research needed before rushing into action.  It would be a
mistake to be mesmerised by the problems.   It should be possible
to agree on a twin track response - more research and action to
stabilise and cut greenhouse gas emissions over 10-20 years.

Researchers claim they have found a way of screening test tube
babies for genetic disease.

Home Secy backs Prince Charles' plan for a "national service army"
of youngsters to keep them off the streets (Express)«

Police say £2000 was stolen from Irish ferry which caught fire,
causing one death.

Sheffield inquest told 15 of Hillsborough dead had drunk so much
they would have been unfit to drive; 51 had been drinking.

Football League and FA to consider merger to provide the sport
with the co-ordinated leadership called for by the Taylor report
{Independent}.

Times leader discusses the Courts and Legal Services Bill saying
that once it is safely through the Commons, Lord Mackay might
apply his formidable ingenuity to an equally radical reform of the
legal aid system.

Sun identifies 11 "soft” judges who "let evil m&n go free”.
                               7.              April 19, 1990

                          PHESS DIGEST


Row over judge freeing driver who killed a girl student, refusing
to hear 11 witnesses who said he had been drinking.

Racial and sexual discrimination against barristers to be banned
by law under proposals announced in the Commons by the Attorney


Mirror claims a network of child sex rings has been uncovered in
Canterbury and that 30 men and women have been arrested.

Tory MPs call on BBC to cancel a new TV series with Glenda Jackson
now she is a prospective Labour candidate.

Calcutt inquiry into press and privacy of the individual expected
to recommend self-regulation of the press should be given a last
chance (FT).

Broadcasting and Entertainments Alliance calls for £100 TV licence
so that pensioners can have their's free.

Royal Opera House takes unprecedented step of budgeting for a
£2million deficit in the current year (Times).

Honeymoon between the Poles and Solidarity is over, as polls show
30% decline in support for the Govt, Walesa and the movement
itself {Independent).

Border controls between East and West Germany to be scrapped by
the summer {FT ).

EC paper on implications of German unification warns that
factories in East Germany which pollute the environment may have
to be closed as the price for integration (FT).

Pro-Iranian kidnap gang say they will release an American hostage
by tomorrow - at the request of Iran and Syria (Times).

Soviet Embassy in East Berlin sets out in detail its objections
to swift German unification {Times).

11 chiIden burn to death in Beirut when grenade hits their bus and
blows up fuel tank,

Ivory ban has mixed Impact with prices plummeting in US, remaining
stable in Europe but actually rising in Japan. Poaching appears
to have declined in Zaire, Congo and Gabon (FT).
                               8.              April 19, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

You are the Guild of British Toastmasters' best after dinner
speaker,

THE GUN - COMMENT

Mirror says the "successful operation” which Nicholas Ridley
claimed ought never to have been necessary. He was evasive,
complacent and ignorant in defending his bungling officials.

Today leader headed ”Ridley still hiding the truth" says it is a
cop out for Nicholas Ridley to clam up about okaying the deal
while prosecutions are being considered. For all we know other
companies in Britain may be making guns for the IRA under cover of
DTI approval.  If Mr Ridley won’t give the answers you must
replace him.

Independent says Mr Ridley completely fails to explain the affair,
and asks whether his department were negligent or dishonest.   It
concludes that since there has evidently been incompetence or
dishonesty, or both, it would be better to say so at once, and,
alien though the idea may sound to them, Ministers should stop
claiming a success, and apologise.

Express says it is a relief to be assured officially that
Whitehall boffins can recognise a gun when they stumble across
one. But Opposition huffing and puffing is absurdly overdone.

Mail leader headed "Dozing on guard duty at the DTI” asks what
alerted HM Customs. It suspects the alarm was raised only by the
murder of Gerald Bull. The happy ending does not absolve the Govt
from giving Parliament and public a more complete account of this
menacing story.
                                                                   ANNEX

MINISTERS HIK VISITS- SPEECHES E T Q
FCO:      Mr Hurd has working supper with the Belgium Foreign Minister, Mr
          Eyskens
LPC:     Sir Geoffrey Howe hosts dinner for Goh Chok Tong, first Deputy
          Prime Minister of Singapore, London
MAFF:    Mr Gummer attends European Environmental Ministers' meeting with
         Prince of Wales, Sandringham
WO:      Mr Walker address Jiji Press seminar, London
DEM:     Mr Nicfcolls launches CITB safety video for Federation of Piling
         Specialists, London

DH:      Mrs Bottomiev visits Crossroads Care Attendance Scheme, Guildford;
         later meets Hull MPs re Health Service Finance
DSS:     Mrs Shephard meets the Voluntary Hostels Group to discuss hostel
         changes and homelessness
DTI:     Mr Redwood addresses Institute of Economic Affairs conference on
         wider share ownership, QEII Conference Centre, London
DTI:     Mr Forth addresses opening of Radio Frequency Investigation Ltd’s
         automated test facility, Basingstoke

DTp:     Mr Atkins visits Stanstead Airport
MAFF:    Mr Curry addresses         Bi-ennial   Divisional   Veterinary   conference
         dinner, Kemble
OAL:     Mr Luce addresses presentation of Student Design Awards, Institute
         of Practitioners in Advertising, London
WO:      Mr Grist addresses Challenge to the Community, Aids conference,
         Cardiff

MINISTERS fPRESS INTERVIEWS
DH: Mr Clarke interviewed by Nick Robinson, BBC
                                                        April 20, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS

Prime Minister sees Singaporean Deputy Prime Minister,
Mr Goh Chok Tong; Dr Viljoen, South African Minister for
Constitutional Development; and the Irish Taoiseach, Mr Haughey
EC:      Informal meeting of Environment Council, Ireland (to April 22)

PUBLICATIONS

PCA:     Annual Report for 1989 - published at noon

NAO:     Sale of fierstmonceux Castle


PARLIAMENT

Commons

Business:       PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BELLS
                Licensing (Low Alcohol Drinks) Bill: (Sir Peter Emery)
                Licensing Bill: 2nd Reading: (Mr Edward Leigh)
                Coalmining Subsidence (Damage, Arbitration, Prevention    and
                Public Awareness Bill: 2nd Reading: (Mr A Meale)
Adioy.TTtmenLDffbaigs;   Closure of hospital facilities on the Isle of Sheppev
                         (Mr R Moate)
Lords:      Starred Questions
            Social Security Bill: Second Reading
            UG to ask HMG what are their plans for the future of the Arts
            Council and in particular whether they intend that it should
            continue to enjoy independence under its Charter
                               2,              April 20, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Norman Tebbit crushed in Hong Kong vote;   rebellion collapses.
Express - "Walk over on Hong Kong”.

Tebbit is felt to have gone over the top with a racist speech and
to have probably irreparably damaged his leadership chances.
Blames Labour for defeat.

In interview with Los Angeles Times he says Asian inunigrants fail
cricket test - ie they don’t support England team.

Today leader says that beneath Tebbit*s harmless sounding "cricket
test" lies a deep and hateful prejudice. The question for the
Tories is whether such a person should survive at the top of their
party. Tebbit should remember Enoch Powell ended up in the
wilderness.

Express says honour is now satisfied over Hong Kong. The Bill is
an honourable attempt to deal with a difficult and delicate
problem. Opposition’s cheap and shallow opportunism did not
deserve to be crowned with success.

You place the onus for securing export licences on firms in Iraqi
gun case - Sim headline: Maggie gives Iraq gun firms a rocket.
Mail says you have shifted the entire blame to firms.

Independent says Iraq’s "supergun” was a £4million ballistics
test-bed designed to enable Iraqi scientists to learn the
technology of ballistics within a barrel, and to help realise the
country's long term ambition to launch a small satellite by
rocket, SRC nled to understand" Whitehall had been told by both
British companies involved of the so-called "Babylon" project.

Hal Miller writes to you over the "supergun". Telegraph leader
says that on the available evidence Govt Depts failed to pool
knowledge quickly enough.

Independent: editorial says the latest developments in the ’pipes
for Iraq’ story make the Govt!s claims of ignorance look ever less
credible, raising the question: Stfhy was the Govt turning a blind
eye to an export which could eventually have given Iraq a new form
of military capability. Concluding the Govt has been shown to
have contravened its own policy on arms exports during the
Iran-Xraq war, but for a tip-off Iraq might have got away with the
whole inglorious exercise.
                               3.                April 20, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Gorbachev now cuts supplies of gas to Lithuania which remains
defiant. He also issues a warning to Estonia if it goes the same
way. He attempts to buy off a similar declaration of independence
by Latvia.

Times leader says that not only does the attempt to isolate
Lithuania from the rest of the Soviet economy appear to have been
carried out by bunglers; the design itself - for which President
Gorbachev cannot escape responsibility - must surely prove
counter-productive, as is the norm with economic sanctions.

President Bush councils caution over Baltic boycott. Meanwhile
British Govt appears embarrassed and uncertain how to react over
Lithuania (times).

Lithuania delegation - an embarrassment to Norwegian govt - kept
at arms length (FT).

Independent concludes that EC foreign ministers should devise a
graduated series of penalties co-ordinated with the Americans, to
reasonably include the prospect of restrictions on trade credits
and joint ventures, but with the object of not having to impose
penalties. Such penalties should be seen as bargaining counters
in a diplomatic game which needs to be played long and cool.

You and President Bush agreed in Bermuda to prevent USSR from
raising question of East Germany’s membership of JWTO at 2 + 4
meeting next month (Independent)♦

US and Britain have agreed to take a far tougher line than
expected with the Soviet Union over the question of whether a
reunified Germany should belong to NATO (times),

France and Germany call for political and economic union in Europe
by 1993. Today leader says this is a crucial challenge to you.
You reflect the doubts of most British people but the danger is
you are trying to steer Britain through the Nineties on an
Eighties1 timetable, Europe is where our future lies.

Hail says you are set for a new Euro showdown.

Times says the Mitterrand/Kohl joint statement is intended to
signal that France and West Germany are back working together as
the powerhouses of the Community.
                               4.              April 20, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Kail leader says there is surely more than meets the eye in the
Mitterrand/Kohl call.   It is doubtless part of an attempt to rejig
the Franco/German entente. There may also be a wish to create a
diversion from German unification over which Kohl feels to some
extent in the dock.   It loks almost designed to provoke you. But
you should not take the bait. The French and Germans are in tune
with the times. You must spell out an alternative to federalist
schemes.

FT- You make it plain you do not want to see next week’s Dublin
meeting become preoccupied with proposals for political union -
far better to concentrate on practical issues such as German
unification than on more esoteric things (FT).

FT leader on Mitterrand/Kohl initiative says it could not have
come at a more significant moment. By proposing a political and
security dimension for the EC the aim of both leaders is to make
sure West Germany will not abandon its Western European partners
in favour of eastern ventures. Timetable may well be
over-ambitious and is open for discussion. What is important is
that Britain should be present from the very beginning - the UK’s
absence from the discussion table would do little or nothing to
halt development. Its participation would ensure a British stance
of the share of a European political union.

FT leader claims that Mitterrand not yourself deserves the
monetarist palm for being prepared to accept high unemployment in
order to rid the country of the scourge of inflation.   It
speculates the main policy legacy of the 1980s may be
"Mltterrandism" rather than "Thatcherism" or ’’Reaganism".

East German Prime Minister says negotiations on German monetary,
economic and social unification should be concluded within next 10
weeks, but insists on parity for the exchange rate between the two
currencies (Independent),

Coverage of the "seige scum” of Strangeways with criminal
records of the 7 still holding out.

A review of the Irish Republic’s extradition laws to be carried
out after UK pressure during Anglo/Irish talks yesterday


Labour will let unions stage lightning strikes without a ballot,
according to Tony Blair {Sun),
                               5.              April 20 , 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Sim leader on John Smith’s visit to USA, says Uncle Sam should not
be fooled by his blarney. Labour is not a changed beast when it
comes to spending and taxation.

Star leads with Andrew Hunter HP’s allegations that two of
Mandela's men met the IRA in County Down.

Star says many well-meaning, decent people have been drawn to the
Mandela bandwagon, They are misguided. For Mandela and his ANC
are terrorists, hell bent on violence.  If Kinnock wants to be
Prime Minister he should choose his bedfellows more carefully.

Victims say that five ANC torturers are still in power, holding
high ranking posts within the ANC leadership (Times).

George Gale, in Mail, says it was a dangerously unstable (Kinnock)
man who clenched his fist and punched the air at the Mandela
cooncert. He knows an incompetent and dangerous buffoon when he
sees one. A man in search of a pulpit but not a man fit to govern
a nation.

de Klerk pledges to bring down pillars of apartheid paving the way
for a peaceful transition (Independent).

Graham Mather, director, Institute of Economic Affairs, says
personal job contracts are increasingly popular in public as well
as private industry.

Chief Fire Officers want to take over emergency ambulance service,
much to the distress of Roger Poole, NUPE, who says they are
empire building. D/Health reject the proposals for fire service
to take over.

NAS/UWT teachers’ strikes over jobs could start next week {Times).

Post Office investors lose £25mill±on contract with Freemans, mail
order firm, because they refuse to sign a no-strike deal.

More than 500 miners in Blaenant lose the battle to save their pit
which cannot meet production targets (Times).

Germans bring the so-called trouble free Cologne car plant to a
standstill over pay.

British arm of Peugeot is booming ~ record pre-tax profit of
£l35million last year.
                               6.              April 20, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Tory and Labour MPs react with anger and dismay to Select
Committee Report saying MOD failed to safeguard reliability of
weapons, and cost of that unreliability costing £lbill±on a year
(Independent).

Eric Forth announces much tougher rules for estate agents with
power to ban them. Today says that while its campaign has paid
off the new regime does not go far enough because it doesn't deal
with gazumping.

Express welcomes the new powers and wants the Govt to monitor
their operation and toughen them if necessary.

Community Charge

   21 Labour councils taking Govt to court for charge capping
   them,

   Full page Conservative Party adverts explaining charge.

   Hackney Council staff threaten to strike if council does not
   lift the suspension of Andy Murphy a member of the Class War
   group involved in the Trafalgar Square community charge riots
   (Times).

   Star says Labour-controlled Newcastle upon Tyne Council gives
   £1,000 to lesbian group but refuses to contribute to a charity
   run by Simon Weston, Falklands hero, in aid of inner city
   children.

   Sun says painting manager for Hackney Council, sent home after
   an inquiry by the finance dept, has been paid £80,000 over 4
   years, including £2,700 car allowance, for doing nothing.
   Tories attack Council’s "incredible inefficiency".

Times leader is critical of Lady Porter's suggestion that there
should be a Minister for London saying that Ministers appointed
for cosmetic purposes tend to intervene cosmetically. They meddle
rather than help. It recognises that the abolition of the GLC has
left certain problems in the air, saying London is poorer for the
lack of a strategic regional authority. But the answer is to
consider what form a (modest) authority might take, not to run
crying to the nursemaids of Whitehall and Westminster.

Writer in Mail urges drug tests in schools as the effective way of
fighting them.
                                7.              April 20, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

World Health Organisation say young homosexuals may be abandoning
safe sexual practices. Such a development:, it confirmed, would be
a blow to AIDS health campaigns {Independent).

Allegations that DSS provided money for a homeless mother with
three children to buy a tent and utensils - some £260 - in St
Albans.

Expert report says the recently introduced national breast cancer
screening programme is endangering the lives of many of the women
it is meant to protect (Times).

D/Health Initiative to reduce hours worked by junior doctors
ineffective, says study by Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh; doctors
are now working even longer hours (Independent).

EUFA president says he wants Liverpool back in European football
next season. But retiring president says it would be foolish for
English clubs to celebrate prematurely;  it would be suicide to
allow them to take part without Govt guarantees.

Thousands of tonnes of contaminated waste from Austria and
Switzerland being dumped in a quarry in South Wales (Independent)♦

World Bank and European Investment Bank have proposed big
increases in loans for projects to improve the environment in the
Mediterranean region (FT).

Nations divided on global warming cure - 34 countries will seek to
agree targets for reducing greenhouse gases which cause global
warming at a conference on Action for a Common Future in Bergen
next month (FT).

Sun takes Jeremy Isaacs ("as boring as 8 hours of Wagner") to task
for once more rattling the begging bowl for taxpayers’ subsidies
for the Royal Opera House. He should charge economic prices for
seats.

Joe Haines, in Mirror, says that while the Mirror supports the
Press Council its chairman, Louis Blorn-Cooper, is a blithering ass
and likely to do more harm than good to press freedom.

Release of American hostage in Beirut held up by pro-Iranian Group
because US Administration refused to send an envoy to Syria.

3 Soviet diplomats at UN in Geneva unmasked as spies and not
permitted to re-enter Switzerland. Said to have been collecting
scientific and technical information (FT)♦
                                8,               April 20, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST


Basque separatists thought to be responsible for parcel bmb which
blew off a woman’s hand at office of the Seville Expo-92 World
Fair yesterday (FT).

Indian troops massed on Pakistan border adds to atmosphere of
tension over disputed Kashmir territory {In d e p e n d e n t) .
                                                                            MMEK



            u m m m . sp eech es e tc )
HM T:     Mr Major addresses Huntingdon Enterprise Agency, London

SO:       Mr Rifkind opens Aberdeen Business Centre, Aberdeen University

DEM:      Lord Strathclyde visits East Anglia to meet Tourist Board members

DH;       Lady Hooper addresses the British Society for General Dental
          Surgery Spring Scientific meeting; later addresses the Business and
          Professional Women's annual conference

DOE:      Mr H eathcoat-A m ory visits        the      C ountryside    C om m ission’s
          headquarters in Cheltenham

MAPt-:    Baroness Trumpington visits Slough and Worplesdon Laboratories

MAFF:     Mr Maclean      attends   Association   of    Public   Analysts   conference,
          Glasgow

WO:       Mr Roberts opens Rank Motorway Service Area, Junction 33, M4
          Motorway

WO;       Mr Grist attends British Aggregates Construction Materials Industries
          lunch, Cardiff


MMmmsjmEmEMvism)
DOEuMr Trippier attends informal Environment Council, Ireland
                                                                       April 23, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS

Western European Union meeting, Brussels (to 24 April)
EC; ECOFIN Council, Luxembourg
National Association of Licensed House Managers annual conference, Aberdeen
(to 27 April)

STATISTICS
BOE;         Provisional estimates of monetary aggregates (Mar)
CLSB:        London and Scottish banks monthly statement (Mar)
CSO;         Cyclical indicators for the UK economy (Mar)


fmuc&nom
HO; Interception of Communications Act 1985: Report of the Commissioner:
    Command Paper

PARLIAMENT

Cagmass
Questions:        Transport; Chancellor      of   the   Duchy     of   Lancaster;   Church
                  Commissioners
Business:         Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill (Lords) Consideration
                  in Committee (1st Allotted Day)
Adjournment Debates:          G overnm ent funding for so cia l housing in
                              Manchester, the case of the Langley overspill estate
                              (Mr J Callaghan)
                              TELEVISING OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE HOUSE
                              Subject: Review of the Television Experiment
                              W itnesses: BBC, Sky TV, British S a tellite
                              Broadcasting
Lords:            Starred Questions
                   Education (Student Loans)        Bill:   Consideration of Commons
                   Reasons and Amendment
                   Landlord and Tenant (Licensed Premises) Bill: Committee
                   Property Services Agency and Crown Suppliers Bill: Committee
                   UQ to ask HMG whether Treasury Ministers propose to discuss
                   with the Governor of the Bank of England the recent
                   conviction of subsidiaries of the Batik of Credit and Commerce
                   International on money laundering charges in the United States
                   Federal Court in Florida
                               2.              April 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Guardian ICM survey says 62% of €2s now back Labour;   20% still
loyal to Govt*

But 91% of Britain's businessmen distrust Labour’s ability to run
the economy, according to Independent on Sunday. But majority
expect Labour to win the next election, And Harris poll reports a
6% improvement on Conservative standing*

The Govt is to reject the idea of "banding *' the community charge
according to people’s income in its reappraisal of the new system
(Times}.

New report shows that losers are likely to outnumber gainers by
three to one under community charge. In the politically crucial
middle income groups, the proportion is 4 to 1 (Independent).

Royal Institution of Chartered surveyrs say that a house sales
boost is likely in areas with low community charge (Times).

Labour Party in Scotland will come under pressure this week, both
from its own supporters and from the Conservatives, to produce
detailed figures for its property tax (Times).

Chancellor has delivered a stark warning to ministerial colleagues
that the Treasury will not fund public sector pay awards which
threaten its spending targets and anti-inflationary strategy {FT)♦

Independent editorial attacks the unacceptable growth of credit
and the money supply. If monetarism had been applied
successfully, credit could not have burgeoned to its present
inflationary level, A binding contract between the Bank of
England, Treasury and Parliament to limit the growth of lending is
an idea worth examination.

New outbreak of violence in prison - at Pucklechurch Remand Centre
near Bristol where youths go on rampage.

David Waddlngton criticised for "sneak" visit to Strangeways.

Hail says his half glimpsed visit hardly inspires confidence the
seige is going to end quickly, Whole affair has been
characterised by incompetent buck passing and indecisiveness»

Mr Waddington made it clear during visit he backed the tactics
being employed.
                               3.              April 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Home Secy comes under fire for leaving his home address and
telephone number in the phone book*

Mew attempt at serious negotations as Lithuanian delegation leaves
for Moscow {Independent).

Yeltsin eondems blockade of Lithuania though he says Lithuania had
been too quick to declare independence,

Lithuania blocks export of goods to Russia.

EC Foreign Ministers leave open the option of applying economic
sanctions against the Soviet Union after giving Lithuania strong
backing (FT).

Mandela reported to have called for violence tobe stepped up;
negotiation, he says, will not come as a result of peace*

You are likely to meet him on July 6,

Foreign and Defence Ministers of NATO and WEU will today discuss
practical steps for creating a European pillar of NATO including
the formation of multinational military units (FT).

NHS unions say many hospitals are so dirty since cleaning was
contracted out, that they should carry a Govt health warning.

Doubts surround future of Cyclotron Trust as two patients sue
over cancer treatments’ distressing side-effects (Independent).

Labour Party would peg mortgage tax relief at standard rate - a
germ of common sense, says Today*

Kinnock is preparing to put in hand this week the biggest overhaul
in the Labour Party’s policy making and organisational machinery
since it was founded. Far reaching and long awaited proposals to
cut the block votes of the trade unions will be accompanied by a
radical plan to transfer policy formation out of the hands of the
Labour conference to a new, elected 170 member council drawn from
all sections of the party (Times).

Times leader looks at Kinnock’s proposal for a National Policy
Council within the Labour Party saying he deserves support for his
new constitution on condition that he lets the country examine the
purposes to which he would put his augmented power. People do not
like being left to guess the policies of a party to which they
entrust their votes.
                               4.              April 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Bill Deedes, reflecting on teachers’ conferences, says while
Kinnock has done more than be thought possible in removing
Left-wing beliefs from Labour's shop window. But it stays stored
at the back and after 10 years of Thatcherism it is a more
resentful force.

How over John MacGregor permitting a Middlesborough mother to
transfer her daughter from a school with a high proportion of
Pakistanis to one where children are 98% white. Today headline:
"Birth of ghetto school”.

NUT and Labour allege this is a move to segregation, DES says
race does not coma into it; parents have the right to choose
their chiidren’s school.

CHE has asked John MacGregor to change the law so that parents are
not free to select their child’s school on the basis of race (FT).

Doug McAvoy, NUT, dismisses as "gimmicky" Labour Party plan for an
Education Standards Council.

Labour Party education spokesman, Jack Straw, says they would
scrap £40million a year scheme which gives 32,000 bright children
opportunity to go to public schools.

Straw says teachers who strike will play into Govt’s hands.

Headteachers to protest at "catastrophic" cash cuts in Bradford
schools {Independent).

Rover to announce first 24 hour working in British car industry
today.

Eurotunnel confident of raising extra £2billion now needed to
complete its work {Independent).

Britain has 28 of the 50 best performing companies in Europe,

CBI warns that pay is outstripping productivity in manufacturing.

Company directors have given themselves highest pay rises for 10
years, averaging 11.3%.

Rail pay talks resume today ~ new offer expected above 8,5%.

Morning Star says Govt intends to attack the firemen's pay formula
which takes no account of ability to recruit.
                               5.              April 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Barclays expected to charge £10 fee on credit cards.

British Telecom 60% profit margin on international calls (FT).

FT leader says GATT still matters and Ministers have less than 8
months to show themselves worthy of an inheritance they have too
long taken for granted.

Star, continuing its campaign against Sellafield, quotes the
Irish Health Minister in support and reports alleged harrowing
tales from Dundalk.

Express calls on MPs to back embryo research in tonight's vote.

But five Roman Catholic Archbishops attack the idea.

Telegraph expects MPs to vote for a lower abortion limit to at
most 24 weeks.

Guardian leader attacks the "unholy alliance" of lawyer MPs in
trying to torpedo the Legal Services Bill.

Concern voiced over detention of lorry driver taking gun parts to
Iraq and arrested in Greece.

MOD denies No 10 suggestions that records of Sir Hal Miller’s
”supergun” warnings have been traced. Sir Hal claims departments
are spreading "disinformation" about him {In d e p e n d e n t) .

Miller prepared to defend MD of Walter Somers in court if
necessary (FT),

One man, 39, dies in London Marathon,

Ted Heath ridicules your ’sovereign states' approach to Europe
which, he says, is fed up to the back teeth with our negative
approach.

But we shall take part in any EC talks on political union even
though we think it is premature.

Philip Stevens says you are in the slow lane of a two speed
Europe. But you will bring alternative proposals for Euro
integration/European political development, based on a
”constitutional” approach, to the EC council in Dublin in June
(FT).
                                                 April 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Mail reprints an article from Sunday Correspondent in which David
Blake says missing in British politics is any large and
influential body of opinion which is in tune with other EC
countries about integration.

In a letter in the Times today Sir Geoffrey Howe replies to an
article by Tim Congdon last week on the EMU. He says that EMU has
been an aspiration, not a precisely defined goal, for many years.
It remains so today, notwithstanding the Delors report. He goes
on to say there is a whole span of possible options and
intermediate stages from which European leaders might choose.

Britain will fiercely resist EC plan for carbon tax to combat
global warming. Brussels officials say support for tax is growing,
but West Germany could be against it too (Independent).

55 year old American hostage, held for 3 years, freed in Damascus.
His release said to be a personal triumph for Rafsanjani. Another
hostage expected to be released on Friday.

Hopes rise for release of 17 Western hostages.    But Telegraph says
Britons are low on the freedom list.

Attempted coup by junior officers in Nigeria foiled.

An Independent editorial says it is a good thing that the Nigerian
coup appears to have failed. The plotters' plan to partition the
Muslim North from the Christian South would have been disastrous,
leading to serious civil strife.

Times leader says anybody who thinks that the path of
constitutional change in South Africa is easy should heed events
this past weekend in Nigeria. It adds that there remains a vast
gulf between what the South African Govt seems likely to put on
the table once real negotiations begin and the ANC’s blueprint
from the end of minority rule. Unless the ANC is prepared to
compromise and also allow Mr Mandela to negotiate, de Klerk’s
flexibility may be shortlived.

Solidarity re-elect Walesa as chairman with 78% vote - boost for
his presidential ambitions.

Pope sets out new vision of a less materialistic Europe - but he
draws smaller-than-expected crowds in Czechoslovakia
(Independent).
                               7.              April 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

EC environment Ministers promised at weekend to put together a
comprehensive aid package to restore the ravaged environment of
Eastern Europe (Times}.

Britain protests to Russia at banning of British beef, dairy
products, sheep and goats apparently because of BSE fears.

Nucleus of organised conservative opposition to Gorbachev emerges
as "Russian Communist Party" holds first congress {Independent).

Denktash re-elected as president of Turkish Cyprus for fifth, and
self-declared, last term (FT).

Argentina has suspended research into controversial medium range
Condor II missile (FT).

Britain again rejects an appeal by the Falkland Islands for its
.150-mile fishing zone to be extended to 200 miles to protect fish
stocks against a huge international fishing fleet (Times).

22 people died in clashes with security forces in Xinjiang
province of China, earlier this month (FT).

Organisers claim 200 million in 136 countries participated in
events surrounding 20th annual Earth Day.

Egypt receiving over 600 US tanks withdrawn from Western Europe
under arms reduction agreements (FT).

SCHOOLS/R&CK

Mirror leader, headed "No more ghettos", says parents whose
children attend schools where many children do not speak English
have a legitimate worry, but it is one of language not race. The
answer is to give those schools the teachers necessary to cope.
What will happen to our country if our children do not meet, play
and learn together?

Today calls the plan insulting and damaging. Parents should have
some choice but not based on racist attitudes.

Mail leader headed ”Freedom of choice must come first" says
banning parents from doing what they feel to be in the best
interests of their children is wrong.
                                                                           &mmx
 M M m m S J U K VISITS, s p e e c h e s f t h

 DES:          - MacGJei° f ^ceives courtesy call from Mr Yagodin, Soviet
            Minister of Education; Mrs Rumbold later hosts a lunch for Mr
            Yagodm at the British Council:, London
 HO:        Mr Waddington visits the Commission for Racial Equality
 SO,        Mr Rjfkind visits Compaq computer component factory,
            Erskme, Renfrewshire

 DEM;      Mr Nicholls dines with Dr Cullen, Health and Safety Executive
 DES:      Mr Howarth launches training project at Birmingham Heartlands
DES;       Mr Jackson addresses St Paul’s School, Barnes on "Student Loans"
DH;        Mr Freeman visits Cornwall Health Authority

DSS.       Mrs Shephard meets Michael Colvin MP re residential care and
           nursing homes

DTI:       Mr Redwood visits Nissan European Technology Centre,
           Cranfield
DTI        Mr Hogg visits Newcastle for keel laving ceremony and
           meeting with Tyne and Wear District Council
DTI:      Lord Trefgarne opensSingle             Market   exhibition   and
           conference, Norwich
HO:        L?r4I,.Fenp rs opens Association of County Councils seminar on "Fire
           -me Time for Change”

MAFF:     Mr fvx r? launches North York Moors Farm Scheme: later visits Brow
          Well Fisheries Ltd, Hebden

SO:       Mr Lang visits John Bosco Primaxy School, Erskine; later
          addresses Post Office: Queen’s Award for Export and
          I echnological Achievements, Trades House, Glassford
          Street, Glasgow

SO:       Lord James Douglas-Hamilton launches Environment Week, Glasgow
 ________ City Chambers, Glasgow

MMISTBRS (OVERSEAS VISITS^

DEM:       Mr Howard visits Lisbon, Portugal
HMT:       Mr Major and Lord Caithness attend ECOFIK, Luxembourg
MOD:       Mr King attends Western European Union meeting, Brussels
DTI:       Mr Forth visits Florida, USA

FCO:       Mr Sainsbury visits Nicaragua and Honduras (to 28 April)
OAL:       Mr Luce visits Italy (to 26 April prov)

ODA:       Mrs Chalker addresses UN Special Session onInternational
           Economic Co-operation, New York (to 28 April) _______________________
                                                                    AKWSX




TV AND RADIO

 World in Action".      ITV (8,30 pm) Better safe than sorry - a look at
contraception

 Return Ticket”. Radio 4 (8.43 pm) Harvey Thomas recalls the Brighton bomb
 Every First Wednesday". Radio 4 (9,20 pm) A look at local democracy in
action with Sheffield City Council

"Panorama”. BBC 1 (9,30 pm) lane Corbin looks at the future of the Red Army
”The_ Struggle for Democracy”,       fTV (11,20 pm) Patrick Watson Investigates
how tar freedom of information is under threat
"Advice Shop". BBC 1 (11.25 pm): The elderly homeless
                                                                     April 24, 1990
PR IMS MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS

The Queen opens the Old Windsor Day Centre at Straight Street, London
Prime Minister visits Gallipoli (to April 25)
Tidy Britain Group launches Environment Charter
Second official level 2+4 meeting
Football Spectators Act comes into force
Gruinard handed back to owners by Michael Neubert


  lATXSTXCS

BSA:       Building societies monthly figures (Mar)


HO:        Deaths reported to coroners (England and Wales 1989}
           Training of non-industrial civil servants
PARLIAMENT

Q m m sm
                 Employment; Prime Minister
                 10 Minute Rule Bill: Dogs (Mr David Amess)
                 Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill (Lords) Consideration
                 in Committee (2nd Allotted Day)

Mmunm€.gLDgi3algs:          Guidelines on Fire Service cover (Mr P Vlggers)
Select Committees:          COMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                            Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill [Lords]
Lords:     Starred Questions
           Town and Country Planning Bill (HL) (Consol): Third Reading
           Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Bill (HC)
           (Consol): Third Reading
           Planning (Consequential Provisions) Bill (HL) (Consol): Third Reading
           Planning (Hazardous Substances) Bill (Consol): Third Reading
           Contracts (Applicable Law) Bill (HL): Third Reading
           National Health Service and Community Care 'Bill: Committee (2nd
           Dav)
                               2,              April 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main Hews

Four teams of warders in riot gear bring riot at Bristol remand
centre to a quick end; 42 prison staff and 35 inmates injured.

Snatch squad catches one of 7 Strangeways prisoners. Remaining 6
say they will corae down at 2pm today if they are given a peaceful
night.

Strangeways Governor signals he may use tougher tactics to end the
seige - but Lord Ferrers says he doesn’t want a "battle royal” in
Britain’s jails {Independent)-

Star leads with report that 2 of the six rioters still holding out
at Strangeways have AIDS.

Guardian says the Strangeways spark has spread protests to 19
prisons in 3 weeks; its leader says it made sense to hold back and
the Governor deserves respect.

Two lorries carrying parts for Iraq supergun arrived in Iraq two
days before Teesside shipment stopped.

MPs demand lorry driver detained in Greece carrying gun parts
should be freed, William Waldegrave says he is innocent,
Guardian says charge against him may be dropped.

Star leader says the driver is paying the price for incompetent
Civil Servants.

Times says Hal Miller is to ask for an apology from Bernard Ingham
for making a number of uncomplimentary references to him. The
allegations are strenuously denied,

Senior Whitehall sources say security authorities first received
positive intelligence about Iraqi plans to build a super gun
several months before the seizure at Teesport Docks (Times).

You ask Sir Robin Butler to find out what action was taken on Sir
Hal Miller’s ’’supergun” warnings, as a Chief Customs man is
summoned to Cabinet Office {Independent).

US officials oppose pressure to isolate Iraq, Bush administration
man believes Saddam Hussein is more moderate than he has been in
the past, and there is a good chance he will be more moderate in
the future {Independent)-
                                               April 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

West German shares plunge after Kohl announces 1:1 paritybetween
Deutsch and Gst marks. Cost to unify currencies put at
£?0billion.

Chancellor Kohl brushed aside the economic arguments of the
powerful Bundesbank and took the political decision to convert the
nearly worthless Gstmarks into a strong DM at parity, says Times.

FT in its editorial, comments that the West German economic
concessions to East Germany are neither as large as the East
Germans wanted, nor as expensive as the West Germans fear. What,
it argues, will prove decisive is how East German wages adjust to
market forces, and here one-to-one currency conversion may lead to
large scale unemployment. That would be no triumph for politics,
but a disaster born of populism and shortsightedness.

FT round up of business opinion suggests economy is heading for a
quicker recovery than Chancellor expects - by the end of next year
inflation almost halved to 4.5%, trade gap cut to £ll,4blllion and
interest rates down to 11%.

Likelihood EBRD to b© sited in London increases after EC Finance
Ministers’ meeting in Luxembourg (FT),

Professor Sir Michael Howard, in Times, claims that there
still lingers in Downing Street "that sour mixture of arrogance
and timidity towards Europe which has proved so disastrous in the
past”.

In the independent, Peter Jenkins says there is nothing you can do
to stop some form of political union, as outlined by Kohl and
Mitterrand.   In practice such union would be much store mundane
than a single federated state of Europe. Because what Kohl has in
mind is such small beer, Britain appears ready to sup with him,
albeit with a long Thatcherite spoon.   In the end, the history of
the Single European Act is likely to reflect itself: you will
hold your nose, shield your eyes and sign up for the future.
Later you can always blame it on the Foreign Office - if you are
still around.

Economic reform in Eastern Europe could eventually add 10% to
world trade, AMEX Bank review suggests (FT).

Patrick Minford, in Sun, claims that under Labour inflation would
leap 5%; unemployment by 500,000 and output would fall by 2% -
Kinnock's con trick.
                                4.               April 24, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST

Harris/Thames poll gives Labour a 20% lead in London elections,
putting Barnet, Express says, in danger,

in an Jtadtegenderefc article, Gordon Brown attacks the Govt for
policies that are, he claims, bankrupting small businesses in
record numbers,

Community Charge

   Mirror claims Princess Royal has said that if the Govt had
   tested the charge it would not now be experiencing its massive
   problems.

   Greenwich councillors threatening to sue Kenneth Baker over
   Tory adverts which say Labour is to blame for high community
   charge.

   Hammersmith & Fulham, Islington, Camden, Greenwich, Rotherham,
   Barnsley and Derbyshire County Councils to challenge charge
   capping. More expected to follow (Times).

Frank Field, in Guardian, says the poor are not benefiting from
economic growth; contrary to Govt claims they are getting poorer.

House sales picking up; building societies lent more than
£4billion last month for first time since October.

Mail, commenting on CBI warning of pay price spiral, says the buck
stops with bosses. The CBI spends much of its time whingeing to
the Govt about what politicians should be doing; perhaps it would
be better if they spent more time ensuring their own members get
the message„

Mirror claims 40,000 miners * jobs will be lost and 40 pits will be
closed as Govt knocks the industry into shape for privatisation.

The Govt has significantly altered its timetable for privatising
British Coal because of uncertainty over business prospects during
the rest of the 1990s (FT).

British Rail offer 9.3% and bring hopes of a settlement.

Express, contemplating overcrowding and fare increases on 8R,
calls for privatisation as soon as possible or, if that is
dropped, to sort out the mess.

Sun claims Rover workers, with first 24 hour working in UK, will
work only two weeks a month.
                               5.              April 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Extra 1,200 jobs to be created after the deal to cut working hours
{Times).

Channel Tunnel will cost extra £2b±ll±on - at least £7.5billion.

British Telecom makes 60% profit on phone calls abroad, according
to leaked internal document.

Renown, one of Japan's biggest clothing companies, buys Aquascutum
for £73.Smillion.

Sir James Goldsmith pulls out of BAT’s takeover after nine month
struggle.

Lords’ Cttee says figures used by you and your Ministers on the
Govt’s spending on research and development are badly flawed
{Times ).

You are planning to exploit the Franco-German call for greater
political union in the EC by pressing for new curbs on the powers
of the Commission (Tiroes).

Richard Holt MP protests at double standards of CHE for protesting
about a white mother removing her child from a predominantly
Pakistani school when they made no complaint about a Muslim father
removing two youngsters from a mainly white school in same area.

Express feature says the "racist” charge has taken over from
"fascist” as an all inclusive, unthinking Left wing response to
just about anything they don’t like.

Times leader says those who are genuinely concerned to foster good
relations between different racial and cultural communities should
be wary of making accusations of racism against parents seeking an
education for their children suitable for the society in which
they will live. Such accusations are more likely to breed racism
than to prevent it.

An Independent editorial says a parent’s racial reason for
withdrawing child from school is regrettable. But parents should
not be forced to behave like multi-cultural zealots* Not only
will coercion prove counter-productive, it also infringes the
liberty of parents to bring up their children in one tradition
rather than another. On balance the drawbacks of letting
officials dictate to parents where they can send their children
are worse than the admittedly alarming risk that British,schools
will become more divided.
                               6.               April 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Telegraph leader says common sense insists   that John MacGregor is
right in declaring the right of parents to   choose a sdchool for
their children cannot be overturned by the   Race Relations Act.
This issue is not one of colour but mainly   of language.

Small time robber who sprayed his victims with ammonia but got
only £2,000 jailed for 20 years - 5 years on each charge,

Mail critical that 8 months after Marchioness disaster there is
still no official explanation for the collision.

Contraceptive services cut by up to 50% in a year as health
authorities try to stay within budget, Family Planning Assn claims
{Independent).

Ballot of 10,000 health service staff emphatically rejects plans
for Guys and Lewisham Hospitals to opt out of health authority
control {Times).

Research on human embryos given go ahead by Commons by 364-193.

Times leader calls for tolerance on embryo research and abortion
saying the task of drawing a line is a matter which some people
regard as of life and death will never by uncontroversial. But
that is why Parliament exists and that is why good democrats
accept the rule of law, even when they may disagree with the
conclusions.  It adds that tolerance and respect is also owed to
those whose religion and moral convictions leave them deeply
disturbed.

Star, continuing its campaign to close Sellafield, says Greenpeace
want this and Chapelcross plants closed now - both, they say, are
timebombs waiting to explode.

Meanwhile, Nil gives the two stations another 5-lOyears’ operating
life.

Sellafield nuclear factory has won a £225million contract to
reprocess spent fuel from West Germany {F T ).

Another 14,000 to be moved from Chernobyl disaster zone, according
to Pravda;  12million acres of land contaminated by accident.

Guardian says future of Philharmonia, one of the world’s great
orchestras, is in jeopardy because the London Philharmonic, chosen
as the South Bank's first resident orchestra, is to be given
special contractual priveleges.
                               7.              April 24, 1990

                          PRESS DISEST


Natural History Museum announces 100 redundancies by 1995 to make
it more sensitive to market and public needs.

Woodrow Wyatt in the Times urges the West to stand up to Gorbachev
over Lithuania.  For a start Britain and the US should call Mr
Gorbachev’s bluff and send the Lithuanians the oil, gas and other
supplies they need. He could not retaliate without wrecking the
improvement of Soviet relations with the East, which are so
important to him if he is to survive at all.

Sun highly critical of West for doing nothing to help Lithuania.
Kremlin offers Lithuania a deal - delay independence for two
years,

Telegraph leader deplores Russia’s current attempt to browbeat the
Lithuanians into submission and says any use of force will arouse
revulsion in the outside world. But these considerations must toe
tempered by the wider context. The Lithuanians must judge whether
their cause is best served toy precipitate action.

Gorbachev spokesman signals backing away from radical reform for
Soviet economy. There will be no shook treatment says Maslennikov
{Independen t }.

Moscow TV has bought three episodes of Yes, Prime Minister.

Editor of Tehran Times suggests all Middle East hostages could be
freed by the end of the year.

Times leader looks at Syria’s role in the release of a US hostage
saying that the case for restoration of British relations with
Syria, broken off in 1386, might look stronger but it is not yet
decisive. The Govt’s firm action in 1986 has paid off. The route
to resuming diplomatic ties was clearly charted in 1986. It
starts in Damascus, and there Is no reason for the British Govt
yet to redraw the map.

Iran?s Foreign Minster says Britain should use its strong
influence over the Phalangist groups in Lebanon and the Israeli
Govt to free Muslim captives in both countries {Times ).

10 die as mobs attack police in Kathmandu.
                                                                        ANNEX




MINISTERS a IK VISITS. SPEECHES ETC’s
DEM:     Mr Howard makes presentation to 500,000 EAS entrant; Mr Eggar
         attends
DEN:    Mr Wakeham addresses the Institute of Energy’s annual lunch*
        Inn on the Park, London
DSS:    Mr Newton addresses Age Concern conference
HO:     Mr Waddington addresses Cambridgeshire Magistrates Association
LPC:    Sir Geoffrey Howe       lunches   with   Peat   Marwick       McLimock,
        London
DEM:    Lord Strathclyde attends Tidy Britain            Group        launch    of
        Environmental Charter, Regents Park, London
DEM:    Mr Nicholls attends press launch of 'The Third Age Network”,
        London; later addresses Motor Agents Association dinner
DEN:    Mr Morrison addresses the Module Constructors Association, Inn on
        the Park, London
DEN:    Mr Baldry addresses the         World Conference       Coal    Dinner,       QEII
        Conference Centre, London
DES:    Mr Jackson addresses press conference for launch of Active Memory
        Technology Ltd’s computers for universities programme, London
DES:    Mrs Rumbold launches Thames              Polytechnic   Accreditation.        Inset
        Scheme with Bromley LEA, Bromley
DES:    Mr Howarth launches the West Midlands Regional Drugs Campaign,
        Birmingham
DH:     Mr Freeman visits North West Hertfordshire District Health
        Authority; later visits Harperbury Hospital and meets Toby Jessell
        MP re Teddington Memorial Hospital
DTI:    Mr Redwood presents New Year Honours Awards to DTI staff,
        London
DTI:    Mr Hogg visits BAe, Stevenage
D ll:   Lord Trefgame visits Glasgow tor Expo '92 presentation
                               2.              January 2 3   ,1990
                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Soviet Union told to get out of Azerbaijan in 48 hours after
impressive display of mourning and nationalise at funeral of those
killed in Baku.

Threat to seccede from USSR unless Soviet troops leave;      want
state of emergency lifted.

Iran tells USSR it is playing with fire sending troops to
Azerbaijan and killing Muslims.

Foreign Secy, in East Germany, announces extension of know-how aid
to whole of Eastern Europe. Warns East Germans of need to conduct
fair elections.

East German premier, Modrow, agrees to give Opposition groups
places in Cabinet.

Bonn Govt urgently drawing up plans to make West Germany a less
attractive haven for ethnic Germans from throughout Soviet bloc,
but particulary to stop exodus of East Germans who are needed to
rebuild their own country (Times).

Czechoslovakia likely to become member of IMF by the summer (FT).

Yugoslav Communist Party in disarray after Slovenes walk out of
congress *

Times leader says that Gorbachev’s apparent ability to work
political miracles was useful to the reformists as long as the
Ceausescus and Honeckers, the Husaks and the Zhivkovs were in
charge. As his reputation is eclipsed by insurgent subject
nations, his patronate has become insufficient to inspire respect.
Gorbachev's liberal Leninism is no longr the standard by which
Eastern Europe nations judge themselves.

Mail and Independent turn attention to prospects for disarmament
with Soviet Union In retreat.

Hail says we shall have radically to refashion our defences. The
challenge will be to cut the army burden while continuing sensibly
to modernise our capability.

An Independent editorial says you are right to insist there should
be no early unilateral cuts in Britain’s defence budget, while
holding open the possibility of deep reduction next year following
an agreement in Vienna. The new British army should be smaller
                                3.               January 23, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST

 but better equipped, its primary goal to guard western and
 northern approaches and capable of delivering a substrategic
 nuclear deterrent - possibly in co-operation with the French.

 US Congress looks for big defence cuts to fund civil projects -
 but the "peach dividend" may be disappointingly small
 {Independent).

 Mail draws attention to arrival of 45 Vietnamese boat people at
 Heathrow - among first of 2,000 to arrive.

US indicates willingness to soften position over involuntary
repatriation of boat people {Independent),

Under the heading "Racist populism? I believe in honouring our
pledge” Norman Tebbit in the Times says themost remarkable aspect
of the proposal to give a quarter of a million Hong Kong Chinese
the right of abode in Britain is that ministers seem surprised it
caused a controversy. He concludes that it is true the Govt
accepted that Hong Kong's problems can be solved only in China and
not by unilateral British action,

Labour Party orders inquiry Into de-selection of Frank Field who
submits a 150-page account of Militant activities in Wirral.
Mirror says Militant remains strong around Liverpool.

Independent says Labour scent victory in Mid-Staffs seat left
vacant by death of JOhn Heddle. Constituency Tories are unprepared
for election.

jk&ggsg. says Labour plans for replacing community charge with tax
based on property values and related to income sounds like a
disaster but as an idea for making community charge seem better it
sounds terrific.

T.&frss leader says Labour will not advance its own cause with this
plan. The outcome would be a bureaucratic process which would
make for an accountant’s dream and a citizen's nightmare.

Manchester's community charge could toe pushed up to £733 (Times).

Times says that the meeting between you and Tory MEPs tomorrow is
being turned into a peach convention with the focus on the future
of Eastern Europe.

Sxm backs Norman Tebbit for attacing Tory MEPs - by and large, it
says, they are politicans who have failed to make it to
Westminster„
                                4.              January 23, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST


FT leader ono Pohl's speech on the prosepctive European monetary
order says his suggestions, some of which you will consider
outrageous will focus cosnideration on whether politically managed
money - a euphamism for its debasement - is an essential
democratic principle. He has brought the constitutional Issue
into the open.

 10% increase in company failures in 1989 as production falls.

Stock Excchange wipes £7.Sbillion off shares as profits slump.

C8I calls for tax incentives to investment.

Fears of higher mortgage charges as building society takings fall.

Sun says you are right in wanting to raise mortgage tax relief
above £30,000.

Abbey National pays £41million to buy French mortgage firm
(Independent).

Pressure for strike ballot as ambulance shop stewards meet in
London today.

Kenneth Clarke, in interview with Telegraph, which leads with it,
tries to break ambulance deadlock by offering the prospect of
better pay in future through locally negotiated productivity
deals.

Ford sending leaflet to 33,000 workers explaining benefits of its
pay offer in effort to avoid all-out strike; company warns of job
losses if strike goes ahead.

College employers say many lecturers are anxious to accept a new
pay offer which has been rejected by their unions (Times).

Ferranti wins £2billi.on order to build radar systems for new
European Fighter Aircraft.

Whitehall officials believe BAe will be forced by Ec to repay all
or part of £38million inducements used in Rover deal


Govt liekly to allow electricity supply industry to drop plans to
completea £2billion investment programme to cut acid rain
pollution because national Power and PowerGen claim they will be
store difficult to privatise if their prospectuses commit then? to
                                   5.          January 23, 1390

                           PRESS DIGEST

completing the programme (f t ).

BAe preparing a £1.2billion plan to develop Speke into an
international airport (Times).

Glass found in Mr Kipling pies - 250,000 packs withdrawn.   Not
know whether deliberately spiked.

20p cheaper jars of coffee forecast after fall in world price of
beans.

Showdown looming with West Germany over its ban on British beef
because of BSE*

Bar backs amendments to the courts and legal services Bill to
strengthen the role of judges in determining the extent to which
solicitors will be allowed to take cases in the higher courts
{Times).

Govt’s initiative to cut hospital waiting lists has failed.
£55million special fund offset by cuts elsewhere (independent)♦

Plans to regulate every aspect of NHS Consultants’ work to be
unveiled soon (Independent).

Teachers' opposition grows to plans for teaching geography in
national curriculum. Claims that plan means return to learning
facts by rate (Independent).

Express praises Michael Howard for putting his weight behind calls
for employers to provide better child care facilities for female
exployees.

Today highlights case of mother who has won a legalbattle to
secure a child minder allowance so that she could go to college
only to discover that Govt haschanged rules alowing only unmarried
mothers to claim allowance.

Times says that as a result Govt may soon find itself in the
European Court to answer charges that it discriminates against
married people who want to enter the job market.

Home Secy rejects calls for inquiry into Stalker/Taylor affair;
Stalker says he will this week hand in document which he says
proves decision to remove him from Inquiry was political.

Telegraph leader says Ministers would do well to resolve the
matter one way or another as quickly as possible.
                                6.               January 23, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST


Select Cttee plans to question Sir Robin Butler role of Cabinet
Office in Stalker affair.

Cardinal 0 ’Fee says Pope would visit Northern Ireland if x r a ended
violence.

Unionists disappointed by Haughey’s continuing commitment to
Anglo/Irish agreement. Paisley and Molyneaux still pressing for
suspension {Independent).

Ulster Unionists deeply split by Haughey's offer to renegotiate
Anglo-Irish agreement.

Dr Brian Mawhinney says he believes Ulster will stay the same
constitutionally for 50-60 years (Mail).

RUG inspector shotdead in his home last night.

Malcolm Rifkind refuses to change system for selecting Scottish
judges and says there is no legal bar to homosexual judges.

Probation officers call for national council to bring consistency
inCrown Court sentencing {Independent:).

First case of racial discrimination to be brought against Army by
black ex-Guardsman {Independent)♦

Case of two senior policemen who drove at up to 60mph on hard
shoulder of Ml in unmarked car to catch Heathrow flight - each
find £400 with £200 costs.

Scotland Yard scrapping minimum height requirement for police to
encourage more ethnic minorities to join police (FT).

Three Labour MPs ~ John Prescott, Frank Cook and David Marshall -
surcharged {press say fined) on video-cameras brought in from Far
East trip. Cost: £770 each.

Channel 4 decides to go for more quality minority programmes in
bid to protect its market in the new broadcasting regime. Rejects
idea of cheap game shows {Independent)«

Home Office studying Express evidence of £55GmiIXion soft p o m
industry in Britain.

Paul Johnson, in Mail, says Rushdie should take the opportunity of
a lecture he is to give to announce he will forego his right to
                               7.               January 23, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

put his book into paperback and to express his regret for the
distress he has caused the Moslem community. There is a strong
chance that this would end the row.

Indepedent on Sunday sued before its launch (FT),

Much anticipation of your visit to Coronation Street.

Feature on the John Majors in Today.

Anthony Bevins, in the Independent, sees distinct signs of
dampness in John Major’s political record. Before becoming a Whip
in 1987, he was a known liberal on immigration and   hanging,
and supported full EMS membership.

Criticism of Sebastian Coe for denouncing cricketers who have gone
to play in South Africa; Sun points out he rejected your request
to boycott Moscow Olympics over Afghanistan.   Today says it has
not taken Coe long to learn the first sordid lesson of politics:
hypocrisy.   Mail doubts whether, as Coe says, most British people
are ashamed of the cricketers.

Japanese general election on Februry 18.

Californian police fear arrival of a new drug scourge as they
discover laboratory making "ice”, for smokeable methamphetamine
{Independent).

Kashmir upheaval threatens relations relations between India and
Pakistan. Muslim militants spread anti-Indian feeliing as Indian
accuse Pakistan of aiding extremists (independent).

India has filed prei inminary charges againstBoforsover bribes
allegedly paid by the company to secure a large arms contract
<!£) *
                                                                             ANNEX


    MINISTERS {UKVISfTS. SPEECHES ETC)

    DH:            Mr Clarke attends an informal editorial conference, The Guardian
    WO;            Mr Walker performs topping-out ceremony at Cardiff World Trade
                   Centre, v,arduf; also attends private construction industry lunch
                   caram ana visits West Leigh Windows Ltd, Caerphilly

    DEM:           Mr Hg§ar addresses the Federation of Master Builders dinner        about
                   the Untried Business Rate                                           ooux

    DEM:           Lord Strathclyde addresses All-Party Tourism Committee, London
    DEM:           Mr Howard visits the North East
    DES:           Mrs Rumbold visits Southwark ILEA

    DH:            Lady Hooper meets Mr Hunter of the Association of Optometrists
    DTI.                 Trefgarne addresses CB1 conference on Trade and Investment in
                   Tunisia; later hosts Lancaster House reception on launch of BGTB’s
                   forward plan; Mr Ridley and Mr Redwood also attend

 DTI:           Mr Forth launches new EUREKA project on the environment; later
                addresses How to manage your corporate and marketing strategy in
                a greener world” conference

 DTp:              Mr Atkins visits Eastern Region and Cardington Training Centre
MAFF:           Baroness Tnxmpkgton attends BP Past, Present and Future reception
MAFF:           Mr Maclean addresses National Association of Catering Butchers
                annual lunch, London                                &



DTI:               Mr Ridley addresses British-American Chamber of Commerce, New
                   ? ODC+ Q              ___

               3*S (PRESS INTERVIEWS^

DES:            Mr MacGregor interviewed by John O’Leary of The Times

LPC:      Sir Geoffrey Howe interviewed by BBC Northern Ireland’s Spotlight
_________ programme______ _______________ _________ ________       r    &

m    m     m   m     Q

"Viewpoint W prv (1035)
Looks at war being waged against Colombian drug barons
”News-Swap” ITV (HJSpm)
Moscow and London use latest technology to swap clips from each country's
news bulletins and to review the week's events
PRIME MINISTER                                                                                  January 24, 1990


MAIN EVENTS

 Prime Minister to open new exhibitions "Past, Present and Future” at
 the Tate Gallery - the first complete re-hang of their collection for
 nearly 30 years;   later meets MEPs


STATISTICS
   ------------- ™ --------- -M -3 »




CSC:                         Cyclical indicators for the UK economy
DOE:                         Construction - new orders (prov)
DOE:                         Bricks and cement production and deliveries (4th qtr prov)
WO:                          Index of production and construction for Wales (3rd qtr)_________________

zwm&nom
OAL:                          National Museums and Galleries: Accounts for year ending 31 March
                              1988___________________________________________________________
PARLIAMENT
     .TiTTTilfft iTriii HifflniiT liiw iit




Cflmaass
Questions:                                   Environment
Business:                                    10 Minute Rule Bill: Rent Acts (Repeal)
                                             Opposition Day (3rd Allotted Day)
                                             Until about 7,00 pm
                                             Debate on Education on an Opposition Motion
                                             Afterwards
                                             Debate on the Disabled on an Opposition Motion
                                             Motions on Welsh Revenue Support Grants Reports,        Details
                                             will be given in die Official Report
                                                  *     Government funding of residential care and nursing
                                                        homes (Mr M Colvin)
                                                   WELSH AFFAIRS
                                                   Subject: Toxic Waste Disposal in Wales
                                                   Witnesses: Representatives from Welsh Health Authorities;
                                                   officials from the Department of the Environment
                                                   AGRICULTURE
                                                   Subject: Fish Fanning In the UK
                                                   Witnesses: Nature Conservancy Council; Countryside
                                                   Commission; Countryside Commission for Scotland; Royal
                                                   Society for the Protection of Birds; Marine Conservation
                                                   Society; World Wide Fund for Nature
                                                              January 24, 1990



 Sdcct Committees (Confd),
                     TRADE AND INDUSTRY
                     Subject: Company Investigations
                     Witnesses: (At 10.45) Serious Fraud Office, (At 11.30) Hie
                     Stock Exchange Insider Dealing Group
                     DEFENCE
                     Subject: Physical Security of Military Installations
                     Witnesses: Ministry of Defence officials
                     STANDING ORDERS
                     EMPLOYMENT
                     Subject: Tourism
                     Witnesses: Department of Employment officials; (At 5.15
                     approx) The National Trust
                     SOCIAL SERVICES
                     Subject: Community Care
                     Witnesses: Mrs Virginia Bottomiey, MP, Minister for
                     Health and Mr Roger Freeman, MP, Parliamentary Under­
                     secretary of State, Department of Health and 'Rt Hon
                     Nicholas Scott, MBE, MP, Minister of State for Social
                     Security and the Disabled
                     TRANSPORT
                     Subject: Aircraft Cabin Safety
                     Witnesses: Civil Aviation Authority
                     TREASURY AND CIVIL SERVICE
                     Subject: International Debt Strategy
                     Witnesses: Sir Jeremy Morse, Chairman, Lloyds Bank, and
                     Sir Kit McMahon, Chairman, Midland Bank
                     PROCEDURE
                     Subject: The working of the Select Committee system
                     Witnesses: Rt Hon Robert Sheldon, MP
                    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                    Subject: Quality Control of Roads and Bridges
                    Witness: Sir Alan Bailey, Permanent Secretary, Department
                    of Transport
                    COMMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                    King’s Cross Railways Bill
Lords:         Starred Questions
               Debate to call attention to the deteriorating state of London’s
               traffic and the need for comprehensive initiatives to tackle the
               problems
               Debate to call attention to the situation in Hong Kong
               UQ to ask Her Majesty's Government what are their plans for
               the future of the probation service _____
                               3,              January 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Much speculation this morning about higher taxes after Chancellor
warns there will be few giveaways in Budget and that Interest
rates will stay high for some time. An austerity Budget is the
overall verdict and fears of an increase on mortgage rates.

Chancellor holds out a "decade of promise” if we beat inflation.

Express finds it hard to disagree with the thrust of Chancellor's
remarks. We are having to pay the price of Nigel Lawson *s
reckless abandonment of monetarism.

Snipers kill at least four Russian soldiers in Azerbaijan where
militants threaten to go underground if Soviets stay.

Iranian MP condemns Russian "genocide” against Muslim people of
Azerbaijan. But official Iranian reaction is restrained and there
is no support for Azeri secession {Independent).

Gorbachev threatened by split in Politburo and growing backlash
from conservatives and bureaucrats (FT).

Izvastia warns that mounting disorder in Azerbaijan could bring
the return of a conservative regime and the end of Gorbachev's
reforms. "We have reached the point where people are asking:
will there be perestroika or not?” says govt paper (Independent).

Four leading officials of Ceaucesceu regime to go on trial at
weekend on complicity in genocide charges.

Hail sees Yugoslavs as next to opt for multi party democracy.

Hungarian Prime Minister says agreement in principle reached on
Soviet troop withdrawal (Times),

Leipzig students question Douglas Hurd about UK pollution,
community charge and Hong Kong (Independent).

Modrow warns that violence between opposition parties could
threaten democratic progress in East Germany {Independent).

Romania’s provisional govt to delay promised elections by one
month, and ask UN to send observers (Times),

Relief workers in Romania say country faces threat of mass
starvation unless massive emergency food supplies made available
CTimes),
                               4.              January 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


South African Govt reported to be meeting today to agree a date
for release of Mandela.

Telegraph says de Klerk is preparing to repeal Land Acts which
are fundamental to segregation.

Hong Kong Rights Bill set to be unveiled next month after detailed
redrafting intended to strengthen its effectiveness when China
takes over in 1997 {FT).

Canada has opened the way for compromise over boat people by
suggesting that only the 56,000 refugees now in Hong Kong should
be exempt until the end of the year. Newer arrivals would be
subject to a speedier screening process (FT).

Times and Telegraph claim Lord Justice Taylor's report has
rejected football membership card scheme.

Lord Bethel, in Express feature, says MEPs are not coming to No 10
today for a fight but for a discussion as to how they can work
better for their country.

Times editorial says MEPs do not reflect the shades of opinion
which make up the consensus of Conservative opinion in Britain,
and are not constrained by the political realities which operate
on Westminster MPs. While, in the interests of practical
politics, you should build bridges of communication with MEPs, the
party should reflect on how MEPs are selected in future.

Telegraph says MEPs issued a warning yesterday that you could face
disaster at the next election if you continue to cold shoulder
them.

George Brock, in a commentary in the Times, says that your meeting
with MEPs today will be the product of ambiguity, indecision and
muddle. Over the last six months your actions and statements
speak more of indecision than a clear plan of opposition to EC
policies: the policy-making engine is idling. Into this muddle
comes the prospect of German reunification, but here too you are
trapped and have not said much about the key issues involved.

Strasbourg Tories seek concord at No 10 ~ Philip Stevens says
today’s meeting with MEPs has all the ingredients of a political
"high noon” (FT).
                               5.              January 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

FT leader on keeping 1992 on track says without full market
integration dreams of eventual economic union make little sense,
EC also needs to remember that access to a large and efficient
single market is one of the more valuable economic benefits it can
offer eastern Europe which it is so eager to help (FT).

Up to 30 MPs, including Benn, Skinner and Heffer, are threatening
to defy Kinnock and refuse to pay community charge.

Labour leaders step up purge of Militant Tendency by laying
charges today against 5 party members in Glasgow (Times}.

Ford warns its 30,000 staff that their jobs will be at risk if
they strike over pay.

Gavin Laird, AEU, predicts Ford workers will vote to accept the
offer.

London ambulance shop stewards vote against a national strike
ballot.

Claims that a pregnant mother died waiting for an Army ambulance
in Dorset which took 12 minutes to cover a mile because of a
"communications fault”.

Star says sadly Kenneth Clarke probably doesn’t give a damn.

Scottish managers say striking Edinburgh crews refused to attend a
child, 10, hurt in a road accident.

Express leader on Kenneth ClarkeTs aim for local productivity
deals in the ambulance service asks him what he Is waiting for?
Such deals offer the way out of the dispute. Dismantling national
bargaining should be one of your main priorities.

Mirror claims patients, young and old, are being sent home because
they are too costly to treat.

Claims of a breakthrough in the treatment of cancer tumours.

Imperial Cancer Research Fund says Govt's health service reforms
could have a devastating effect on cancer research In hospitals,
causing cut-back or abandonment of some projects (Times).

Much editorial concern about the way women are prevented from
reaching the top in employment.
                               6.              January 24, 1930

                          PRESS DIGEST

Lady Howe advocates tax relief for nannies to boost career chances
for women. Ministers may be breaking law by appointing mainly men
to public bodies {Independent).

British workforce content and "not overly ambitious" says major
survey of attitudes. Nearly one-third have got as far as they
wanted (Independent),

GEC to buy radar bit of Ferranti for £310million.   Labour Party
calls for an inquiry.

Times says takeover was crucial ingredient in persuading West
Germany to stop opposition to company’s radar system for EFA.
Elsewhere, the takeover should lead to an announcement, confirming
Ferranti selected to provide the EFA’s radar, within a week.

Tom King thought to have guaranteed Germany against cost overruns
on Ferranti’s EFA radar {Independent).

US Customs investigating Ferranti International export of military
equipment (FT).

Environmental dispute looming over plans to increase flights at
Heathrow (Times).

EC bans export of live British cattle, except calves up to 6
months, because of BSE.

10,000 lorries were so seriously overladen that they were
prevented from continuing their journeys - 60% rise over previous
12 months.

Cecil Parkinson announces proposals to reduce environmental impact
of heavy lorries in city centres and residential areas (Times).

Nicholas Ridley, in USA, accuses America of practising
protectionism while preaching free trade.

Mirror claims Prince Charles is imposing up to 15% rent rises on
pensioners living in Duchy of Cornwall property In London.

Govt *s crackdown on Insider share dealing in ruins following
collapse of case against former OFT civil servant. But appeal
against Judge’s ruling likely (Times}.
                               7.              January 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Tory councillors warn that unrealistic Govt spending targets will
force up their community charge. Almost half London small
businesses will consider raising prices when unified business rate
comes in, council survey shows.

Eric Forth says your enthusiasm for green issues makes it hard for
Cabinet colleagues to keep up. You have done more than any other
leader to raise environmental awareness.

British Waterways launches 3 year campaign to clean up neglected
canals and convert them into amenities.

Tories to launch new drive to recruit ethnic minorities.

Mirror claims real reason Armed Forces are not recruiting enough
blacks are racial prejudice and bullying.

Governors of Cheshire school agree 2 Moslem sisters can attend
wearing headdress.

National Union of Teachers to set up counselling service
for teachers suffering stress, and calls for better health and
rest facilities in schools {Times).

Cricket and football coaches to be drafted into schools to halt
decline in team games (Times).

Hunt for 36 hour old baby kidnapped from St Thomas's switches to
Australia.

Lord Justice Glideweil calls for a formal judges' forum to discuss
sentencing and ensure decisions are consistent {Times).

Banking union calls for national security code to make armed
robbery more difficult. London figures show big rise in armed
raids on betting shops and post offices (Independent).

Star claims a staggering 459 horses have died in first 6 months of
National Hunt racing.

SBC refusing to allow other broadcasters to cover the Commonwealth
Games (Times).

Police arrest & man and seize two rifles just before Prince
Edward was due to open Commonwealth Games in Auckland,

Four died yesterday in storms around Britain; snow expected
in North.
                               8.              January 24, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


John Stradling Thomas MP faces re-selection fight in Monmouth.

West Indian barrister to become political adviser to Home Office
ministers.

Tories appoint hardline anti-CND campaigner Julian Lewis to
Research Dept.  "He makes Mrs Thatcher look like a dangerous
leftie” says Labour’s Alan Williams {Independent).

Colombian drug barons recognise the "triumph of the state" in the
war waged against them by Barco's Govt.

Peres says direct talks between Israel and Pakistanis are "very
near”.

Times editorial reviews Argentinian President’s attempts to tackle
the country's economic problems, concluding that Mr Menem1s robust
belief in the possibility of economic miracles may not in itself
be enough, with corruption remaining a major cause of the national
malaise.

Times editorial on merger of political parties in Seoul, expresses
the hope that this reflects genuine parliamentary progress, and is
not simply an electoral gambit for the forthcoming elections.

EASTERN EUROPE

Sun says you are the most admired and respected of Western
politicians in all the states of the former Communist conference
and you would have an enormous impact if you visited Rumania and
other countries instead of sending junior Ministers.
                                                                         ANNEX


 MMSH R S (UK VISnS.SEHECHBS ETO
 DES:     Mr MacGregor visits schools in Gloucestershire

 LFC;     Sir Geoffrey Howe meets delegation of Pakistan Senators            led Hy Mr
          Wasim Sajjad

 DEM:     Lord Strathclyde visits Port of    Dover/Dover Harbour Board and local
           tourist attracdons

 DES;     Mrs Rumbold visits Haygrove School Bridgewater, Somerset

 DH:       Mr Freeman attends Resource Management study day,Mount                 Royal
         ' Hospital London

 DH:      Mrs Bottomley meets Baroness Seear and delegation from Institute of
          Domieiiaiy Care re community care, London

OSS:      Lord Henley chairs North London War Pensions Committee meeting,
           London                                                       *

DTI;      Mr Forth attends       signing    ceremony    for   ERMES,     pan-European
          paging system

DTI:     Lord Trefgame meets Tunisian Minister of Economy, M Belaid
DTp:     Mr Portillo visits South London Transport

DTp:     Mr McLaughlin visits Royal National lifeboat Institute, Poole
DTp:      Mr Atkins visits AA Roadwatch            Centre,    Stanmore and       Vehicle
          Inspectorate Executive Agency, Bristol

FCO:     Mr Maude receives visit from Israeli Ambassador, Yoan Biran
HO:       L&rd Ferrers visits Gwyd Fire Brigade, North Wales
HO:       Mr   Patten visits Liverpool and Rochdale re: Safer Cities

                £ ur37 addresses Staffordshire       Farm Management Association,
          Staffordshire College of Agriculture

MAFF:    Mr Maclean visits AFRC Institute of Food Research, Reading_____________
m m )   m o t o

"The Carers" CH4 (2,00pm)
Considers work of carers retraining iong-stay psychiatric patients for life In
the community
                                                                  January 25, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS




STATISTICS

DEN:         Energy treads (Nov)_______________________________________________
PARLIAMENT
Commons

Questions:       Home Office; Prime Minister
Sk}$i$gs$:       Motions on Scottish Housing Support Grant Order and Revenue
                 Support Grant Reports. Details will be given in the Official
                 Report
                 Opposed Private Business
                 London Local Authorities Bill (HL)
                 Medway Tunnel Bill
                 Afterwards
                 Motions to take note of EC Document on Shipping and
                 Dangerous Goods and on Merchant Shipping Regulations.
                 Details will be given in the Official Report
A^g.ammeaUSgMies;          Dumping of waste in the North Sea (Mr M Bruce)
Select Committees;    COMMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                      King’s Cross Railways Bill
Lords;         Started Questions
               Courts and Legal Services Bill (HL): Committee (2nd Day)
______________ Trade Union Act 1984 (Amendment) Bill (HL)        ______________
                               2,             January 25, 1990

                         PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Soviet tanks and ships break blockade of Baku harbour by 50
merchant ships. Several vessels blown out of water and sunk,
according to reports.

Independent sees this as Moscow in effect declaring war on
Azerbaijan. Gerasimov rejects suggestions of national crisis,
saying "There are no alternative leaders. There are no
alternative policies”.

Bush backs troubled Gorbachev (Mail).

Riot police break up 30,000 demonstrators in Yugoslavia demanding
democracy for ethnic Albanians in Kosovo province.

Political turmoil in post-revolutionary Romania deepens as crowds
again take to streets to protest against decision of the ruling
National Salvation Front to stand in the May General Elections.
Leader accuses the National Salvation Front of goading the nation
to fury. It suggests that the distinguished former dissident,
Mrs Doina Cornea, who has resigned, should take over as caretaker
President as she alone appears to have the substance to become a
Romanian Havel or Walesa (Times).

Douglas Hurd says East German Govt's lack of authority is creating
instability.   He pleases East German Govt by taking a cautious
view on the prospects for German reunification (FT)„

Times says that the first united rightwing party has staggered to
its feet in East Germany In the first serious challenge for the
growing conservative vote in May elections.

Telegraph leader says if you were seeking to work with the grain
of history with Mitterrand last weekend it applauds you. We need
to do three things: welcome advent of a Germany that can decide
its own future democratically? do everything we can to reassure
Gorbachev by encouraging US to stay in Europe and showing more
enthusiasm for CSCE; and give substance to German hopes a
reunified Germany will occur within EC,

Moscow cuts oil sales to Eastern Europe but there is uncertainty
about whether this is due to shortages or part of an economic war
of nerves (FT).

Soccer national membership card scheme dropped. Seen as a U-turn
by Govt; a humiliation for you by Mirror - no choice but to turn.
Today describes it as victory for thugs.
                               3*              January 25, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


John Carlisle MP hopes Govt will stand firm and go-ahead with
scheme. He says it would be "pathetic” for Govt to comply with
Taylor’s "extreme prejudice” against cards (Independent).

Labour Party delighted.

Express says decision will not stop Ministers looking for
alternative membership schemes which do not endanger fans.

Senior Met. sources deny conclusions of leaked report on Wapping
violence, claiming author lacked experience. Disclosures
embarrass Police Complaints Authority and Crown Prosecution
Service (Independent).

Express leader says if the leak is correct the investigators must
have been operating in a timewarp in which violent. Luddite
attempts to destroy a lawful business are still expected to be
indulged in by the rest of society. Anyone who believes the rent-
a-mob at Wapping was of peaceful intent will believe anything.

Britain frustrated at Vietnamese boat people conference by
Americans' refusal to compromise.

Express says the boat people conference ended in a shambles.

Ford workers reject strike and accept 10.2% - seen as a climbdown
by workers which nonetheless will fuel inflation. Gavin Laird,
AEU, sees it as a benchmark for all workers - "Double figures
were always our target”. Star says Govt should now pay ambulance
men same.

FT says however that, notwithstanding the vote, Ford are braced
for further disruption to production as 600 skilled workers
meet tomorrow to consider extending their strike. Ministers
intend to portray the settlement as a special case.

Times says Ford emphasise that 10.2% pay deal is self-financing
through productivity measures but Chancellor is left with the
problem of how to contain wage rises which threaten to push
inflation even higher, damaging City confidence and risking
interest rate rises. CBI welcome Ford workers' vote but warn that
it was no benchmark, adding that pay deals not earned by better
performance would mean job losses.

NW London ambulance workers to strike this morning in spite of
wider London decision not to do so.
                               4.              January 25, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Kenneth Clarke, confronted by crowd of heckling students when, on
an ambulance call in Newcastle while making a film of the dispute,
encounters a dying lecturer who does not respond to resuscitation.

Times says Doctors Pay Review Body recommends they should have
rises of up to 18% in return for new performance-related
contracts. Ministers expected to phase in award to avoid fuelling
ambulance dispute.

Assistant Masters' & Mistresses’ ftssn claims that figures issued
by D/Environment show that Ministers are planning to introduce
regional pay for teachers (Times).

Telegraph says Christopher Prout said there was now a reasonbly
good chance UK would join ERM by end of year.

Relatively little coverage of your meeting with MEPs but it is
generally seen as not settling rift over EMU/ERM.

Delors in Paris calls for establishment of European Federation ,
without Britain if necessary, and the transfer of large of areas
of national sovereignty to a political executive.

BBC union leaders lodge claim for 10%. Daily Mail staff are
working to rule in protest against plans to introduce Individual
contracts.

BAe management to hold talks with local union leaders at Chester
site in pay and hours dispute {Times).

British Shoe Corporation threatening to make 1,000 staff redundant
after sales slump; 200 stores closed.

Aeroflot places £200million order for 5 Airbus 310s.

BAA increases landing fees for small aircraft at Gatwick and
Heathrow by 40% - small airlines protest. Could add 15% to air
fares.

Serious Fraud Sguad says decisions whether to prosecute
individuals involved in the House of Fraser takeover should be
made by end of February (Times).

EC Commission proposes member states should let It become their
negotiator with rest of world on fixing of airline routes (FT),
                               5.               January 25, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Ferranti Issues writ against Peat Warwick McLintock claiming
damages for losses arising from Ferranti’s takeover of
International Signal and Control (FT),

Times leader looks at the history of the European Fighter Aircraft
saying that the end to the Anglo-German squabble could be in sight
with the GEC takeover of Ferranti. But there is still a question
mark over the future of EFA, adding that the four ministers of
defence involved still have a lot of talking to do.

Chairman of Securities and Investments Board denies suggestions
body about to take over responsibilities from DTI (FT).

France to push for tough curbs on imports of Japanese cars at EC
Foreign Ministers meeting next month (FT) -

Furious dispute between Eurotunnel and the 10 contractor
companies erupts again over costs of Channel Tunnel (Times).

British Gas chairman says there are plans to introduce quality of
service targets, possibly backed by financial compensation for
inadequate service, for 17 million householders (FT).

Families in London face lower bilIs than in almost any other major
capital according to PE International Consultants.

Banks suspect you will avenge yourself for their student loans
decision by restricting tax relief on doubtful debts
(Independent).

Woodrow Wyatt in the Times accuses the banks of doing a disservice
to the country as well as students by bucking out of the student
loan scheme. He adds that it is not too late for them to come
back into the scheme but doubts that they will because they run
scared at the slightest whiff of, or breaking of ranks in the face
of, the HU'S.

George Walden HP claims A level exesis are being made too easy.

Labour attack state school for charging £11 a week to ensure
under-fives can cope with the national curriculum (Independent).

New fears raised by Sir Richard Doll over link between
contraceptive pill and cancer.

Hail says Kinnock is threatened by a new wave of hard left
Militant penetration.
                               6.              January 25, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Sun says Kinnock has no choice but to expel the 30 Labour MPs who
are threatening to refuse to pay community charge.

Kenneth Baker accused of spectacular own-goal over Centra1 Office
postcard claiming rises in health spending. Shows nurse from
hospital hit by spending cuts {Independent).

Express feature says if Conservatives lost Mid Staffs and worse
still, Chancellor's medicine does not work, MPs will be excused
for running around like those in Dad's Army saying "Don’t Panic".
But Labour have their problems if they fail to win.

Michael Latham MP to retire after next election to spend more time
with the family.

Lord Chancellor asks Judge Pickles to explain his ”dinosaur"
criticism of Lord Chief Justice.

Sir John Hermon rejects allegations of conspiracy against Stalker
who is expected to hand in his evidence to the Home Office today.

Police inspector dies and two sergeants and pilot injured when
police helicopter hits block of flats in Glasgow in snow.

Nine W. Yorkshire detectives investigated over claims that a man
was wrongfully convicted of murder {Independent)♦

Gun gang steal £5million worth of property from Bucks home of
Al-Taj ir.

In libel court: Andrew Neil, Editor, Sunday Times, accuses Donald
Trelford, Editor, Observer, of trying to steal Pamella Bordes from
him,

David Glencross appointed Director General of ITC,

Nine Leftwing MPs, including Skinner, invite you "to make the
supreme sacrifice and commit suicide on the job” Nicholas
Winterton says they are sick. Sun says if they think this is
funny they badly need treatment.

ECONOMY

Sun leader, responding to reports yesterday that Budget might put
taxes up, says the Tory Party was NOT elected to raise taxes. We
are prepared for taxes not to go down in March but not for them to
go up. Do the Tories want to lose the next election?
                               7.               January 25, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Mirror leader says with the scourge of inflation continuing it’s
death for many more shops and a reduction in the standard of
living for first time buyers. To understand the despair you have
created you should walk through Grantham where shutter after
shutter is going up as shops close down.

Express leader says if the Ford deal turns out to be bad for the
company's profits and job security it will be their business and
both management and unions will know who to blame. You should not
be pestered about private sector pay claims. Instead you should
be relentlessly pressed about getting a good deal for the taxpayer
in public sector pay talks,

MEPs

Star, Sun, Mirror ignore meeting. Today: Maggie lectures her Euro
Tories but you and they are still some way apart.

Express - Brief piece - Euro MEPs rebuffed.   You refuse to budge
on ERM.

Mail - Move to heal Euro rift fails.

‘Telegraph prints picture of the occasion. Report claims MEPs
detected you are "softer” on EMS. But serious differences remain.

Independent - Deep division between you and MEPs over European
Central Bank. Split will intensify tensions in party over
approach to Europe.

Times - MEPs promised better access to Govt Ministers as part
of effort to improve relations. Douglas Hurd calls stories of
rifts between the two sides as "myths and mists",

Guardian - MEPs make no headway with Thatcher on EC role ~ they
left virtually empty handed.

YOUR VISIT TO TRTE

You make a spontaneous pledge on arts funding, which may come to
haunt you (Independent).

Times carries a picture of you looking at a modern sculpture at
Tate Gallery.
                                                                   AMNEX


 MINISTERS (UK VISITS. SPEECHES ETC)
 DES:     Mr MacGregor addresses Society of Education Officers AGM; later
          gives short speech at reception for annual congregation of Fuibright
           Scholars
 DSS:     Mr Newton opens the Queen Elizabeth’s Foundation for the Disabled
           exhibition, Institute of Directors, London; Mr Jackson (DES) attends
 FCO:     Mr Hurd addresses Association of American Correspondents, London
 DEM:     Mr Howard attends CBI presentation, London
 DEM:     Mr Nichoils addresses National Council for Industry and Training
          Organisation Standards and Qualifications conference, London
 DEM:     Mr Eggar launches and addresses BGT Small Business Programme
 DH:       Mrs Bottomley attends meeting and dinner at the Royal College of
           Obstetricians and Gynaecologists; later meets representatives of
           Women’s Health Concern Organisation, and meets Dr Graham
           McDonald re junior doctors’ hours, London
 DH:       Lady Hooper     meets Terence English of the          Royal   College   of
           Surgeons

 DSS:     Mrs Shephard addresses the Social Affairs Forum meeting; Social
          Security and the Family
DTI:      Mr Hogg visits Newcastle

DTI:      Lord Trefgame attends British Knitting and Clothing Export Council
          annual banquet

DTp:      Mr 5Atkins attends^ launch of Suffolk Group Radio: Belt up in the
                                                                   toads to

DTp:     Mr Portillo addresses Greater London Area Executive Committee
HMT:     Mr Lilley presents Sunday Telegraph Unit Trust Investor of the Year
         award, London

MAFF:    Mr Curry addressesADAS/NFU                 Cereals Farmers’ conference,
         Cnelmstord; later visits Dengie Crops, Asheldham, Essex
MAFF:    Mr Maclean visits NFU Watercress and Fish Farm, Hampshire
OAL:      Mr Luce addresses opening of Leeds Arts Collection Fund exhibition,
__________Leeds           ___________________________
l>maSTg.ES...(.Q.mS.SEAS VISITS)
HMT:     Mr Major attends IMF        Interim Committee meeting, Washington (to 26
         January)

MAFF:    Mr Gummer visits Berlin for Greenweek (to 26 January)
FCO:     Mr Maude visits Gibraltar (to 26 January)
                                                          AMNEX




DH:       Mrs Bottomley on the Robbie Vincent Show, LBC, about NHS
          reforms



TV AND RADIO
"This Week" ITV (830pm)
"Question. Time” BBC1 (10,00pm)
With Foreign Secretary Douglas Hard, Lord Jenkins, Matjorie Mowlam MF and
Andrew Neii
                                                                 January 26, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIM EVENTS

Prime Minister to open Tidy Britain Croup HQ, Wigan and visit
Granada Studios, Manchester
Princess _ of Wales visits the       Salon Culinaire      International   de   Londres
Hotdympia, 1990, Olympia, London



CLSB:    Quarterly house purchase finance statistics (4th qtr)
CSO:     Balance   of payments current account and overseas trade figures
         (Dec)                          -                — .............  *
CSO;     Engineering sales and orders at current and constant prices (Nov)


PARLIAMENT


               Private Members’ Bills
               Consumer Guarantees Bill: 2nd Reading: Mr Martyn Jones
               Licensing (Low Alcohol Drinks) Bill: 2nd Reading:
               Sir Peter*Emery
               Reform of the Home of Lords Bill: 2nd Reading:
               Mr Graham Allen
                           Use uniform business rate in North East Kent
                           (Mr R Gale)
                               2.                 January 26, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Death toll in storm put as high as 45;   winds up to I06mph caused
damage .

Ministers hold emergency meeting and decide to operate 8e1Iwin
compensation scheme.

Weathermen did warn country of risk of structural damage on this
occasion but Today criticises failure to warn of intensity of
storm.

Insurance bill estimated at at least £lb±llion;    some companies
publish claim forms as adverts.

Claims that this second great storm in 2 years is result of
Greenhouse effect.

Armenia and Azerbaijan agree to partial ceasefire.

Sun says Foreign Secy is right to rule out cuts in Rhine Army;
Europe is basking in a Soviet spring but that could easily turn
into winter,

Belgian Govt suggests withdrawing its forces from NATO in Germany
by end of year.

Mail and others pick up your Mall Street Journal interview;     Go
slowly, Maggie tells two Germanys.

Norman Tebbit raises pro-Europe hackles in Tory Party by saying a
country lacking sovereign control over economic policy is not a
nation but a province.

Express criticises "forked tongue" in Washington’s "unctuous
stance” over Vietnamese boat people*

Leoxs Srittan predicts imminent UK U-turn over membership of EHH,

Mail says Americans will not accept hard choices necessary to
solve tragic problems of boat people and so are failing to measure
up to their responsibilities as a great power.

Ford production at a standstill at Southampton and Halewood plants
because of strike by craftsmen.

British Gas unions lodge double figure claim.
                               3.              January 26, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Times says that if companies believe sterling ’will not fall
further against the mark that will do more than any number of
Ministerial reminders that pay increases have to be paid for,

You attack spendthrift soccer bosses who spend millions on
transfer fees instead of on safety and comfort of fans,

Mirror says you still believe a membership card scheme will come
into operation.

Sun attacks BBC for "delighting in undermining the forces of
justice and order” by publishing leaked police report on Wapping
by Northants police "where the nearest thing to violence is a car
backfiring”,

Today says selectively the impression is being created that
violence is all down to the police. The true blame lies with
rioters,

            editorial says, in light of the leaks from the report
into policing of the Mapping dispute, that the police are
suffering as a result of an undue reliance on promotion from the
ranks, and are thus badly officered,

Toyota (GB> to spend £15miiiion on new vehicle parts warehouse and
distribution centre in Leicestershire (FT).

FT editorial looks at the two recent setbacks for the Govt over
insider trading. While saying that it should be recognised that
anything like complete success in tackling this problem cannot be
achieved, there is a case for updating and tightening appropriate
legislation.  In particular the Govt must consider amending the
1385 Act to provide for civil, as well as criminal, remedies,

British Veterinary &ssn says farmers should get more compensation
for BSE victims.

Pressure group says working mothers in Britain endure the worst
child care facilities in Europe,

Peter Kellner, writing in the Independent, looks at the numbers
(said to be at least 10 million} of floating voters, and analyses
what is likely to make them vote either Tory or Labour. He
concludes that Labour’s policy review has been successful, but
they still have to contend with the wide respect the electorate
have for you, irrespective of their political allegiance. He says
"Labour’s policy review can write unilateralism out of the script,
but it cannot write out Mrs Thatcher",
                                   4,          January 26, 1990

                           PRESS DIGEST


Mail leader highlights some of the mean-minded acts by Labour
authorities against schools which opt out.

Govt agrees to tv/o-tier structure for national curriculum
{Independent).

ESC expected to announce today 5,000 reduction in staff to
eliminate over-manning.

Home Office rejects "virtually out of hand” (Mail) Stalker's
attempt to prove a Whitehall conspiracy against hi®.

John Prescott described as lobby lout after furious four-letter
confrontation with Nicholas Sennett MP In Members' Lobby over his
Customs ”fineM.

Ron Brown MP give notice to quit by constituency which passes vote
of no confidence in him; he refuses to go.

Anthony Beaumont-Bsrk MP attacked by rottweiler in park.

Letter fro® Unionist leaders in Northern Ireland paves way for
talks on devolution (FT).

Prime Minister Bhutto gives birth to a girl.

A.va Gardner dies in London, 67.

President Bush narrowly rescues his policy of keeping open
contacts with Chinese Govt, as the Senate falls to override his
veto of a bill allowing Chinese students to stay in the US (FT).

President Bush launches SlObillion package to combat drugs abuse
in the US (FT).

Mandela stands by ANC line on nationalisation and emphasises his
political loyalty ’’primarily” to &NC (Independent ) >

Guardian publishes text of document submitted by Nelson Mandela to
P W Botha before their talks last year.

FOOTBALL

     s&yo the Taylor report - and the Govt’s response - give the
clubs one final chance to get their own act in order and rid
Britain of soccer scum.
                              5.                 January 26, 1990

                         PRESS DIGEST

Express says flaws in membership   scheme have become increasingly
obvious but you will earn a loud   cheer from fans when you
criticise clubs for spending too   nvueh on transfers and wages and
too little on customers, A levy    on transfer fees makes more sense
than membership cards.

George Gale, in Mail, hopes Taylor’s final report is better than
his interim one which whitewashed fans and put blame on police -
"about the biggest load of judicial tripe dished out last year”.

Telegraph leader says Taylor's repudiation of membership cards has
increased the Govt’s political difficulties in curbing soccer
hooliganism* The card scheme was flawed.

FT - Govt’s apparent abandonment of ID card scheme represents a
victory for the football industry.

Guardian says the membership card scheme would have impoverished
smaller clubs, infringed civil liberties and reduced crowd
control. But this is not the end of the affair. Responsibility
returns to where it belongs; the clubs. You were right to
compare the large sums spent on transfers with the much smaller
sums spent on ground improvement. Football authorities have not
been acquitted but put on probation.

Times says the jubiliation of those opposed to membership schemes
is myopic. The case for fir® measures against hooliganism is
undiminished. Hooliganism is merely being contained, the
national game and its supporters will be on trial throughout the
year, especially during the World Cup.
                                                                     ANNEX


MINISTERS (UK VISITS. SPEECHES HTO
DH:       Kir G arke addresses the Cambridge Union Society Harvard Debate
DEM:     Mr Howard visits Wales
DH:      Mrs Bottomley visits Bolton and the North West re community care
DSS:     Lord Healey visits       Preston   model office   and   ITSD,    Lytham St
         Anne’s
DTI:     Lord Trefgarne addresses Ipswich and Suffolk Industrial Advisory
         Council dinner
FCQ;     Lord Brabazon attends receptions given by the _ Australian High
         Commissioner, Douglas McCellan and the Indian High Commissioner,
         Shri M Rasgoira
HMT:     Mr Lilley opens new Inland Revenue building, Telford
HO:      Lord Ferrers visits HM Prison, Wandsworth
HO:      Mr Waddington visits HM Young Offenders Institution, HeweII Orange

MAFF;    Mr Maclean attends seminar on Food Bill, Hull
GAL:     Mr Luce addresses opening of Frenchgale Library Information Point,
         Doncaster, Yorkshire
SO:      Mr Lang visits Queen Margaret College, Edinburgh
WO*       Mr Grist addresses Priority Estates Programme seminar, Cardiff;
          later visits Public Health Laboratory Service Communicable Disease
          Surveillance Centre, Cardiff Royal Infirmary _________ _ ______ __ ____
MINISTERS fFRRSSlNTEBVIEWS)
GAIL      Mr Luce interviewed by Yorkshire TV               about   the   sew   Leeds
          Playhouse Theatre (broadcast on 5 March)


TV AND RADIO
"Anv Questions” Radio 4(8.05pm)                 . „ ,,             . ,,    ,
Widb Michael Forsyth MP, Magnus LInklater, AUstait Darling ano Liz Lockheao
                                                                     January 29, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


m m    EVENTS

Lord Justice Taylor's final report on Football Safety published
Princess Royal visits the Faculty of Engineering, University College, London
EC; Count Lambsdorff, Chairman of Free Democratic Party in West Germany
visits London (to 2 February)
House of Commons Select Committee on European Legislation visit Dublin (to
31 January - prov)
Labour Party unveils policy for London
OS defence cuts announced


PARLIAMENT
Commons
Questions:        Energy; Attorney General; Foreign and Commonwealth (Overseas

Business:         Second Reading of the Employment Bill
                  Motion relating to the welfare food amendment regulations
                             Paternal support for children of single mothers
                             (Mr Frank Field)

                       Subject: Promotion of Qualuy and Standards
                       Witnesses: Sir Peter Gregson, KC8, Department of
                       Trade and Industry, Dr Ivan Dunstan, British
                       Standards Institution
             Starred Questions
             Capital Allowances (Consolidation) Bill (HL): Second Reading
             Courts and Legal Services Bill (HL): Committee (4 th Day)
             Code of Practice on the implementation of the Memal Health Act
             1983: Motion to annul____________________ _             ________________
                               2.              January 29, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

USA to announce defence cuts today - 3 British bases to be closed
or run down at Greenham Common, Fair ford and Wethers field.

Telegraph leads with Bush to recall 20,000 troops from Europe,

Guardian says US is to step up its nuclear spending on development
and modernisation.

Mail suggests end of cold war wi 11 bring a £15billion peace
dividend to Britain over five years with proposal of more spending
on NHS, schools, and transport as well as tax cuts.

Foreign Secy rules out *premature’ cuts in UK defence spending
{Times).

East German elections brought forward from May to March 18.

Reports that attempts may be made to topple Gorbachev at Central
Cttee meeting next week.

Soviet reformers form new faction, Democratic Platform", with
sore than 1,200 people from 100 cities* Communist parties. The
aim is to renew communism within, but move could split the party
(Ti mes).

As Moscow tightens grip on Azerbaijan, Republic’s Communist Party
opens discussions to find a way out of crisis {Independent).

40,000 demonstrate in Bucharest demanding a say in coalitions.

Times says post“revolutionary Romania slips closer to anarchy in
wake of yesterday’s demonstrations,

Today says Western car manufacturing jobs are at risk with cut-
price labour forces available in Eastern Europe.

14 die - shot dead by police - in weekend riots in Kosovo,
Yugoslavia,

Polish Communist Party splinters into three warring factions
{Times).

Speculation that Mandela is to be released today;   others say he
has refused freedom until ANC is unbanned.
                               3.              January 29, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Mirror makes much ~ a front page lead in fact ~ of Gatting
dismissing black protests at the South African cricket tour as ”a
few people singing and dancing”* Kinnock also attacks him and
Kaufman, urges Gatting to call off tour. Mirror says Gatting & Co
will never be forgiven but it would help if they came home now.

Independent editorial comments on how naive, if not stupid, the
Gatting tour members were in believing their tour could be
divorced from polties or help the cause of multiracial sport.

On weekend before Taylor report: on Hillsborough is published 15
Newcastle fans arrested after rampage in Oxford pub; 32 held en
route to Southampton-Oxford tie; and complaints about behaviour of
foesuited "gents”, guests of Pall Mall Marketing, at Bristol City
v. Chelsea tie*

Today says football's authorities are the real culprits behind its
violent malaise. Clubs treat their fans like rabble and they
iToday} have been sued for telling this truth.

Express says Govt faces a row with League clubs over all seater
stadia; they will plead poverty. Mail says soccer is bracing
itself for a £100mi11 ion bill.  independent puts it at
£13Csn±llion.

Fulham sell their ground to developers for £13million.

More storms forecast for this week.

Consultants to seek judicial review of Covt’s arrangements for
implementing NHS reforms (FT).

Seven per cent rise on electricity prices forecast.

Full Employment UK pressure group urges provision of £500 training
vouchers to help unemployed prepare for new jobs {Independent},

BAe to develop closer links with Daimier-Bens and Honda in move to
reduce reliance on OK defence market (FT).

Thousands of Lloyds Bank Access card holders have moved to other
credit cards, many to Barelaycard, following introduction of £12
annual levy (Times),

MOO considering taking control of a £2billion helicopter project
away from Westland because development: running more than 3 years
behind and overbudget (Independent).
                               4.              January 29, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

B/Rail studying overhead rail system, abandoned as obsolete in New
York 40 years ago, as possible high-speed Channel Tunnel rail link
to London {Times).

Vets in Britain and Germany to meet to try to end beef "war" over
BSH.

NALGO "to instruct branches to readmit those drummed out for
working during national stoppage in view of threat of
compensation running into millions {Telegraph).

UFC figures indicate that academic "brain drain” was countered by
thos coming to this country by 160 to 244 in 19B8 {F T ),

Govt’s task in whittling down the 12% lead Labour reported by MORI
poll seen as becoming harder {Times).

Express forecasts bruising times ahead for Kinnock as he tries to
end the electoral college system and reselection in the Labour
Party and strip unions of their 40% vote.

Sir John Siradling Thomas MP to face deselection following
allegations of his lack parliamentary activity {Independent)«

In Times Conservative prospective candidate Praveen Moman attacks
Norman Tebbitfs ’’gratuitously offensive” case against Hong Kongers
coming here. Tebbit shows disregard for the quiet and
constructive way in which blacks and Asians have settled down.
His statements can only create divisions in British society.

Religious shows to be compulsory on new TV franchises {Times).

Richard Branson’s UK 2000 to be scrapped,

Oil companies urging the Chancellor for 4p tax cut on unleaded
fuels to revive sales (Times),

President Bush to launch a scheme to plant Ibillion trees a year
in USA.

Hat| feature says punishing parents for the crimes of' their
children has worked wonders in the USA,

New Church of England report on poor and inner cities causes
dismay within Church itself in condemning virtually every social
policy of the past 5 years (Hall).
                               5.              January 29, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Michael Spicer to announce £2G0?sillion package to improve urban
housing, providing a boost for inner cities and the homeless
(Times}.

Looking at the ElGOraillion overspend by the Housing Corporation,
the Independent, in an editorial, say better financial
co-ordination is needed. If this year *s overspend leads to closer
monitoring of the whole sector, then it will be a lesson well
learnt <

Divorcee, 33, in court today on baby snatch charge. Portia Trust
wants the charge dropped - it believes this could lead to other
kidnappers abandoning the infants. Today says kidnapper needs
help.

Lord Hallsham calls Judge Pickles ”an anti-judge”.

IRA apologise for killing a 17 year old youth by mistake - and
Injuring 8 others ~ in bomb outrage at Bloody Sunday march.

Reports that US is negotiating a multi-million pound ransom of
hostages held in Lebanon, including Waite and McCarthy.

Trainee barristers to receive £6,000 during pupilage year under
Bar council reforms (Times).

Police Federation say evidence to be presented to Select Cttee
this week on Crown Prosecution Service will be critical "but
not destructively so” (Times).

Treasury poised to approve a £4~5rnillion package of improvements
to career structure of lawyers in CPS (Tiroes).

Pressure groups say leaked documents prove 1988 Immigration Act
has led to more deportations {Independent).

Princess Margaret’s jet for the West Indies struck by lightning.
Lands safely at Manchester.

FT leader on Euz'ope calls for a new European union based on
confederation and open to new members which meet its economic and
political criteria; wotild be an appropriate centrepelce round
which to build new European order*

Mail suggests German is about to replace English as main language
in EC because of rising power of Germany>3.
                                                January 29, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Jesse Jackson poised to run as Mayor of Washington when current
incumbent, Mayor Barry, steps down, in wake of allegations he took
drugs (Independent),

Observers speculate Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng may be
sacrificed as the scapegoat for June 4 massacre, to save Image of
the Coinmiinist party {Times)-

New World Bank loans - totalling £54million - proposed for China;
the first since Tiananmen Square (F T }.

India has warned Pakistan it: will not tolerate interference in
Kashmir: Ministers are voicing the possibility of war with
Pakistan, 60 have died in Kashmir since January 21.
Benazir Bhutto yesterday sacked her Minister responsible for
Kashmir {FT).

&RMS CONTROL - S&STERN EUROPE

Today says the clamour for arms cuts is   growing all over the
Western world, They must be resisted.     The unravelling of the
Eastern bloc makes it very unstable and   Gorbachev may not survive.
We cannot tell what new Napoleon may be   waiting in the Kremlin
wings,

Express sees danger in rushing our fences.  It would be prudent to
postpone decisions to cut the armed forces until later when we see
the precise extent of CFEl reductions agreed in Vienna.

Mail says the British Govt must be prepared to join in with its
own positive and radical suggestions for saving money on defence
without economising on essential security.  If ever there was time
for military minds to redefine and refine the doctrine of flexible
response this looks like it.

Times editorial previews Bush’s State of the Union speech saying
that there are some negative aspects to his first year in office
(eg rising inner city crime), and. his immediate political
prospects In an election year are not good. On the international
front, the paper concludes Bush is a conservative
internationalistf a breed that is in gentle decline.

Tom King assured by the Chancellor and Chief Secretary that the
Defence Budget will not be cut this year (Independent),

£T. “ Bush aims to halve budget deficit with tax and outs plan;
defence to rise by 2% less than rate of inflation.
                                               January 29, 1990

                          PRESS SIGES’T

Work on large radar Installation in the Ukraine halted after
public demonstrations about its environmental impact - further
indication o£ anti-military sentiment in Soviet republics (F*T).
                                                                                       annex


?........... .     ................   SPEECHESBTQ
npv.             \ | r Wakeham addresses Parliamentary Alternative Energy Group
                  m«etir^; later opens British Coal Opencast exhibition, both House
                  of Commons, London
DES:             Mr MacGregor visits National Council for Vocational Qualifications
                 headquarters, London
DSS:             Mr Newton attends staff suggestions awards, London
MAFF:            Mr Gummer visits Game Farm, Edinburgh
DES:             Mr Jackson addresses the Bolton Institute of Higher Education
DES:             Mrs Rumbold opens new department at the Cambridge Institute

DES:             Mr Howarth visits East Sussex LEA
DH:              Mr Freeman visits Teignbridge and North Devon
DH:              Lady Hooper addresses^ the annual Age                       Concern Institute    of
                 Gerontology lecture, Kings College, London
DH’               Mrs Bottomlev meets Dr Graham McDonald re J u n i o r Doctor’s Hours;
                  Michael Morris MP re Vitamins Foram; Womens Nation^ Cancer
                  Control Campaign; Prince of Wales Advisory Group on Inability;
                  English National Board; Mrs Myers, President, Society or FPCS, all
                  London
DTp:             Mr Atkins visits <:M65, North East Lancashire
FCO:             Mr Waldegrave receives               visit from     Hank     Cohen,    USAssistant
                 Secretary for Africa

 HO:              Mr MeMor visits Drug Squad, New Scotland Yard, London
 MAFF-            Mr Cnrrv visits Woodsford Farm and attends Dorset National
                  Farmers t/nioiy^nnual General Meeting, both Woodsford, Dorset
 MAFF:            Baroness Trumpington attends Cumbria Count)' National Farmers
                  Union, Annual General Meeting, Penrith______ „_______ _ _____


 MOD:              Mr King visits Washington, USA (to 31 January)

 FCO:              Mr                 visits the Falkland Islands (to 8 .Feorn§rvj_

 TV AND RADIO                           '
 ’’World in Action" ITV <830 pm)
 Community charge           ,
 '’Panorama” BBC1 (9.311 pm)                             h l rypc Minister
 Bunking off. Looks at problem ot truancy ui Britain s schools, Dfca m v m e i,
 Mrs Rumbold, appears on the
                                                                              January 30, 1990
PRIME MINISTER


MAIN EVENTS


Prime Minister and Sir Geoffrey Howe meet Count Larasdorff

100,000th       Open. University graduate

Church of England follow-up report on inner cities


 m u srm
 BOE:        London sterling certificates of deposit (Dee)
 BGE;        Bill turnover statistics (Dec)
 BOE:        Sterling commercial paper (Dec)
 BOE:        Monetary statistics      (including   bank and     building   society   balance
             sheets) (Dec)
CBI:         CBI industrial trends survey (Dec)
DTp:         New vehicle registrations (Dec)
HMSO/OFCS: Key population and vital statistics; local and health authority
           areas 1988

m m jo m Q m
HMT:         1990 Public Expenditure; White Paper      c p &s   9a® from HM Treasury
             and published at 3*30pss


Commons
Questions;        Education and Science; Prime Minister
Berness;          Opposition day (4th allotted day).  Until about seven o'clock
                  there will be a debate entitled "People trapped in poverty”,
                  Afterwards there m il be a debate entitled "'Implications of the
                  Taylor report for safety at football grounds”.     Both debates
                  will arise on opposition motions
                   M otions relating to private medical           insurance    regulations,
                   Details will be given in the official report
                                     2.                         January 30, 1990




PARLIAMENT        {Confc’d}

   Adjournment D ebate:       Treatment for allergies (Sir I Spicer)

   S sk gL -C aS M lj^:   PROCEDURE
                          Subject: Use Working of the Select Committee System
                          Witnesses: (At 430 pm) Mr Frank Field MP; Mr David
                          Marshall MP (At SM pm) Mr Michael Mates MP, Sir John
                          Wheeler MP
                          COMMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                          King’s Cross Railways Bill

  Lords:     Starred Questions
             Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Bill (HL): Second
             Reading
             Debate to take note of the Report of the Select Committee on
             Science and Technology on the Greenhouse Effect (6th Report. 1988-
             89, HL Paper 38)
             Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions)     )
              (Contamination of Feeding Stuff)            ) Motionsfor
              (England) Order 1990                        } Approval
             Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions)     i
              (Contamination of Feeding Stuff)            }
              (Wales) Order 1990                          )
                               3-               January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Main News

Football directors in the dock - the virtually universal verdict
in today’s treatment of the main story; extensive coverage of
Taylor!s criticisms.

Fears that the need to convert grounds to all-seater stadia within
10 years will bankrupt some clubs, But Football Ground
Improvement Trust says estimated £130mi11ion cost of converting
stadia to all seats "not too dreadful" - pools could provide
£75million over 5 years.

FA and football league officially welcome report.

Hattersley gets a bad press for his reaction. Hail says you may
know less abut the game than he does but your determination to
discipline the yobs and slobs who ruin the game puts you in a
League apart.

Meanwhile, events used to underline malaise.

Case of Sunderland player fined after night out in Exeter for
jumping on tops of cars.

Chelsea Chairman under fire for paying £750 fine on a player who
cheekily dropped his shorts on the pitch (Sun).

USA makes cuts at Greenhara Common, Fair ford, Bentwater and
Wethersfield.

Greenham Comi&on women say they will stay until last nuclear
missiles leave in May, 1931.

Foreign Secy says US defence budget decisions reasonable and
compatible with US commitment to NATO {Independen t )-

US defence Secy Cheney hints US may scon propose more cuts in
conventional forces in Europe, prompting speculation Mr Bush may
follow up this theme in his State of the Union address tomorrow
{      )     ♦




Times says that senior Ministers moved yesterday to dassp down
hoeps that upheavals in Eastern Europe will bring big cash savings
in Britain’s defence budget,

Paul Johnson, in Mail hails your luck in the dividend to foe
obtained from defence cuts from which the first savings will be
working their way into tha budget before the next election-
                               4.                January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST


Strikes, wage claims, attacks on officials and economic chaos
threaten East Germany - failing apart,

Honecker to go on trial for treason;     arrested on his release from
hospital after cancer operation.

Huge crowds take to the streets in Bucharest to demonstrate, this
time, support for new Govt.

Thousands of pro-Govfc demonstrators beselge headquarters of two
opposition parties in Bucharest {Independent).

The Polish Communist Party renames itself the Social Democracy of
the Republic of Poland, Soviet Union supports the change, but
Lech Walesa criticises transfer of party assets to new party
CIndependent).

Sixth consecutive day of rioting in Kosovo, Yugoslavia, claims the
lives of 2 ethnic Albanians (Independent).

Czechoslovakia’s Interior Minister warns that the secx'et police
force were planning to reverse the country’s democratic revolution


Azerbaijan crisis creating ever mounting difficulties in vital
struggle to revive the Soviet Onion’s economy (Independent)«

Ambulance workers trying to organise a day of action in Britain in
their support.

Crews in Glasgow refuse to take Instructions from controllers.

Kenneth Clarke in trouble for tucking into a 10-course Chinese
meal in his constituency while ambulancemen, they say, live cn
mince and chips,

Bishops call for independent inquiry into ambulance crews’ pay
{Times).

Mali reports Tory "fury” as church leaders side with ambulance
crews.

More trouble in a Bloemfontein township over English cricketers’
tour of South Africa.
                               5,                January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Two British radio reporters from BSC and XRN accused by South
African TV of collaborating with anti-tour campaigners by passing
on information.

Nelson Mandela thretens to resume the "armed struggle” against the
South African Govt upon his release, unless banning orders on
the ANC are withdrawn (Times),

Woodrow Wyatt in the Times backs Hong Kong calls for democracy
under the heading "where votes are vital now” .

Foreign Secy in US, attacks US policy on forced repatriation and
comes close to accusing the® of hypocrisy (Independent},

Tim Congdon in the Times shows how investment has changed under a
Thatcher Govt, saying that at last Britain can claim to be
capitalist.

Inland Revenue set to allow high street banks more than £1billion
in tax relief after accepting Bank of England's new guidelines on
Third world debt provisions (Times).

Bolls Royce works at Derby reject 9.2%.

Provisional settlement in poly lecturers pay dispute:    6.5%
backdated to April, plus 1% from September,

Ford faced with rebellion by craftsmen which threatens to cripple
its main plants in Britain (times).

Ford dispute brings 3,000 lay offs in Belgium.

More than 100,000 damages claims expected after Ford agrees to pay
four former employees a total of £24,000 for deafness.

Chris Patten to insist that full details of how industrial
processes are polluting the environment should be made public
(Time_s),

Big slump in microwave oven sales after safety scare.

Labour Party policy for London gets little coverage in pops,
including Mirror {pl3}< It plans to reinstate GLC,

Building Society Commission concern over effect of low starter and
deferred interest mortgages on less credit worthy borrowers
(Express}.
                               6.              January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Church of England report claims Tory legislation is widening the
gap between rich and poor. Measures taken without proper thought
for the increasing number trapped in a cycle of fear and
alienation.

Teddy Taylor MP says this repeated Govt bashing will have a bad
effect on church membership.

Times says that the Church of England moved quickly yesterday to
defuse a potential quarrel with the Govt by insisting that the
Govt deserves credit for improvement in social conditions over the
past 5 years.

Times leader on Church of England’s latest report says it seems to
treat the rise in employment as an act of God. It is in truth
largely the result of free market economic enterprise, the
encouragement of which the Govt has always made its chief concern.
The report assumes that the market is responsible only for bad
things, not for good.

Survey of 40,000 5th year pupils shows that about 1 in 4 inner
city schools experienced serious truancy and bad exam results
{Times).

MPs furious about decision of DPP not to prosecute a Muslim leader
who called for Salman Rushdie to be executed.

Robert Dunn MP calls for scrapping of May Day and replacing it
with Queen Mother’s Day in August; Sun suggests an old people’s
day every year.

New adoption guide for black babies issued by Govt.

2 die as storms return;  five men questioned in Dorset after
complaints about cowboy builders cashing in on damage.

British weightlifter latest drug suspect at Commonwealth Games.

Donald Coleman, MP for Neath, to stand down at the next election,
64.

Star features extent of AIDS epidemic in Uganda, affecting, it
says, 1 in 2 children.
                                 7.            January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

SOCCER - TREATMENT AND COMMENT

Star pi lead - Soccer in a Shambles' Grounds, fans and players in
big shake-up. Hcane Secy acts on damning report by judge. Inside
virtually two pages on "Shame of the Game". Leader - soccer’s
rulers should hang their heads in shame. Our national sport has
been ordered to put its house in order. And about time, too.

Sun pi - Football to get £75million lifeline from pools.  Inside -
Soccer? Its foul - fans treated like animals; players act like
yobbos; profit is put before safety. Leader headed "We’ve lost
our way" says it is torn between Taylor’s plea for all seater
grounds and Govt ID cards.

Mirror pi - leads with "Shamed - on the day that the face of
football changed, a lager lout was fined for jumping up and down
on a car. He plays for Sunderland",   Inside two pages - Judge
puts soccer bosses in dock. Bosses snub fed up fans - the fat
cats of football. Leader finds grounds for hope.   It claims
(predictably) that the Taylor report shows greater understanding
than you. And it calls for tax relief for clubs on every penny
spent bringing grounds up to standard.

Today pi lead - Treated like dirt. Condemned; the football bosses
who put fans in a living, and dying, hell. Inside, two pages
”Scum of the earth - that’s how these guilty bosses of football
treat you, the faithful fans". Leader composed of replay of Today
comments about the plight of the game alternately with supporting
quotes from Lord Justice Taylor.

Express pi lead - Clean up or risk the axel Football branded a
national disgrace as Waddington backs seats-for-all plan.  Inside
a page on "The squalid side of British soccer". Leader says
Taylor puts football squarely in the dock. Taylor’s venom will
only be achieved if football is run in a modern businesslike
manner. At present it is deliberately regulated to protect the
least successful.

Sports writer says Taylor has got it right: English football
needs not so much to be taken into the 21st century but out of the
19th.
                               8.              January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Hail pi lead ~ Last chance for soccer. Change your ways or go
under, bosses warned. If they fail again no-one will forgive them
or save them. Leader headed "The storm slum landlords of a
blighted game" says it is one of the clear virtues of Lord Justice
Taylor’s withering indictment of English soccer that he does not
hesitate to name the guilty men. There is a symbiotic
relationship between the yobs on the terraces and the slobs in the
directors’ box. The main thrust of Taylor recomendations are a
resounding endorsement of your contempt for the calibre of those
who maladminister the game.

Peter Jenkins, in Independent, sees the story of football ID
scheme as a parable on you. A tale of populism and righteousness.
While your determination not to take "noes" for an answer
highlights one of your great strengths, your insistence on your
own solution shows one of your great weaknesses. But he concludes
your instincts in this were right - you blamed the clubs and not
the supporters, who you felt deserved better.

Independent editorial says the abandoning of the proposed ID card
shceme will not be mourned, except perhaps by you. But it
criticises as far too generous ethe time allowed to introduce
all-seater stadia dn says, in criticising the commercial
Imanagement of the game, that the movement should not be swayed by
pleas for tax concessions: spectator sport is an area in which
market forces should rule.

Telegraph pi - All seat plan for ”squalid” soccer clubs.  Inside
one page coverage headed "All seat stadiums are urged to beat
soccer hooligansim scourge”.

Times pi lead - Football gets £50million help from pools for all
seats future. A trust fund by pools promoters last night promised
£5Qmillion towards implementing the Taylor Report. Football
correspondent says the report should be the turning point in the
history of football in Britain. Over the chasm dividing a Govt,
which has been inexcusably apathetic, and the game’s authorities,
who have been shamefully complacent, Taylor has single-handedly
built a bridge. There can be no more excuses or complaints from
either side. Leader describes the report as a social document of
the first importance.  It adds that Hattersley seems to see
football as a sort of extension of the NHS into which the Govt has
some ill defined moral duty to pour substantial sums of public
jnoney. It concludes that the Govt’s concern is with public safety
and order. Public opinion will support it in believing that
football must now set its own house in order at its own expense.
                               9.              January 30, 1990

                          PRESS DIGEST

Independent pi lead - Football faces £13Gmillion safety bill.
Ministers abandon controversial ID scheme and accept
recommendations in Lord Taylor’s scathing attack on English
football. But football must pay the estimated £130million costs
of dragging the game from its blighted state {Independent).

Guardian editorial says the Govt has swallowed its medicine on
football, and yesterday the clubs got their bitter pills, with the
Taylor report critical of all aspects of the game. But his
suggestion on the package of recommendations to both rugby
and cricket in most contractors, and Minsiters are probably right
to kick this into touch.

Telegraph leader says the Taylor proposals are so radical that ID
cards would by comparison be a slight burden on football. It finds
the report somewhat unsat isfactory; the behaviour of the
Hillsborough crowd has escaped proper analysis.

DEFENCE

Times describes Bush’s cut backs as the U S ’s biggest military
retrenchment since the end of the Second World War. Leader says
that by the time it is finally enacted Bush's budget is unlikely
to bear much resemblance to yesterday’s proposals, and by the end
of the year in question it will bear even less.

Independent editorial says US intention to pull out of bases in
Europe had long been expected. However, in the context of
proposals for cuts in US forces in Europe lower than currently
being negotiatied at CFE, expected to be announced tomorrow by
Bush, the paper argues in support of mutually agreed force levels
with reductions carried out as part of a coordinated and orderly
east-West process.

Max Hastings in Telegraph says great change is coming to the
British armed forces.  It will surely be seen to be to the Govt's
credit to give such a change a clear lead rather than languish
unhappily behind with the rearguard.
                                                                        ANNEX


                                     hto

DEM;     Mr Howard addresses Restaurateurs Association dinner
DEN:    Mr Wakefcam hosts reception to launch City and Guilds                        Loft
         Insulation awards for Neighbourhood Energy Action, London
DES:    Mr M acG regor       addresses    O pen     U niversity's    graduate    press
        conference

LPO     Sir Geoffrey Howe meets Count Lambsdorff, Chairman of West
         German Free Democratic Party, London

DES:    Mr H ow arth     addresses   National     Union     of Teachers’ appraisal
        conference

DH:     Lady H ooper meets        representatives    from   the     Tobacco    Advisory
         Council* London

DH:     Mr Freeman meets Maurice Frickei, Doug Henderson MP and Steve
        Moms MP re access to medical records

DSS:    Mrs Shephard meets Sir Richard Body MP with a delegation from the
        Mental Aftercare in Residential Care Homes Association to discuss
        hostel accommodation

DTI:    Mr Forth presents Data Communications of the Year awards with
        Motorola
DTp:    Mr Portillo addresses Public Issues conference
FCO:    Mr Waldegrave visited by Israeli Ambassador, Yoav Biran
FCG:    Mr Maude attends dinner hosted by Baron Herman von Richtofen of
        the Federal Republic of Germany

FCO:    Lord Brabazon visited        by   Mr Teburoro        Tito,    leader    of    the
        opposition for Kiribati

HO:     Mr Lloyd speaks on Asylum at London Borough                   G rant Schemes’
        conference on Refugees, London
HO:     Mr Patten chairs ministerial group on the Voluntary Sector
HO:     Lord Ferrers visits West Mercia Police (and 31 January)
MAFF:   Mr M aclean opens Institute of Environm ental H ealth Officers
        seminar on "temperature monitoring is die chill and cold chain",
        London
MESSTEESi.Q.VERSEAS YISTTS)
DU:     Mr Ridley and Mr Hogg attend Airbus meeting, Madrid
                                                                       ANNEX




DEM:     Mr Eggar interviewed         by David     Oates.   W estern   Daily   Press
         "Business Feature”
DTI:     Lord Trefgarne briefs press on Single Market next steps campaign




"Taking liberties” BBC2 (8.00 pm)
A Criminal Way to Treat an Illness.    Looks at bow the community care system
bandies mental illness
"Viewpoint ’90* 3TV (1035 pm)
Killing for Land.      Conflict on Amazonia’s eastern border between the rural
poor and the rich landowners
                                                                 January 31, 1990

PRIME MINISTER

                                                                               ,A
MAIM EVENTS                                                               r

Princess o f Wales attends a concert at the Uoyal Festival Hall, London


PUBLICATIONS

OPCS:       White Paper on Births/Deaths registration:               proposals for
            change

HMT;         Reply to 34th, 35th and 3?th - 41st PAG Reports 1988-89




Questions:       Scotland

Business;        Opposition Day (5th allotted day). Untii about seven o’clock
                 there will be debate entitled "The European Community a/nd
                 Developments m Eastern Europe”. Afterwards there will be a
                 debate entitled "Small businesses and the self-employed”, both
                 debates will arise on motions in the name of the Social and
                 Liberal Democrats
Adlm m m ent Debates:       Standard spending assessment for Cumbria
                            (Mr E Martiew)
Ssk&..CommUccs:             ENVIRONMENT
                            Subject PoEutxon of Beaches
                            Witnesses; Lancashire County Council; North         West
                            W ater Ltd
                            WELSH AFFAIRS
                            Subject: Toxic Waste Disposal in Wales
                            Witness: MAX Recovery (Holding) Ltd
                            AGRICULTURE
                            Subject: Fish Farming in the UK
                            W itnesses: Crown E state Commissioners;          Natural
                            Environment Research Council
                            TRADE AND INDUSTRY


                            DEFENCE


                            ENERGY
                            Subject; The Fast Breeder Reactor
                            Witness: Mr W alter Patterson
                                     2.                        January 31, 1990



PARLIAMENT (Contfagsdl

                        EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND ARTS
                        Subject: Prison Education
                        Witness: National Association for the Care and
                        Resettlement of Offenders; National Association of
                        Teachers in Further and Higher Education
                        EMPLOYMENT
                        Subject: Tourism
                        Witnesses: Countryside Commission;         Association   of
                        District Councils (at 5.15 pm approx)
                        HOME AFFAIRS
                        Subject: The Crown Prosecution Service
                        Witness: Mr Allan Green, QC, Director of Public
                        Prosecutions
                        PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                        Subject: TV license Evasion
                        Witness: Sir Clive Whitmore, Home Office
                        SOOAL SERVICES
                        Subject: Social Security
                        Witness: Rt Hon Tony Newton, OBE, MP, Secretary
                        of State for Sodal Security
                        TREASURY AND CIVIL SERVICE
                        Subject: International Debt Strategy
                        Witnesses: HM Treasury officials
                        COMMITTEE ON A PRIVATE BILL
                        Sing’s Cross Railways BUI
Lords:   Starred Questions
         Debate to call attention to the importance of education and training
         for the success of the economy and society
         UQ to ask HMG whether they will reduce the quantity and improve
         the quality of legislation
                         PRESS DIGEST        January 31, 1990


American TV report that Gorbachev is to distance himself from
Communist Party resigning as general secy, but not as Russian
president, greeted with scepticism.

Gorbachev apparently accepts inevitability of German
reunification but he warns all parties must act responsibly
taking account of views of the four allied powers (Independents.
Hail says you should take your cue from this and stop treating
German reunification like an unexploded bomb.

Soviet newspaper accuses troops of brutality in Azerbaijan
(Independent) .

Bush likely to propose tonight further cuts in US/Soviet Union
troops below the levels under discussion at CFE. Eagleburger
briefed you on Monday (FT).

Dutch threatening to break NATO ranks by planning to save
£700million in defence cuts by 1995 in anticipation of deeper
arms cuts post CFE (FT).

At least 6 killed yesterday in further clashes in Kosovo,
Yugoslovia.

Warning of civil war in Romania unless tomorrow’s round-table
talks slacken the grip of former Communists on the interim
National Salvation Front Govt (Times).

Romanian National Salvation Front splits into two groups, one to
govern the country and one to participate in elections
(Independent).

Court rules Honecker should be freed from detention centre ;    too
ill to be kept there.

Times says you are heading an informal group of several senior
Cabinet Ministers engaged in studying the options for a new
military strategy for Britain and NATO alliance.

Sun commenting on US withdrawals from England, says we are at the
dawn of a new age of freedom and peace in the world. There could
not be a better time to say "Thanks Yanks” .

First community charge to be set - in Kent - is £8 below Govt‘s
average at £270.

CBI fears a recession and rising unemployment in latest trends
survey.

Telegraph ~ Public servants face struggle over pay claims.

Row looming over public sector pay uses as tomorrow’s Cabinet
look set to endorse pay rises for them which could exceed offer
to ambulancemen (FT),

Express says Govt is bracing itself for a tough new battle over
pay - cutting back pay review body reports.

Mail ~ Maggie ready to hold down top pay rises.
 Cabinet: preparing to take a tough line tomorrow on public sector
 pay awards which are expected to be staged (Tiaes).

 Business confidence at lowest level of 9 years (FT),

Public spending to rise by £5.ISbillion next year compared with
plans set out a year ago. Extra money will go to NHS, roads,
colleges and homeless. Times leader says that the extra     '
expenditure will clearly make it more difficult to achieve the
prudent fiscal policy which is needed to buttress monetary policy
and bring down inflation. Though a Conservative Govt can never
hope - nor should it attempt - to trump Labour by promising
higher public spending, its favoured programmes are for the most
part well chosen and should help to soothe public demands.

.Xl^.^B.
       ^.ndent editorial says that spending on education, announced
 by the Treasury yesterday, means a cut, in real terms, in the
budget over the next 3 years.     It is critical of Govt policy and
 says three things now need to be done: increase teachers’ pay
dramatically,* rapidly increase the proportion of 16-18 year olds
 in full-time education; and increase the availability of higher
education from its present pathetic level of 14%.

Value of residential property market fell by 25% last year
because of slump in sales (Times).

Edwina Currie says women have employers over the barrel; they
will need them as employees and they will be forced to provide
nurseries.

Opposition demand a statement on the Colin Wallace affair after
yesterday *s Written Answers clarifying some aspects of case.
Admission of dirty tricks disinformation.

Britain’s nuclear submarine fleet being checked for faults after
discovery on one of them.

Independent says that 9 of the Royal Navy’s nuclear submarines
may be suffering from cracking in their nuclear reactor cooling
circuits, a fault that may be impossible to repair.  Identifying
the first fault as having been found in HMS Warspite, the paper
suggests these faults could affect the operational role of
nuclear submarines.

Trouble continues in Bloemfontain over English cricketers tour;
60 demonstrators in hospital after clashes with police,* 45
arrested bringing total of 100 in two days,

police in South Africa ignore de Klerk’s pl^a to avoid strong arm
tactics {Independents.

Western countries beginning to hold out carrot of lifting
sanctions to encourage South African Govt to talk to ANC.

Ambulance dispute rallies in major cities in support of ambulance
men- Roger Poole says the day was a ’’stunning success”; Kenneth
Clarke describes it as •’pointless” . Star says the cost of
yesterday’s stoppage was much greater than that involved in
settling dispute.

Waterloo hit by unofficial strike today by drivers protesting
over sacking of colleague for fiddling a time sheet.
Following the conviction of an electrician for manslaughter after
he wrongly wired up a central heating system killing a man Times
leader warns that many a jobbing tradesman will have to rethink
his attitude now that the criminal law has been extended into
areas which most people had assumed were beyond its reach.

Govt advisers looking at why there has been a decrease in
radioactive waste disposal since costs charged for disposal have
risen ten-fold {Independent ).

Studies back early use of AIDS drug by HIV positive patients
(Independent).

World's first successful heart surgery on baby in mother’s womb


Express highlights report that Lambeth has the highest
illegitimate birth rate in England and Wales - 48.4% - compared
with lowest, Richmond, Yorkshire -10.2%.  It says it would be
nice to be reassured that the State benefits system and housing
and welfare concessions are not encouraging girls to have babies
before husbands,

Kenneth Baker in a fierce attack on the permissive society says
fathers who walk out on their families should be treated as
social outcasts (Times).

FT leader on church, state and poverty says the Church has every
right to guestion the morality of Govt economic policy.  But it
would do so more effectively if it displayed a better
understanding of the philosophical rationale behind the
enterprise culture,

Letter from Ian Brady telling how Myra Bindley killed victim
printed in full in Star; it says Bindley insisted in killing one
girl herself.

Mirror leader, by Maxwell, says Brady *s letter should be the
last word from him, from Bindley and from Longford, her
apologist.

Representatives from police bodies complain to MPs that "case
after case” is being lost through mishandling by the Crown
Prosecution Service (Times).

British Airways suing two Canadian students for £30,000 damages
after a bomb hoax to delay their flight when their car broke down
on way to the airport.

Andrew Neil awarded £1,000 damages and Sunday Times token 60p, in
libel action against Sunday Telegraph over Fame11a Bordes;
Sunday Telegraph faces £200,000 costs. Sun commenting on
revelations in trial, wonders whether the poor editor of a
tabloid newspaper can afford to be associating with people like
these three Mquality” editors,

£276 million development of Royal Opera House to go ahead (FT),

19 seamen feared drowned as Greek cargo ship mysteriously lost
sheltering off Isle of Wight.

EC to give £650,000 from disaster fund to help meet cost of UK
storm damage.
Soccer

            Today says Hattersley wants to apply the same
            ruinous rule to the business of soccer as Labour
            does with every other clapped out industry - prop
            it up with Govt money,

            Mail feature on luxurious stadiums in North
            America; the longer we leave building them
            the greater the expense and the heavier the
            shame.

            Ministers insist during debate that football clubs must
            pay for all-seating stadia (Independent).

British weightlifters likely to be suspended from international
competition after a Welsh gold medallist is stripped of his
success following failure of drug test; another Welsh medallist
suspected of drug taking.

IjSeXggs says Foreign Secy’s plea to USA to offer passports to
Hong Kong citizens to help sustain colony has fallen on deaf
ears.

Under the heading “Hurd’s damaging inaction” Gerald Kaufman in
the Times lists further failures to stand up to Peking over Hong
Kong.

Senate votes 98-0 for legislation which includes a series of
trade sanctions against China (Independent).

Judge orders President Reagan to hand over diary extracts related
to Iran-Contra scandal IIndependent),

Pakistan accuses India of troop build-up on border (Independent).

Liberal Democrats in Japan expected to discard Mr Kaifu
immediately after winning the General Election Times.

EAST-WEST

Mail leader says German reunification is unstoppable. It
suggests you should take your cue from Gorbachev. You must stop
treating German reunification as if it were an unexploded bomb.
It is not a monstrous device to be defused but a massive
challenge to which we must respond positively and with goodwill.

Times leader says no-one should be surprised at Gorbachev’s
seemingly abrupt admission over reunification.   It is likely
that he will not let East Germany, the chief factor in Soviet
military strategy, slip out of his grasp, except at a price.

Independent editorial looks at German reunification in light of
Gorbachev*s acceptance that this is inevitable, saying that there
is now a rush to resolve the issue before the country implodes.
If, as seems inevitable, the March elections lead to government
with a mandate to push reunification through quickly, the
security issues which such a development raises will have to be
tackled immediately.
Peter Jenkins, in Independent» wonders why peace is so costly.
People, he says, will not expect the state of unusual military
footing in the West over the last 40 years to last. They will
demand, at the very least, a reassessment of true defence needs
in light of the diminished threat.

Si EMM ~ US envoy says that NATO will accept American defence
cuts, but gives a veiled warning that those countries paying less
per head than the US for defence would come under strong pressure
to carry a larger share of the NATO budget. He also warns
countries against cutting spending and forces unilaterally before
conclusion of CFE (Times).

Henry Stanhope, writing in the Times under the heading “What role
now for the Army?”, foresees big cuts ~ including an almost total
rundown in Germany - as Soviet forces leave Eastern Europe.

EE leader on German reunification says the progressive
integration of the West and East German economic systems,
involving inevitably some common institutions such as the Central
Bank, would lay the groundwork for a fuller unification of the
country at a later date.  But it need not lead, in the short
ter®, to the agonising reappraisal of alliances which the Soviet
Onion and most of Bonn's western allies at present so much fear.
                                                                     ANNEX



i ^ amsjm_vism^gBECHESEtc)
DES:    Mr MacGregor announces £370,000 grant for the Royal Ballet School
MAFF:   Mr Gummer visits Leatherhead Food Research Association
WO:     Mr Walker hosts lunch for Japanese journalists, London
DEM:    Mr Eggar skives opening speech to launch of Business Growth
        Training Seminar, 0PM Conference, Olympia; later opens Micro Tech
        Training Centre, Southgate

DEM:    Mr Nicholls visits the Channel Tunnel
DEN:    Mr Morrison attends Ministerial Group on Energy Efficiency
DES:    Mrs Rumbold visits Oakham School, Leicestershire
DES:    Mr Jackson visits the Wimbledon School of Art
DES:    Mr Howarth addresses Berkshire Secondary Heads Associates
DH:     Mrs Bottomley visits Youth Treatment Centre, Brentwood
DH:     Mr Freeman visits Kings Fund Centre
DH:     Lady Hooper meets Miss Ashton and Miss Balfour from Royal College
        of Midwives
DTI:    Mr Hogg visits National Defence Industries           Council; later visits
        North Peckham Task Force
DTI:    Lord T refgarne addresses the Fellow’s           Company      seminar    on
        "Ministerial Life and Department Management"
DTp:    Mr Portillo awards Minister of State Cup for best line to Great
        Northern Line
DTp:    Mr Atkins visits A27 in West Sussex
FCO:    Lord Brabazon attends dinner given by Korean Ambassador, Jay Hee
        Oh
HO:     Mr M ellor m akes keynote speech at             Broadcast    Europe     1990
        conference, Inn on the Park Hotel, London
MAFF:   Mr Maclean addresses AGM of WFU, London
QAL:    Mr Luce opens new Ba&am library, London            ______________________
MINISTERS ^OVERSEAS VISITS)
FCO:    Mr Waldegrave visits Brussels (to 1 February)

u m srm s   fFK Ess i n t e r v i e w s )
DEM:    Mr Eggar interviewed by TVS on Pay and the Minimum Wage; later
        interviewed by "Takehome Drinks”  ______ ______________ ________
                                                             ANNEX




"QED* BBC1 (9,30 pm)
The House That Bob B uilt Looks at UK home design and asks if we live in
the worst insulated houses in Northern Europe____________ ______________ _
