        Liverpool Cathedral




          THE VISIT
               OF
    THE PRIME MINISTER
  THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
MARGARET THATCHER P.C., M.P
.   •




        In the vacant places
        We will build with new bricks
        There are hands and machines
        And clay for new brick
        And lime for new mortar
        Where the bricks are fallen
        We will build with new stone
        Where the beams are rotten
        We will build with new timbers
        Where the word is unspoken
        We will build with new speech
        There is work together
        A Church for ail
        And a job for each
        Every man to Ms work.


        T.S. Eliot




                                         2
 LIVERPOOL CATHEDRAL, Liverpool 11 7AZ
 m i ?m 627i
 From the Dean: The Very Reverend Derrick Walters


 Prime Minister,

 W elcome to o u r little Cathedral

 Y our last visit to the C athedral was a sad one, when we m et here to
 remember those who died at Hillsborough.

 You were present then to m ark the grief of the nation and your own
 personal sym pathy for those who were bereaved and injured.

 We dared to hope then th at you would come again to m ark a happier
 occasion in the life o f our great city.

 We were delighted when you accepted the Invitation to be present today.

 It w as in 1982 th at the government, in your administration, the first, took
 a major initiative in the renascence of Liverpool by deciding to develop
 the mainly derelict land between the Cathedral and G reat George Street
 as a m ajor scheme o f regeneration, involving p artnership between the
 private and public sector.

My colleagues m the Chapter and the C athedra! Committee take the
opportunity o f thanking you and the Government, the officers of the
D epartm ent o f the Environment, the Merseyside T ask Force and the
Housing C orporation for all that has been achieved and is being achieved
here*                                                          *

We have had splendid support from the private sector, from the Liverpool
Polytechnic, who found us 450 young people to live in Dlllistone and Patev
C ourts, from the contractors and complete com m itm ent to the scheme
from the m em bers o f the development team th a t advise us.

T hat support and commitment has given us the resolution to proceed with
the budding o f C athedral Chambers.

Not only will Keith Scott’s elegant design provide a worthy approach to
the C athedral along U pper Duke Street, but it will a visible    smmo f the
confidence we have m the City and its future,

]w           & ! 0ll02 r f ? F rS ! M inister, if you would unveil     the plaque
th at m arks the foundation o f Cathedral Chambers,
 Before the Ceremony the Organist plays

 Grand Choeur Dialogue                                                    Gigout

 THE ENTRANCE
 11% stand as the Prime Minister enters the Cathedral by the Rankin Porch,
 accompanied by the Dean o f Liverpool.

 T H E READING

 When all are in their places WE SIT and the Precentor reads these words:

We build in vain unless the Lord build with us.
Can you keep the city that the Lord keeps not with you?
A thousand policemen directing the traffic
Cannot tell you why you come or where you go.
A colony of cavies or a hoard of active marmots
Build better than they that build without the Lord.
Shall we lift up our feet among perpetual ruins?
I have loved the beauty of Thy House, the peace of Thy sanctuary,
I have swept the floors and garnished the altars.
Where there is no temple there shall be no homes*
Though you have shelters and institutions.
Precarious lodgings while the rent is paid,
Subsiding basements where the rat breeds
Or sanitary dwellings with numbered doors
Or a house a little better than your neighbour’s;
When the Stranger says; "What is the meaning of this city?
Do you huddle close together because you love each other?1'
What will you answer? "We all dwell together
To make money from each other"? or "This is a community”?
And the Stranger will depart and return to the desert.
O my soul, be prepared for the coming of the Stranger,
Be prepared for him who knows how to ask questions.

                                                                      T.S. Eliot

I f you take away from the midst of you the yoke, the pointing of the firmer,
and speaking wickedness, if you pour yourself our for the hungry and satfsfy
the desire of the afflicted, then shall your light rise in the darkness and your
gloom be as the noonday. And your ancient ruins shall be rebuilt; you shall
raise up the foundations of many generations; you shall be called the rebuilder
o f broken walls, the restorer of streets to dwell in.

                                                             Isaiah» Chapter 58




                                                                             3
Now the Choristers sing these words o f
DED ICA TIO N

0 Jesus I have promised
To serve thee to the end;
Be thou for ever near me,
My Master and my Friend; ■
1 shall not fear the battle
If thou art by my side.
Nor wander from the pathway
If thou wilt be my guide.
                                Music; J.S.Bach

We remain seated fo r

TH E PRAYERS

For the nation;

Grant us, O God, a vision of our land,
fair as she might be:
a land o f justice,
where none shall prey on others;
a land of plenty,
where poverty shall cease to fester;
a land of brotherhood,
where success shall be founded on service,
and honour be given to worth alone;
a land of peace,
where order shall not rest on force
but on respect for the common good;
a land o f freedom,
where everyone may find fulfilment
in doing your will on earth, as it is in heaven. Amen.

For the task ahead:

Help us, O God, to remember that we build in vain unless the Lord build with
us. Amidst the complexities of the task ahead, give us wisdom, give us
courage and give us singleness of purpose that in humility we may accomplish
all that is asked of us, for the good of this city and the glory of your name;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen,




                                                                            5
The Chapter Prayer o f Liverpool Cathedral
Good Lord, give to your unworthy servants*
who minister in buildings o f dignity and majesty,
the humour which saves us from pomposity,
the reverence which exalts all that is lovely
and the vision which makes all things new,
through lesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Now the choristers bid a blessing upon all who, in their various ways, arc
engaged in the regeneration o f our city and nation.

A G A ELIC BLESSING

Deep peace o f the Running Wave to you.
Deep peace o f the Flowing Air to you.
Deep peace o f tie Quiet Earth to you.
Deep peace of tie Shining Stars to you.
Deep peace of the Gentle Night to you.
Moon aad stars pour their Healing Light on you.
Deep peace of Christ the Light of the World to you:
Deep peace o f Christ to you.

                                                           Music: John Rutter

The Prime Minister leaves the Choir with ike Dean, who indicates something o f
the glory o f the building as they pass through the Central Space to the Nave,
where the Prime Minister will view the exhibitions and meet personnel
connected with the Cathedral projects.

Meanwhile the Organist plays:
Fugue in Eb (St. Anne)                                              J.S. Bach
The following will be introduced to the Principal G uest-
David Humphries - Project Leader, Quantity Surveyor, Tweeds
Keith Scoti - Architect             A , . AT
David W ylde - ANZ Bank, Financial Advisor
David Barke and Peter Hitchcok - Estates Advisors
David Murgatroyd - Project Co-ordmator
Roger Arden - Chapter Solicitor
Charles Wills - Barclays
David Edmonds - Housing Corporation, Chief Executive
Max Steinberg - Housing Corporation, Regional Director
Alan Smith - Director Cruden Construction Ltd,
                                            Ceremonial
 Alan Cameron, Planning Architect, Project Rosemary
 The guests listed above win be accompanied by their wives.
 TTie exhibition will be manned by staff from the various professional and
 commercial groups involved in the Dean and Chapter projects.
 1240 p m     Principal Guest will meet Barbara Forrester - M amgeress of
              Refectory Fiona Munro - Manageress of V i s i t o r Centre and
              members of Visitor Centre and Refectory Staff under Have Bridge.

 1242 p jn    Principal Guest escorted to Nave E x h i b i t i o n of Photographs of
              construction of Cathedral and meets Cathedral Staff.

 The following will be introduced to the Principal G uest-

 Stanway Johnson - Bursar
 Gordon Hickson - Finance Officer

 Ken Hughes, Cathedral Security

  Bert Poole - Chief Steward
  Robin Finnegan - Chief Guide
  Eleanor W right - Secretary Music Department
  Peter Kennerley - Cathedra! Education Officer who will show Principal Guest
  significant photographs in exhibition, before meeting
  Puvid Felgate -    Clerk of the Works and members of Works Department

  The Principal Guest will meet Terence McDonald and Jimmy McLaughlin
  (totally Deaf) who have been carving replacement finials and view examples ot
  their work. ( Interpreters will be available, including M r McLaughlin s young
  son.)

  Arrangements for visit on 21 July, Issued 26 7 1990                              9
12.50 p m    I f time permits, Principal Guest could meet family and friends of
             staff.

12.55 p m    Principal Guest escorted to Cathedral Reception Room for lunch.
             En route will meet the City Guests, Lord Mayor, Deputy Chief
             Constable Dr Dobbie and Ian Urqhart from Merseyside Task
             Force, also Mrs Howe, Mrs Dobbie and Mrs Urqhart and the Vice
             Chancellor and the Polytechnic Rector and wives

In the foyer o f Reception Rooms Principal Guest will meet:-

Joan Walters
Canon & Mrs Riley
Canon & Mrs Wolfe
Canon Chancellor
The Bishop and Mrs Sheppard

Mr Ian Tracey - Cathedral Organist and Master of the Choristers
Mr Henry Cotton - Chairman Liverpool Cathedral Committee
Mrs Cotton
Mr Malcolm Williams, Cathedral Committee
Mr Donald Tod, Cathedral Committee
Mrs Moran - Cathedral Office
Miss Kenyon - Cathedral Office
Mrs Dobbs - Functions Manageress
David Walters - Dean’s Son
Mrs Kate Walters
(and perhaps William - grandson!)
Walter Huntley • Cathedral Press officer
Mrs Huntley

LOO p.m.    Luncheon

1.40 p.m    Dean will make presentation to P.G of smallmemento    o f visit.
1.50 p.m    Leave through Rankin.

Members of Staff, their families and friends,whowish to bepresent when the
Principal guest leaves will be directed to the Rankin porch area at 1.40 p.m




Arrangements for visit on 27 July, issued 26 7 1990                            10
 LUNCHEON GUEST LIST
 P rincipal G uest
 P eter M orrison M P
 Robin C atfo rd Esq.,
 Jo h n N ightingale Esq*,
 B ernard Ingham Esq*,
 Protection O fficer 1
 Protection Officer 2
 Protection Officer 3
 Press O fficer

 Dtm
 Mrs loan Walters - Dean’s Wife
 Canon Ken Riley - Cathedral Precentor
 Mrs Margaret Riley -
 Canon Michael Wolfe - Canon Residentiary
 Mrs Brenda Wolfe
 Canon David Hutton - Canon Chancellor
 Rt Rev David Sheppard - Bishop of Liverpool
 Mrs Grace Sheppard
 Mr D Walters - Dean’s Son
 Mrs K Walters - Dean’s Daughter-in-law

 Mr Henry Cotton - Chairman Liveipool Cathedra! Committee
 Mrs Cotton
 M r Malcolm Williams, Cathedral Committee
 Mr Donald Tod, Cathedral Committee

 Mrs D Gavin - Lord Mayor of Liverpool
David Howe * Deputy Chief Constable
Mrs Howe -
Prof P Toyne * Rector at Liverpool Polytechnic
Mrs Toyne
The Vice Chancellor Graeme Davies
Mrs Davies
Dr R Dobbie - Merseyside Task Force
Mrs Dobbie
Mr I Urqhart - Merseyside Task Force
Mrs Urqhart
M r Stephen Sage - Merseyside Task Force
David Humphries - Project Leader, Quantity Surveyor, Tweeds
Mrs Jo Humphries
Keith Scott - Architect
Mrs Scott
Chris Lloyd - Architect
David Wylde - ANZ Bank, Financial Advisor
Mrs Wylde

Arrangements for visit on 27 July, issued 26 7 1990           11
•
David Barke
Mrs Barke
Peter Hitchcock Estates Advisor
Mrs Hitchcock
David M urgatroyd - Project Co-ordinator
Mrs Murgatroyd
Roger Arden - Chapter Solicitor
Mrs Axden
Charles Willis - Barclays
David Edmonds - Housing Corporation, Chief Executive
Mrs Sheila Hatch, Housing Corporation
Max Steinberg - Housing Corporation,
Mrs Steinberg
Alan Smith - Director Cruden Construction Ltd
Mrs Smith
Peter Carmichael, Architect, Cathedral Plaza Ceremonial entrance
Mrs Carmichael
Alan Cameron, Planning Architect, Project Rosemary

Walter Huntley - Cathedral Press Officer
Mrs Huntley
Mr Kennerley - Cathedral Education Officer
Mrs Kennerley
Mr Hickson - Cathedral Finance Officer
Mrs Nickson
Mr Stanway Johnson - Cathedral Bursar
Mrs Stanway Johnson
Eleanor Wright - Secretary Music Department
Geoff Latter - Cathedral Photographer
Mrs Jenny Moran - Cathedral Secretary
Miss Sharon Kenyon - Cathedral Secretary




Arrangements for visit on 27 July, issued 26 7 1990                12
ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL


(i)     CATHEDRAL CHAMBERS - FOUNDATION STONE PROJECT


The Cathedral Chambers project will complete the development of the
Cathedral Precinct corner, closest to the City Centre.


The project involves the construction of 64,000 sq ft of office space,
7,700 sq ft of retail space, and underground parking on a 1.33 acre
site.  The Dean and the Chapter are the developer. The project will
yield up to 350 jobs, an estimated 150 man years of construction and
the completion of a prominent corner of the Precinct site.


The City Grant contribution is £1.35M, of a total project cost of
£7.55M.  The  Grant was required to meet abnormal costs, associated
with the sloping site,       to ensure a high quality finish,          and provide
some element of market support.         The award of the Grant was announced
by Mr David Hunt MP,        then Minister for Local Government           and Inner
Cities, when he visited the Cathedral on Friday 2 February 1990.


The   scheme   has   been   designed   by   Keith    Scott,   of   Building   Design
Partnership,    the Cathedral Architect.            Project managers are Tweeds
(David Humphries and David Murgatroyd); the Financial Adviser, David
Wylde, of ANZ Bank. The main contractors are Cruden Construction.
ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL PRECINCT


(it)     GENERAL DEVELOPMENT

The Anglican Cathedral Precinct site covers approximately 20 acres and
is prominently situated in front of the Cathedral.       The site was
derelict for 20 years until acquired by the Housing Corporation at the
instigation of the then Secretary of State in 1981 and a competition
for the design of the site was launched.

The winning proposal comprised a plaza in front of the Cathedral with
up to 8 courts of housing,              servicing shops and offices,                 in a high
quality parkland setting.   The contractors for the scheme are Cruden
Construction, and the Housing Corporation act as managing agents. The
reclamation    and      landscaping        of   the   site    has    been      funded   by   the
Department through the Housing Corporation.

Work commenced in           1983, with extensive reclamation and 3                   courts of
housing completed by 1986.              When the scheme ran into difficulties in
1986, the Dean and Chapter worked up a scheme whereby they would act
as developers, and Crudens only as contractors. A further3 courts                             of
housing    would   be       provided,      as   accommodation for          rent; commercial
development.    Cathedral Chambers - see preceding                        brief   - would be
provided at     the northern end of the site; and                         there   would be a
conference     centre       and    workshop       complex,    known       as   the   Cathedral
College.

The commercial development was the subject of a successful City Grant
application,    of £1.3M towards total costs of £7.5M - see preceding
brief.

An Urban Regeneration Grant was provided for the remaining courts of
housing and Cathedral College. This was approved in February 1988. It
will provide £2.23M towards the total costs of £10.23M, with                                 the
remaining costs being supported by Barclays Bank with the loan,                              and
•the resources       from    the    Dean    and    Chapter.         The   Dean    secured    the
Polytechnic as tenants, for bedsitting room accommodation.
Cathedral       College has,   however,   run    into difficulty.      The College
would    link    the housing   development      with   the Cathedral   itself,   and
would provide a conference centre and workshops.


The Urban Regeneration Grant was given before planning permission. The
conditions of the planning permission increased the costs beyond the
resources available to the Dean.  He knows from the Department of the
Environment that no further City Grant will be forthcoming. According­
ly,   he is currently negotiating with the City Council to see if a
satisfactory scheme, which can be afforded, is possible.               He has been
particularly encouraged by the recent discovery of a drawing by Sir
Giles Gilbert Scott himself, which shows development up to the
Cathedral being in brick, whereas English Heritage are insisting upon
stone.

The last remaining plot at the south end of the site will be developed
by the Pine Court Housing Association to provide new housing for the
Chinese community.
THE   VERY    REVEREND   DERRICK   WALTERS,    DEAN    OF    LIVERPOOL     ANGLICAN
CATHEDRAL


Dean of Liverpool since 1983.


Very Rev (Rhys) Derrick (Chamberlain) Walters.


Born March 1932; married, 1959, Joan; 2 sons.


Education: Gowerton Boys Grammar School;         London School of Economics;
Rippon Hall, Oxford.

Curate,    Manse1ton,    Swansea   1957-58;   Anglican      Chaplain,    University
College, Swansea and Curate, St Mary's, 1958-62.


Vicar of All Saints, Totley,       1962-67; Vicar of St Mary's Boulton-by-
Derby, 1967-74.


Diocesan Missioner, Diocese of Salisbury,          1974-82; Vicar of Burcombe,
1974-79;     non-resident Canon of    Salisbury,    1978;    resident Canon and
Treasurer of Salisbury Cathedral, 1979-82.


Recreations: Escapist literature, croquet,          classical music.        {Annual
festivals of classical music in the Cathedral are now a major and
successful feature of the Cathedral's year).
LIVERPOOL ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL


        "This is one of the great buildings of the world                           ....    the
        impression of vastness, strength and height no words can
        describe ... . suddenly one sees that the greatest art of
        architecture, that lifts one up and turns one into a king, yet
        compels reverence, is the art of     enclosing space" (Sir John
        Betjeman}.


        "Don’t look at         my   arches,    look       at   my    spaces"   (Sir    George
        Gilbert Scott).


1880.   Diocese of Liverpool established.


1901.   Cathedral site selected.


1903.    Sir    GeorgeGilbert       Scott,    then         21,      selected   as Cathedral
architect.


1904. King Edward           VII, accompanied         by    Queen Alexandra, lays          the
Foundation Stone.


1906-1910.     Lady Chapel constructed.


1924.   Consecration of the Cathedral, in presence of King George V and
Queen Mary (first consecration of a new Cathedral on a new site since
Salisbury, in the 13th Century).


1941, West     transepts     completed;       1942, tower completed;           1948       nave
commenced.


1978.   Service of dedication to               markcompletion          of the Cathedral,
attended by Her Majesty the Queen.


Cathedral    600     feet   long,   tower     331     feet     high.      Organ:      largest
cathedral    organ    in use   in   the     world.        Ring of      13 bells.       Major
features;
(1)    "Spirit   of     Liverpool",     in   Visitor Centre:    aerial
sculpture?   designed    by     Keith   Scott,   Cathedral   Architect;
executed 1984.

(2)    Great West     Window,    by Carl     Edwards. Subject   - the
Benedicite: "0 all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord".

(3)     Outstanding design feature - double transept structure,
with great arches (Rankin Porch on the south, Wellsford Porch
on the north}.    Design inspires double cross,         symbol of the
Cathedral.


{4)    Grade I listed.
dean OF THE ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL: "OPERATION ROSEMARY" (FALKNER SITE)

The Prime Minister will be familiar with the Dean’s proposals for the
development of the Falkner       site, near the Cathedral and immediately
adjoining the Granby area, the heart of black Liverpool: she wrote on
the Dean’s behalf to Lord Sainsbury, to seek his interest in the major
retail development which the Dean regards as the hub of the project
(copy letter attached).

The Falkner site is bounded by Upper Parliament Street,                  the seat of
the 1981 Toxteth riots.         The site is currently owned by the City
Council and is derelict.        The Granby area still suffers from major
deprivation,   unemployment, dereliction and poor housing.                The extent
of the difficulties was recognised by the establishment last October
of the Granby/Toxteth Task Force.

The Dean proposes to build some 400 houses, for low cost sale or rent
(eg to the University or Polytechnic,         which are also close            to the
site);   provide a science park and      leisure     facility;      and attract a
major supermarket chain.    The site is well located for the latter, on
a major distribution road into central Liverpool, and there is no
other supermarket for 2\ miles.       The Development Manager of
Sainsbury's,   Mr Ian   Cool,    met   the   Dean    for    lunch    on     13     July
(Merseyside Task Force were also invited): Mr Cool admitted that he
came there very sceptical about the proposal, expecting to say that it
was not for them, but departed saying that he would undertake two or
three weeks research, and give the Dean a definite answer thereafter.
He said that the Dean could feel "optimistic”.


The Dean has submitted an outline of his proposals to Liverpool City
Council, seeking their agreement to him taking out an option on the
land.   Informal contacts with the City suggests they are sceptical,
not because    they would not     like to    see    the   scheme    go    ahead,    but
because they are concerned that the Dean's advisers may not be strong
enough to tackle a scheme of this nature.   In Confidence. Merseyside
Task Force has some sympathy with this view from the City. The Dean is
looking to Tweeds and ANZ,       as his technical and financial advisers.
They were responsible for Cathedral Chambers, and were accepted by the
Department of the Environment's City Grant assessors as being quite
satisfactory for that scheme. But the Falkner site is of a different
order of magnitude - 60 acres, rather than 1.33 acres; and a
development of at least £50M-£60M, compared to £7.5M.


Mr Michael Portillo spent the weekend of 14/15 July as a private guest
of the Dean. In line with his wishes, Merseyside Task Force is giving
the fullest support possible to the Dean in the Falkner site project.
