              JM
               H Depositions of Witnesses                                       taken on oath or affirmation

                  \

                      th is .             4 th           day of                  MARCH
     Yorkshire                                                                                           before me
      to wit   ’ 9                        BRADFORD
                      JAM ES    AW TY   TURNBULL,      one   of   th e   C oroners   of   our   Lady   th e   Q u een
PC Meredith
present               for the                 COUNTY         of     WEST YORKSHIRE               upon an inquest


                      touching the death of        ANTHONY DAVID BLAND



              H.MT CORONER

              PC Meredith, will you give formal evidence of identification, please?

              Yes sir.

              PC 3955 ANTHONY RICHARD MEREDITH, CORONERS OFFICER, WEST YORKSHIRE POLICE,
              KEIGHLEY

              On oath saith,

           Sir, yesterday evening, Wednesday, 3rd March 1993, I was summoned to
           Airedale General Hospital at approximately 9.30 pm. I there spoke with Dr
           Richardson who informed me -that, Anthony David Bland had died in that
           hospital at 9.15 pm that evening, Mr Bland being born on 21st. September
          .1970 with a home address in Keighley.
          Sir, following information received from Dr Richardson at the hospital I
          spoke with Mr Alan Bland, father of the deceased, arid he. in fact then made
          a formal identification of his son to me at the hospital.     Sir, following
          those identifications at 10..15 this morning I formally identified the
          deceased, Anthony David Bland, to Dr Lowe, Consultant Pathologist, before
          a post mortem examination was carried out.

          H.M.CORONER

          Thank you very much. I first of all state that I am satisfied that the
          deceased is Anthony David Bland and I shall, in a few moments, formally
          adjourn the inquest and sign the- Cremation Order which is requested by the
          family.

          This death of Anthony Bland has naturally and understandably given rise to
          a considerable general interest, for reasons which are well known, first
          of all because he appears to have suffered injury at the disaster known,
          as the Hillsborough Football Stadium. Disaster nearly four years ago. and
          secondly because'the medical treatment, of Mr Bland has been the subject of
          three High Court hearings.' I have stated this before but it is important
          that the court should hear why I am holding an inquest into, the death of
          Mr Bland in my jurisdiction,.that is, first of all, because he died within
          my jurisdiction but in circumstances such as these, where the incident, or .
          tragedy or disaster ,has occurred in a different jurisdiction there is
          authority for the Coroner to ask the Coroner of that jurisdiction to take
          the case. Mr Dorries, the South Yorkshire Coroner, whose district covers
          Sheffield, is relatively newly appointed and the Hillsborough Disaster
          inquest was heard by Dr Popper, the then Coroner, before a jury.         Mr
          Dorries was then in practice ,as a solicitor and although he only had a
          peripheral interest in the inquest he did in fact attend for a short
            Depositions of Witnesses                          taken on oath or affirmation


            this               4th          day of           MARCH             1993
Yorkshire   at                                                                  before me
 to wit                        BRADFORD
            JAMES     AW TY   TURNBULL,   one of the Coroners of our Lady the Queen


            for the             COUNTY       °f      WEST YORKSHIRE        UP°n a" inqU6St

            touching the death of    ANTHONY DAVID BLAND


    period of time representing a client of his. He therefore felt that it
    would be wrong, since he had had that interest beforehand, for him to
    hold the inquest into the death of Tony Bland, and some time ago he and I
    agreed that it would be the right course for me to hold an inquest into
    the death of Mr Bland when that occurred.

    In the intervening period since the commencement of the High Court actions
    which seemed likely to lead in fairly short time to the withdrawal of
    medical treatment and the ultimate death of Tony Bland Mr Dorries kindly
    supplied me with a full transcript of the proceedings at the inquest in
    Sheffield. He also let me have' a copy of the Taylor Interim Report and the
    Taylor Final Report, which was the result of a judicial enquiry conducted
    by the then Lord Justice Taylor, into the circumstances in which the
    disaster had occurred and also a number of ancilliary reports, principally
    one prepared by the West Midlands Police who then acted for Lord Justice
    Taylor and for Dr Popper in preparing a case to be presented before the
    enquiry and before the Court.                                             “

    I am fortunate that during the coming weeks I will have the benefit of the
    expertise not only of my own officer, Police Constable Meredith but also a
    officer from South Yorkshire, PC Greenway and also Inspector Caroline
    Perkins of the West Midlands Police in going through the evidence which is
    available and making certain decisions which now I have to consider.

    The Inquest will be resumed as soon as possible. The form of that inquest
    remains to be decided. There is a reasonable point of view that so much
    has already been said, both at the enquiry and at the inquest, about the
    circumstances of the Hillsborough disaster that it would be perhaps
    inappropriate and serve no useful purpose to have a complete re-run of the
    Hillsborough inquest and I have considerable sympathy with that view.
    However, any inquest has to be conducted in accordance with the statutes
    governing the Coroner's authority and the Rules under which Coroners
    operates. One of those Rules states "that evidence may be received before
    a Coroner's Court in the form of written statement so long as the
    statement is regarded by the Coroner as non-controversial and so long as
    properly interested persons have had an opportunity of considering that
    form of evidence and raising no objection to it". It is therefore my
    intention to discuss in due course the course of action that I propose to
    take with the solicitors to Tony Bland's parents and work closely in
    conjunction with them because much of my decision making will depend upon
    the line which the Blands are advised to take. In the interim period it
    will be necessary for me to read the transcript of the Hillsborough
    inquest and when I tell the court that that runs to eighty volumes it will
    be appreciated that that will not be something that I can do in a matter
    of a few days.   However, I am intent on resuming the inquest with the
    least possible delay.
                                      3

            Depositions of Witnesses                               taken on oath or affirmation


            this                4th            day of              MARCH                  19g3

Yorkshire                                                                                   before me
            at
 to wit                         BRADFORD
            JAM ES    AW TY   TURNBULL,     one   of   the   Coroners   of   our   Lady   th e   Q u een

            for the              COUNTY           of    WEST YORKSHIRE              upon an inquest

            touching the death, of        ANTHONY DAVID BLAND


    Tony Bland's death was reported to me a few minutes after it occured by Dr
    Howe who has been the Consultant in charge of his treatment and who is
    well known to certainly members of the Press. I immediately contacted one
    of my own pathologists here in Bradford, Dr Jan Lowe,a     very experienced
    pathologist. As it happens Dr Lowe was in Scotland and he drove back
    overnight and I can tell the court that the post mortem examination
    conducted by Dr Lowe has now been concluded and I          have Dr Lowe's
    confirmation that he sees no reason why he should need to make any further
    examination of Tony's body. I therefore, as has been indicated, propose to
    sign the Cremation Order so that the funeral arrangements can proceed
    without delay.

    I want to say that it is my view, since I attended the post mortem
    examination and it is the view of Dr Lowe, that much credit must be given
    to Dr Howe and his collegues and particularly to the nursing staff at
    Airedale Hospital for the quite wonderful way in which this young man had
    been nursed for a very long time without the slightest indication that any
    untoward effects had arisen because of the procedures that were adopted.
    He had been nursed superbly and that needs to be said because I am aware
    that the nurses in particular have gone through a difficult time, for
    obvious reasons, and I would like to assure them in public that what they
    have done was quite superalitve.

    It will, of course, be necessary for me to re-read the judgements of the
    High Court, the Appeal Court and the House of Lords since one apsect of
    matters concerns the medical treatment and the orders made by those Courts
    and I shall need to consider whether they affect any conclusions which
    this court might come to.

    One of the purposes of dealing with the formalities of opening an inquest
    as quickly as possible is that as it happens and as is well known Tony's
    parents have to attend the funeral of his grandmother today and another
    member of the family, not so closely related, has a funeral next week.
    Arrangements were therefore made with the help of all concerned, including
    the funeral dirctors, for the funeral of Tony to take place next Monday
    and Dr Howe has asked me to put forward a plea on behalf of the Blands
    that they be allowed to have that funeral a privately as is possible. I
    think that everyone concerned, particularly the ladies and gentlemen of
    the Press, will agree that the Blands have been as co-operative as they
    possibly could, as has Dr Howe andit would be a kindness to them if they
    were allowed to take up that part of their grieving with as little upset
    as is possible. I don't suggest that members of the Press cause upset
    necessarily but they would like to be as private as they can.  I make that
    plea on their behalf and finally I pay my own tribute to Mr and Mrs Bland
    for the calm and dignified way in which they have conducted themselves
    during this very trying time. I have myself met them and they fill me full
    of admiration.
                                              4

                Depositions of Witnesses                                   taken on oath or affirmation

                this               4th              day of                MARCH                   1993
Yorkshire
            •   at                                                                   before me
 to wit                            BRADFORD
                JAMES     AW TY   TURNBULL,       one   of   th e   C oroners   of   our   Lady   th e   Q u een


                for the             COUNTY              of   WEST YORKSHIRE                 upon an inquest

                touching the death of    ANTHONY DAVID BLAND


    I see no reason why I should not disclose the cause of death given by Dr
    Lowe, the Consultant Pathologist, in his preliminary findings. He tells me
    that he does not expect that his histological examination of some samples
    which he has yet to examine will alter the cause of death but I emphasise
    that this his preliminary cause of death and he will of course be called
    to the inquest to give detailed evidence of his findings. He states that
    in his opinion, and at this stage of his investigation, the cause of death
    in medical terms of Anthony David Bland is Pyelitis and Bronchopneumonia
    due to Anoxic Brain Damage due to Traumatic Asphyxia.

    As far as I am concerned that concludes the formalities of the opening of
    this inquest but since a number of members of the Press are here and since
    there is considerable interest if I can, as it were, set aside the
    formalities and offer myself to questions at this stage it might obviate
    the necessity of phone calls or enquiries later.   I don't know whether I
    have covered every point that needs to be covered at the moment but if
    there is any other question that     any member of thePress would like to
    raise?

    Can you state the cause of death in layman's terms for us?

    Yes. It is a deterioration of the body which has given riseto kidney
    failure and changes in the lungs as the result of anoxic damage, that is
    lack of oxygen to the brain, which has caused brain damage, which has
    reduced the capacity of the body to deal fully with the business of
    living, as it were, and that has arisen out of oxygen deficiency because
    of traumatic asphyxia. Of course there will be considerable evidence as to
    the effect of the withdrawal, as is well known, of certain treatment and
    in the end I think it would have to be stated that death occurred when it
    did because of the withdrawal of that treatment but the process is as I
    have mentioned.

    Could you just repeat the word after "in medical terms"?

    I'm sorry I'm not following you. The cause of death?

    Yes, the cause of death in medical terms was....?

    Pyelitis and Bronchopneumonia.            (spells out pyelitis)
    Thank you.

    Could I . just ask at this stage, I appreciate the comments you've made
    about ho;; complex the inquest is inevitably going to be, do you have any
    idea of the time scale, when you do start, how long the actual hearing
    might take?

    There are two limits. There's a short limit, which could mean that the
                                          5

            Depositions of Witnesses                                   taken on oath or affirmation


            this               4 th             day of                 MARCH                  1993

Yorkshire                                                                                       before me
 to wit     at                 BRADFORD
            JAM ES    AW TY   TURNBULL,       one   of   th e   C oroners   of   our   Lady   th e   Q u een


            for the             COUNTY                                                  upon an inquest
                                                    df    WEST YORKSHIRE

            touching the death of     ANTHONY DAVID BLAND


    inquest could be quite short and there's the ultimate limit which could
    mean that it takes as long as the Hillsborough inquest did.    The problem
    that I have is this is it is possible to receive evidence in statement
    form. Supposing for one moment that that general process was agreed by
    properly interested persons, and at the present time the only properly
    interested persons who have communicated with me their interest are the
    Blands.   That's the first question, relatively easy to answer depending
    upon the line taken by those advising the Blands. The next question is, of
    the evidence, however it is presented, of the evidence that was give^ at
    Hillsborough by more than two hundred, I think, witnesses which is of that
    is relevant to the death of Tony Bland? Because at the end of the day
    my sights must be firmly fixed upon my duty in respect of this inquest,
    which is to establish to cause of death of Tony Bland and what led up to
    any injuries which he suffered which led to the death.

    No further questions.




    INQUEST ADJOURNED PENDING COMPLETION OF ENQUIRIES
