                            SUMMARY OF H.M. CORONER


As I indicated when I opened the proceedings I have thought it right in all the
circumstances to restrict the course of this resumed inquest to establishing the facts in
relation to the death of Tony Bland.

Tony went to Hillsborough to watch his favourite team, Liverpool, play in a Cup semi­
final match on the 15th April of 1989. He went with two friends, Mr. Grew and Mr. Gill.
Mr. Gill was with him at the kick-off. Very soon after the kick-off, as everyone knows
and Mr. Gill has confirmed, difficulties arose because there were larger numbers of
spectators in the standing area, where Mr. Gill and Tony were, than perhaps was
appropriate to the area. At any rate there was surges in the crowd in that area. Mr. Gill
lost sight of Tony and he himself fell down and was pulled through the small gate onto
the pitch by a police officer. One can only assume, and it is a reasonable assumption and
there is no reason why it should not be assumed because it follows from the sightings,
that Tony himself must have got into difficulty in that melee and suffered a crush injury.
At any rate he was displaying symptoms consistent with that when he was placed into the
ambulance by Police Constable Jenkinson and at that time he had a pulse but was not
breathing but due, I think, to the efforts of PC. Jenkinson he respiration was restored and
he was breathing spontaneously on his arrival at the Northern General Hospital in
Sheffield where the ambulance took him. He was attended then by Dr. Naidoo who
found him in that condition who says that he was breathing spontaneously, there was a
pulse and the pulse and blood pressure were normal. An x-ray disclosed that there
fractures of the ribs on the left side, ribs 6-10 inclusive, again consistent with Tony having
been crushed in that throng. He was treated for some time at the Northern General
Hospital and then transferred to Airedale General Hospital and it was quite soon
recognised that because of injury to the brain caused by oxygen starvation he was in,
what is termed, a persistent vegetative state and as I understand it that is a state which
results from severe damage to the cortex of the brain without damage to the brain stem
so that certain automatic functions take place but the process of thinking, decision
making or anything of that sort does not continue, ceases and that state continued until
a time when Dr. Howe and his colleagues and others whom he consulted, Mr. and Mrs.
Bland and their daughter in particular, came to the conclusion that there was, in their
view, no purpose in allowing this situation to continue.

It is established, as I understand and accept from Dr. Howe’s evidence, that this
condition, whilst it can be recovered from sometimes, has never been known to lead to
a recovery, or to be susceptible to recovery, after one year. Dr. Howe and others
therefore gave consideration to the possibility of how Tony’s life might come to a
conclusion, come to an end, earthly life and to put it shortly, after receiving advice that
to withdraw medical treatment without any guidance or authority might lead to
prosecution on criminal charges, they made an application to the High Court. The High
Court made a declaration in these terms "that the plaintiffs", that is the Airedale National
Health Service Trust and the attendant physicians, "may lawfully discontinue all life-
sustaining treatment and medical support measures designed to keep Anthony Bland
aave in his existing persistent vegetative state including the termination of ventilation,
nutrition and hydration by artificial means and may lawfully discontinue and thereafter
need not furnish medical treatment to Anthony Bland except for the sole purpose of
enabling Anthony Bland to end his life and to die peacefully, with the greatest of dignity,
and the least distress." Evidence was given by the highest medical authority in relation
to this subject of persistent vegetative state and the judge accepted that there was no
hope whatsoever of recovery or improvement of any kind and he gave it as his judgement
that it was the unanimous opinion of all the distinguished doctors who had given
evidence. The judge also said this and it is worthy of note and record that following Mr.
Bland giving oral evidence the judge said "the father is a splendid, straightforward
Yorkshireman. He has faced the terrible tragedy which has befallen his family with
remarkable realism and dignity. He has not allowed emotion to influence his judgement"
and I for one would like to be associated with those words which the judge then spoke.
The judge made the order, there was an appeal which indeed the judge, Sir Stephen
Brown, invited to the Court of Appeal and the unanimous opinion of the Court of
Appeal was that the judgement should be upheld. The judgement so upheld was then
appealed to the House of Lords and five Law Lords again upheld the original judgement.
It should be underlined, however, that both Sir Stephen Brown and more particularly,
Lord Justice Mustill in the House of Lords made it plain that at any rate for the time
being and for the foreseeable future the judgement in respect of Tony Bland should not
be taken to give authority for doctors to withdraw medical treatment in similar
circumstances without an individual, separate and separately argued application for a
similar declaration in every individual case. I think that needs to be underlined.

As I have indicated before I am bound by that declaration and I believe that that means
that I am entitled to say that Tony Bland died as the result of sustaining a crush injury
on the 15th April 1989 and that when treatment was withdrawn it was withdrawn lawfully
and therefore it would not be for me to say, even if I wanted to say it, that there was any
intervening event which would alter the findings which I now record. I find as follows:-

That Anthony David Bland died at Airedale General Hospital on the 3rd of March 1993.
I record that the cause of his death, in medical terms, was Pyelitis and
Bronchopneumonia due to Anoxic Brain Damage due to Traumatic Asphyxia and that
Tony Bland suffered the traumatic asphyxia when he was in a crush of spectators at the
Hillsborough Football Ground, in front of the West Stand, during the afternoon of the
15th of April 1989 and that it was as a direct result of the crush injuries then sustained
the he died on the 3rd of March 1993 and the verdict of this court is that Anthony Bland
died as the result of an accident, the verdict is Accidental Death.

Mr. and Mrs. Bland, I express the hope again that you may now resume, as far as it is
possible, normal life. I hope that the processes which you have had to suffer will have
played some part in allowing you to come to terms with your grief and I thank you for
the help that you have given me during the process with which I have been concerned.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Taylor.
