         OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER                                       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
                                                                           WATERY STREET
         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                SHEFFIELD
         VsVest District)
                                                                                     S3 7ET

         H.M. Coroner                                                                  Telephone:
         Christopher P. Dorries                                            Sheffield (0742) 738721
                                                                   29 March 1993



         Mr James Turnbull
         H M Coroner for West Yorkshire
         City Courts
         The Tyrls
         Bradford
         BD1 1LA




         Dear James

         Tony Bland (Deceased)

         I am enclosing a photocopy of a letter received from the House of Lords today
         together with my draft reply.

         I do not think that I am treading on your toes in any way with this
         correspondence but please feel free to put me right if you take an opposite
         view.  I would also very much welcome your comments on the matters that I
         have set out in my reply.

         I am also sending copies of the correspondence to Stefan asking that he
         formulate his own reply as regards Tony B l a n d ’s case in particular and let me
         know any errors that he sees in my letter.

         I am hoping to be in and around the office          most of theweek if you    wish to
         speak to me at all.

         Best Wishes.




         C P Dorries
         H M Coroner

         enc




SS1ADY
                                        Fax: (0742) 726247
                                                               *a   mu   18
                                                          H. M. CORONER'S OFFICE]
Mr Christopher Dorries
The Coroner
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery St
Sheffield
F3 7ES


                                                                      March 19th 1993

Dear Mr Dorries,

As I am sure you are aware, the House of Lords Select Committee on Medical Ethics
is considering amongst other things the decision by the Law Lords in the case of
Airedale NHS Trust and Anthony Bland.

As a member of the Committee, I am researching into the outcome of the case and
would gladly receive your assistance in clarifying one point I understand from my
reading of the papers tliat when Dr Jim Howe made his first request to your
predecessor Dr Popper to withdraw treatment in the face of infection, he was advised
not to. I am thinking particularly of the fact that he treated the infections that
Anthony Bland contracted.

I would be most grateful if you could inform me why this advice was given, if it was,
and if possible, I would appreciate any copies of the Department’s records on this
particular point.

I am sony. to. trouble., you .with this, however as yet I haye read nothing in the papers
I have received which clarifies this point

Yours sincerely,




Professor the Lord McColl of Dulwich
                                                           29th March 93



         Professor the Lord McColl of Dulwich
         House of Lords
         Westminster
         London
         wwi




         Dear Lord McColl

         Select Committee on Medical Ethics
         Anthony Bland (Deceased)

         Thank you for your letter of 19th March which only arrived at my office on
         the 29th March.

         I think that particular comment on the Tony Bland case ought to come from
         Dr Popper rather than myself.  I have therefore sent a copy of your letter to
         Dr Popper today and asked him to reply to you direct. It may assist you in
         the meantime however if I deal with the point involved in general terms.

         A C oroner’s powers only arise from the presence of a body.  It follows
         therefore that a Coroner has no power at all to give any form of directions
         or permission to a doctor in respect of a living patient (with the possible
         exception of transplant donors). However, not unnaturally, there are
         isolated occasions when the' medical profession are wanting to know what
         attitude the Coroner will take (after death) in respect of a proposed course
         of action for a particular patient.   Any Coroner must treat such a request
         for advice with extreme caution for a number of obvious reasons.

         If a doctor approached a Coroner with a proposal that treatment be
         discontinued for a patient in circumstances that might amount to a criminal
         offence of murder or manslaughter it is not, strictly speaking, up to the
         Coroner to either forbid or encourage such an action.  Indeed it might be
         argued that giving active encouragement to do so is coming rather close to
         aiding and abetting the criminal offence involved.  I suspect that most
         Coroners would, if faced with this situation, go out of their way to ensure
         that the doctor understood the general criminal law and that the Coroner had
         no power to condone or permit such an action, nor would he be able to turn "a
         blind eye" to possible criminality at the subsequent Inquest just because the
         doctor had asked permission first.  I suspect that the doctor would be
         advised strongly to obtain his own legal advice before proceeding further.




SS1ADX
I would be happy to let you have sight of any documentation relevant to your
enquiry which is held in this office but the only paperwork that' I am aware
of at all on this particular point is Dr Pop per’s letter to Dr Howe a copy of
which is attached.

Finally, might I also ask you to bear in mind that an Inquest has been opened
into the death of Tony Bland by Mr James Turnbull, HM Coroner for West
Yorkshire, accordingly I would feel it discourteous if I did not let him have
a copy of this letter as well.

I hope that my general comments are of assistance to you,   if I can be of
further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
H M Coroner

enc
Mr. C. P. Dorries,                                                   My ref: JAT/AP/11K
H. M. Coroner,
Office of H. M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.                                                               2 December 1993
S3 7ET




Dear

Re: Anthony David Bland, deceased

I think I mentioned this to you when we met last Saturday, but now I am writing as a matter
of courtesy formally to tell you that I am resuming the inquest into the death of Tony Bland
on Tuesday, 21st December. I am expecting it to be fairly low key and to last about a day.

Kind regards,

Yours sincerely,




J. A. Turnbull
H. M. CORONER
