                                                                       Judgment: 4 February 1993



                                                 HOUSE OF LORDS
                    r
                                              AIREDALE NHS TRUST
                         }                       (RESPONDENTS)



                                                   BLAND
                                      (ACTING BY HIS GUARDIAN ad litem)
                                                (APPELLANT)



                        LORD KEITH OF KINKEL

                        My Lords,

Lord Keith                  As a result of injuries sustained in the Hillsborough disaster, Anthony
  of Kinkel    f    Bland has for over three years been in the condition known as persistent
Lord Goff           vegetative state (P.V.S.). It is unnecessary to go into all the details about the
  of Chieveley      manifestations of this state which are fully set out in the judgments of the
Lord Lowry          courts below. It is sufficient to say that it arises from the destruction, through
Lord Browne-        prolonged deprivation of oxygen, of the cerebral cortex, which has resolved
 Wilkinson -        into a watery mass. The cortex is that part of the brain which is the seat of
Lord Mustill • **   cognitive function and sensory capacity. Anthony Bland cannot see, hear or
                    feel anything. He cannot communicate in any way. The consciousness which
                    is the essential feature of individual personality has departed for ever. On the
                    other hand the brain stem, which controls the reflexive functions of the body,
                    in particular heartbeat, breathing and digestion, continues to operate. In the
                    eyes of the medical world and of the law a person is not clinically dead so
                    long as the brain stem retains its function. In order to maintain Anthony
                    Bland in his present condition, feeding and hydration are achieved artificially
                    by means of a nasogastric tube and excretionary functions are regulated by a
                    catheter and by enemas. The catheter from time to time gives rise to
                    infections which have to be dealt with by appropriate medical treatment. The
                    undisputed consensus of eminent medical opinion is that there is no prospect
                    whatever that Anthony Bland will ever make any recovery from his present
                    condition, but that there is every likelihood that he will maintain his present
                    state of existence for many years to come, provided that the medical care
                    which he is now receiving is continued.
        In that state of affairs the medical men in charge of Anthony Bland’s
case formed the view, which was supported by his parents, that no useful
purpose was to be served by continuing that medical care and that it was
appropriate to stop the artificial feeding and other measures aimed at
prolonging his existence. Since, however, there were doubts as to whether
this course might not constitute a criminal offence, the responsible hospital
authority, the Airedale N.H.S. Trust, sought in the High Court of Justice
declarations designed to resolve these doubts. In the result, declarations on
the lines asked for were granted by judgment of the President of the Family
Division on 19 November 1992. That judgment was affirmed by the Court
of Appeal (Sir Thomas Bingham M.R., Butler-Sloss and Hoffman L.JJ.) on
9 December 1992. The declarations are in these terms:

       "that despite the inability of the defendant to consent thereto the
       plaintiff and the responsible attending physicians :-

       (a)    may lawfully discontinue all life-sustaining treatment and
              medical supportive measures designed to keep the defendant
              alive in his existing persistent vegetative state including the
              termination of ventilation nutrition and hydration by artificial
              means; and

       (b)    may lawfully discontinue and thereafter need not furnish
              medical treatment to the defendant except for the sole purpose
              of enabling him to end his life and die peacefully with the
              greatest dignity and the least of pain suffering and distress;"

Anthony Bland, by the Official Solicitor as his guardian ad litem, now
appeals, with leave given in the Court of Appeal, to your Lordships’ House.
At the hearing of the appeal your Lordships were assisted by submissions
made by Mr. Anthony Lester Q.C., as amicus curiae instructed by the
Treasury Solicitor.

        The broad issue raised by the appeal is stated by the parties to be "In
what circumstances, if ever, can those having a duty to feed an invalid
lawfully stop doing so?" The immediate issue, however, is whether in the
particular circumstances of Anthony Bland’s case those in charge of it would
be acting lawfully if they discontinued the particular measures, including
feeding by nasogastric tube, which are now being used to maintain Anthony
Bland in his existing condition.

        The first point to make is that it is unlawful, so as to constitute both
a tort and the crime of battery, to administer medical treatment to an adult,
who is conscious and of sound mind, without his consent: In In re F. (.Mental
Patient: Sterilisation) [1990] 2 A.C. 1. Such a person is completely at liberty
to decline to undergo treatment, even if the result of his doing so will be that
he will die. This extends to the situation where the person, in anticipation of
his, through one cause or another, entering into a condition such as P.V.S.,

                                     -   2   -
gives clear instructions that in sucli event he is not to be given medical care,
including artificial feeding, designed to keep him alive. The second point is
that it very commonly occurs that a person, due to accident or some other
cause, becomes unconscious and is thus not able to give or withhold consent
to medical treatment. In that situation it is lawful, under the principle of
necessity, for medical men to apply such treatment as in their informed
opinion is in the best interests of the unconscious patient. That is what
happened in the case of Anthony Bland when he was first dealt with by the
emergency services and later taken to hospital.

         The object of medical treatment and care is to benefit the patient. It
may do so by taking steps to prevent the occurrence of illness, or, if an illness
does occur, by taking steps towards curing it. Where an illness or the effects
of an injury cannot be cured, then efforts are directed towards preventing
deterioration or relieving pain and suffering. In Anthony Bland’s case the
first imperative was to prevent him from dying, as he would certainly have
done in the absence of the steps that were taken. If he had died, there can be
no doubt that the cause of this would have been the injuries which he had
suffered. As it was, the steps taken prevented him from dying, and there was
instituted the course of treatment and care which still continues. For a time,
no doubt, there was some hope that he might recover sufficiently for him to
be able to live a life that had some meaning. Some patients who have
suffered damage to the cerebral cortex have, indeed, made a complete
recovery. It all depends on the degree of damage. But sound medical opinion
takes the view that if a P. V.S. patient shows no signs of recovery after six
months, or at most a year, then there is no prospect whatever of any recovery.
There are techniques available which make it possible to ascertain the state of
the cerebral cortex, and in Anthony Bland’s case these indicate that, as
mentioned above, it has degenerated into a mass of watery fluid. The
fundamental question then comes to be whether continuance of the present
regime of treatment and care, more than three years after the injuries that
resulted in the P.V.S., would confer any benefit on Anthony Bland. It is
argued for the respondents, supported by the amicus curiae, that his best
interests favour discontinuance. I feel some doubt about this way of putting
the matter. In In re. F. (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) [1990] 2 A.C. 1 this
House held that it would be lawful to sterilise a female mental patient who
was incapable of giving consent to the procedure. The ground of the decision
was that sterilisation would be in the patient’s best interests because her life
would be fuller and more agreeable if she were sterilised than if she were not.
In In re J. (A Minor) (Wardship: Medical Treatment) [1991] Fam. 33 the
Court of Appeal held it to be lawful to withhold life saving treatment from a
very young child in circumstances where the child’s life, if saved, would be
one irredeemably racked by pain and agony. In both cases it was possible to
make a value judgment as to the consequences to a sensate being of in the one
case withholding and in the other case administering the treatment in question.
In the case of a permanently insensate being, who if continuing to live would
never experience the slightest actual discomfort, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to make any relevant comparison between continued existence and

                                      -   3   -
the absence of it. It is, however, perhaps permissible to say that to an
individual with no cognitive capacity whatever, and no prospect of ever
recovering any such capacity in this world, it must be a matter of complete
indifference whether he lives or dies.

        Where one individual has assumed responsibility for the care of
another who cannot look after himself or herself, whether as a medical
practitioner or otherwise, that responsibility cannot lawfully be shed unless
arrangements are made for the responsibility to be taken over by someone
else. Thus a person having charge of a baby who fails to feed it, so that it
dies, will be guilty at least of manslaughter. The same is true of one having
charge of an adult who is frail and cannot look after herself: Reg. v. Stone
[1977] Q.B. 354. It was argued for the guardian ad litem, by analogy with
that case, that here the doctors in charge of Anthony Bland had a continuing
duty to feed him by means of the nasogastric tube and that if they failed to
carry out that duty they were guilty of manslaughter, if not murder. This was
coupled with the argument that feeding by means of the nasogastric tube was
not medical treatment at all, but simply feeding indistinguishable from feeding
by normal means. As regards this latter argument, I am of opinion that
regard should be had to the whole regime, including the artificial feeding,
which at present keeps Anthony Bland alive. That regime amounts to medical
treatment and care, and it is incorrect to direct attention exclusively to the fact
that nourishment is being provided. In any event, the administration of
nourishment by the means adopted involves the application of a medical
technique. But it is, of course, true that in general it would not be lawful for
a medical practitioner who assumed responsibility for the care of an
unconscious patient simply to give up treatment in circumstances where
continuance of it would confer some benefit on the patient. On the other hand
a medical practitioner is under no duty to continue to treat such a patient
where a large body of informed and responsible medical opinion is to the
effect that no benefit at all would be conferred by continuance. Existence in
a vegetative state with no prospect of recovery is by that opinion regarded as
not being a benefit, and that, if not unarguably correct, at least forms a proper
basis for the decision to discontinue treatment and care: Bolam v. Friem
Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1 W.L.R. 582.

        Given that existence in the persistent vegetative state is not a benefit
to the patient, it remains to consider whether the principle of the sanctity of
life, which it is the concern of the State, and the judiciary as one of the arms
of the State, to maintain, requires this House to hold that the judgment of the
Court of Appeal was incorrect. In my opinion it does not. The principle is
not an absolute one. It does not compel a medical practitioner on pain of
criminal sanctions to treat a patient, who will die if he does not, contrary to
the express wishes of the patient. It does not authorise forcible feeding of
prisoners on hunger strike. It does not compel the temporary keeping alive
of patients who are terminally ill where to do so would merely prolong their
suffering. On the other hand it forbids the taking of active measures to cut
short the life of a terminally ill patient. In my judgment it does no violence

                                       -   4   -
to the principle to hold that it is lawful to cease to give medical treatment and
care to a P.V.S. patient who has been in that state for over three years,
considering that to do so involves invasive manipulation of the patient’s body
to which he has not consented and which confers no benefit upon him.

        Although this case falls to be decided by the law of England, it is of
some comfort to observe that in other common law jurisdictions, particularly
in the United States where there are many cases on the subject, the courts
have with near unanimity concluded that it is not unlawful to discontinue
medical treatment and care, including artificial feeding, of P.V.S. patients and
others in similar conditions.

        The decision whether or not the continued treatment and care of a
P.V.S. patient confers any benefit on him is essentially one for the
practitioners in charge of his case. The question is whether any decision that
it does not and that the treatment and care should therefore be discontinued
should as a matter of routine be brought before the Family Division for
endorsement or the reverse. The view taken by the President of the Family
Division and the Court of Appeal was that it should, at least for the time
being and until a body of experience and practice has been built up which
might obviate the need for application in every case. As the Master of the
Rolls said, this would be in the interests of the protection of patients, the
protection of doctors, the reassurance of the patients’ families and the
reassurance of the public. I respectfully agree that these considerations render
desirable the practice of application.

       My Lords, for these reasons, which are substantially the same as those
set out in the speech to be delivered by my noble and learned friend Lord
Goff of Chieveley, with which I agree/1 would dismiss the appeal/?



LORD GOFF OF CHIEVELEY

My Lords,

        The facts of the present case are not in dispute. They are fully set out
in the judgment of Sir Stephen Brown P at first instance; they have been
admirably summarised in the judgment of Sir Thomas Bingham M.R. in the
Court of Appeal; and they have been summarised yet again in the agreed
statement of facts and issues prepared by counsel for the assistance of the
Appellate Committee of your Lordships’ House. They reveal a tragic state of
affairs, which has evoked great sympathy both for Anthony Bland himself,
and for his devoted family, and great respect for all those who have been
responsible for his medical treatment and care since he was admitted to
hospital following the terrible injuries which he suffered at Hillsborough in
April 1989. For present purposes, I propose simply to adopt the sympathetic
and economical summary of the Master of the Rolls which, for convenience
of reference, I will now incorporate into this opinion.

      "Mr Anthony David Bland, then aged 17 , went to the Hillsborough
      Ground on 15 April 1989 to support the Liverpool Football Club. In
      the course of the disaster which occurred on that day, his lungs were
      crushed and punctured and the supply of oxygen to his brain was
      interrupted. As a result, he suffered catastrophic and irreversible
      damage to the higher centres of the brain. The condition from which
      he suffers, and has suffered since April 1989, is known as a persistent
      vegetative state (abbreviated to P.V.S.).

      "P.V.S. is a recognised medical condition quite distinct from other
      conditions sometimes known as "irreversible coma", "the Guillain-
      Barre syndrome", "the locked-in syndrome" and "brain death". Its
      distinguishing characteristics are that the brain stem remains alive and
      functioning while the cortex of the brain loses its function and activity.
      Thus the P.V.S. patient continues to breathe unaided and his digestion
      continues to function. But although his eyes are open, he cannot see.
      He cannot hear. Although capable of reflex movement, particularly in
      response to painful stimuli, the patient is incapable of voluntary
      movement and can feel no pain. He cannot taste or smell. He cannot
      speak or communicate in any way. He has no cognitive function and
      can thus feel no emotion, whether pleasure or distress. The absence
      of cerebral function is not a matter of surmise; it can be scientifically
      demonstrated. The space which the brain should occupy is full of
      watery fluid.

      "The medical witnesses in this case include some of the outstanding
      authorities in the country on this condition. All are agreed on the
      diagnosis. All are agreed on the prognosis also: there is no hope of
      any improvement or recovery. One witness of great experience
      describe Mr Bland as the worst P.V.S. case he had every seen.

      "Mr Bland lies in bed in the Airedale General Hospital, his eyes open,
      his mind vacant, his limbs crooked and taut. He cannot swallow, and
      so cannot be spoon-fed without a high risk that food will be inhaled
      into the lung. He is fed by means of a tube, threaded through the nose
      and down into the stomach, through which liquified food is
      mechanically pumped. His bowels are evacuated by enema. His
      bladder is drained by catheter. He has been subject to repeated bouts
      of infection affecting his urinary tract and chest, which have been
      treated with antibiotics. Drugs have also been administered to reduce
      salivation, to reduce muscle tone and severe sweating and to encourage
      gastric emptying. A tracheostomy tube has been inserted and
      removed.         Urino-genitary problems have required surgical
      intervention.
       "A patient in this condition requires very skilled nursing and close
       medical attention if he is to survive. The Airedale National Health
       Service Trust have, it is agreed, provided both to Mr Bland.
       Introduction of the nasogastric tube is itself a task of some delicacy
       even in an insensate patient. Thereafter it must be monitored to ensure
       it has not become dislodged and to control inflammation, irritation and
       infection to which it may give arise. The catheter must be monitored:
       it may cause infection (and has repeatedly done so); it has had to be
       re-sited, in an operation performed without anaesthetic. The mouth
       and other parts of the body must be constantly tended. The patient
       must be repeatedly moved to avoid pressure sores. Without skilled
       nursing and close medical attention a P.V.S. patient will quickly
       succumb to infection. With such care, a young and otherwise healthy
       patient may live for many years.

       "At no time before the disaster did Mr Bland give any indication of his
       wishes should he find himself in such a condition. It is not a topic
       most adolescents address. After careful thought his family agreed that
       the feeding tube should be removed and felt that this was what Mr
       Bland would have wanted. His father said of his son in evidence: ‘He
       certainly wouldn’t want to be left like that’. He could see no
       advantage at all in continuation of the current treatment. He was not
       cross-examined. It was accordingly with the concurrence of Mr
       Bland’s family, as well as the consultant in charge of his case and the
       support of two independent doctors, that the Airedale N.H.S. Trust as
       plaintiff in this action applied to the Family Division of the High Court
       for declarations that they might

       ‘(1)   . . . lawfully discontinue all life-sustaining treatment and
              medical support measures designed to keep AB [Mr Bland]
              alive in his existing persistent vegetative state including the
              termination of ventilation nutrition and hydration by artificial
              means; and

       (2)    . . . lawfully discontinue and thereafter need not furnish
              medical treatment to AB except for the sole purpose of
              enabling AB to end his life and die peacefully with the greatest
              dignity and the least of pain suffering and distress.’

       "After a hearing in which he was assisted by an amicus curiae
       instructed by the Attorney General, the President of the Family
       Division made these declarations (subject to a minor change of
       wording) on 19 November 1992. He declined to make further
       declarations which were also sought."

        The Official Solicitor, acting on behalf of Anthony Bland, appealed
against that decision to the Court of Appeal, who dismissed the appeal. Now,
with the leave of the Court of Appeal, the Official Solicitor has appealed to
your Lordships’ House.

        In so acting, the Official Solicitor has ensured that all relevant matters
of fact and law are properly investigated and scrutinised before any
irrevocable decision is taken affecting Anthony Bland, for whom he acts as
guardian ad litem. This function was performed by Mr James Munby, Q.C.,
who appeared before your Lordships as he did before the courts below; and
he made submissions in the form of a series of propositions any of which, if
accepted, would preclude the grant of the declarations granted by the learned
President. Like the courts below, I have come to the conclusion that I am
unable to accept Mr Munby’s submissions; but I have nevertheless found
them to be of great assistance in that they have compelled me to think more
deeply about the applicable principles of law and, I hope, to formulate those
principles more accurately. Your Lordships were also fortunate to have the
assistance of Mr Anthony Lester, Q.C., appearing as amicus curiae, instructed
by the Treasury Solicitor, and of the thoughtful argument of Mr Francis Q.C.,
for the respondents.

        On one point there was no disagreement between counsel appearing
before your Lordships. This was that proceedings for declaratory relief of the
kind considered by this House in In re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) [1990]
2 A.C. 1 provided the most appropriate means by which authoritative
guidance could be provided for the respondents to the appeal, the Airedale
N.H.S. Trust, and for Dr. Howe who has Anthony Bland in his care, whose
wish it is, in agreement with Anthony’s parents, to discontinue the artificial
feeding of Anthony, with the inevitable result that, within one or two weeks,
he will die. There has therefore been no contested argument about the
appropriateness of the declaratory remedy in cases such as these, which are
in fact concerned with the question whether in the particular circumstances
those who discontinue life support (here artificial feeding) will commit a civil
wrong or a criminal offence. In In re F, the question arose whether it would
be lawful for doctors to sterilise an adult woman of unsound mind. In that
case, this House was deeply concerned to discover that it was common ground
between the parties that, in the case of adult persons of unsound mind, the
parens patriae jurisdiction of the courts had been revoked with the effect that
the courts could no longer exercise their jurisdiction to give consent on behalf
of such persons. On that occasion Mr Munby, who there as here was
instructed by the Official Solicitor, was invited to assist this House by
advancing such arguments as could be advanced that the jurisdiction had not
been abolished. At the end of the argument, your Lordships’ House came
reluctantly to the conclusion that the jurisdiction no longer existed; but,
dismayed by the possibility that the courts might be powerless to provide the
necessary guidance to the medical profession in that case, this House had
recourse to declaratory relief for that purpose. Speaking for myself, I remain
of the opinion that this conclusion was entirely justified.        Of course, I
recognise that strong warnings have been given against the civil courts
usurping the function of the criminal courts, and it has been authoritatively

                                      -   8   -
stated that a declaration as to the lawfulness or otherwise of future conduct is
"no bar to a criminal prosecution, no matter the authority of the court which
grants it": see Imperial Tobacco Ltd. v. Attorney General [1981] A.C.718,
741, per Viscount Dilhome, and see also p. 752, per Lord Lane. But it is
plain that the jurisdiction exists to grant such a declaration, and on occasion
that jurisdiction has been exercised, as for example by your Lordships’ House
in Royal College of Nursing of the United Kingdom v. Department o f Health
and Social Security [1981] A.C. 800. It would, in my opinion, be a
deplorable state of affairs if no authoritative guidance could be given to the
medical profession in a case such as the present, so that a doctor would be
compelled either to act contrary to the principles of medical ethics established
by his professional body or to risk a prosecution for murder. As Compton J.
said in Barber v. Superior Court o f State of California (1983) 195 Cal. Rptr.
484, 486 (1983), . . . "a murder prosecution is a poor way to design an
ethical and moral code for doctors who are faced with decisions concerning
the use of costly and extraordinary ’life support’ equipment". In practice,
authoritative guidance in circumstances such as these should in normal
circumstances inhibit prosecution or, if (contrary to all expectation) criminal
proceedings were launched, justify the Attorney General in entering a nolle
prosequi. In the present case, it is to be remembered that an amicus curiae
has been instructed by the Treasury Solicitor; yet no representations have
been made on behalf of the Attorney General that declaratory relief is here
inappropriate. In expressing this opinion, I draw comfort from the fact that
declaratory rulings have been employed for the same purpose in other
common law jurisdictions, such as the United States of America (in a number
of cases, of which the most recent appears to be Re Gardner 534 A 2d. 947,
949 (1987)); New Zealand (Re J.H.L. (unreported) 13 August, 1992
transcript pp. 10, 12, 16, 39-40, per Thomas J., to whom submissions had
been addressed upon the point); and South Africa (Clarke v. Hurst
(unreported), 30 July 1992, Supreme Court of South Africa, Durban and
Coast Local Division, per Thirion J. transcript pp. 8-16, 86).

        The central issue in the present case has been aptly stated by the
Master of the Rolls to be whether artificial feeding and antibiotic drugs may
lawfully be withheld from an insensate patient with no hope of recovery when
it is known that if that is done the patient will shortly thereafter die. The
Court of Appeal, like the President, answered this question generally in the
affirmative, and (in the declarations made or approved by them) specifically
also in the affirmative in relation to Anthony Bland. I find myself to be in
agreement with the conclusions so reached by all the judges below,
substantially for the reasons given by them. But the matter is of such
importance that I propose to express my reasons in my own words.

        I start with the simple fact that, in law, Anthony is still alive. It is
true that his condition is such that it can be described as a living death; but he
is nevertheless still alive. This is because, as a result of developments in
modem medical technology, doctors no longer associate death exclusively with
breathing and heart beat, and it has come to be accepted that death occurs

                                      -   9   -
when the brain, and in particular the brain stem, has been destroyed (see
Professor Ian Kennedy’s Paper entitled ”Switching off Life Support Machines-.
The Legal Implications” reprinted in Treat Me Right, Essays in Medical Law
and Ethics, (1988)), especially at pp. 351-2, and the material there cited).
There has been no dispute on this point in the present case, and it is
unnecessary for me to consider it further. The evidence is that Anthony’s
brain stem is still alive and functioning and it follows that, in the present state
of medical science, he is still alive and should be so regarded as a matter of
law.

         It is on this basis that I turn to the applicable principles of law. Here,
the fundamental principle is the principle of the sanctity of human life - a
principle long recognised not only in our own society but also in most, if not
all, civilised societies throughout the modem world, as is indeed evidenced by
its recognition both in article 2 of the European Convention of Human Rights,
and in article 6 of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights.

        But this principle, fundamental though it is, is not absolute. Indeed
there are circumstances in which it is lawful to take another man’s life, for
example by a lawful act of self-defence, or (in the days when capital
punishment was acceptable in our society) by lawful execution. We are not
however concerned with cases such as these. We are concerned with
circumstances in which it may be lawful to withhold from a patient medical
treatment or care by means of which his life may be prolonged. But here too
there is no absolute rule that the patient’s life must be prolonged by such
treatment or care, if available, regardless of the circumstances.

        First, it is established that the principle of self-determination requires
that respect must be given to the wishes of the patient, so that if an adult
patient of sound mind refuses, however unreasonably, to consent to treatment
or care by which his life would or might be prolonged, the doctors responsible
for his care must give effect to his wishes, even though they do not consider
it to be in his best interests to do so (see Schloendorffv. Society of New York
Hospital 105 N.E. 92, 93, per Cardozo J. (1914); S. v. McC. (Orse S.) and
M (D.S. Intervener)-, W v. W [1972] A.C. 24, 43, ger Lord Reid; and
Sidaway v. Board o f Governors of the Bethlem Royal Hospital and the
Maudsley Hospital [1985] A.C. 871, 882, per Lord Scarman). To this extent,
the principle of the sanctity of human life must yield to the principle of self-
determination (see Court of Appeal Transcript in the present case, at p. 38F
per Hoffmann L.J.), and, for present purposes perhaps more important, the
doctor’s duty to act in the best interests of his patient must likewise be
qualified. On this basis, it has been held that a patient of sound mind may,
if properly informed, require that life support should be discontinued: see
Nancy B. v. Hotel Dieu de Quebec (1992) 86 D.L.R. (4th) 385. Moreover
the same principle applies where the patient’s refusal to give his consent has
been expressed at an earlier date, before he became unconscious or otherwise
incapable of communicating it; though in such circumstances especial care


                                      -   10   -
may be necessary to ensure that the prior refusal of consent is still properly
to be regarded as applicable in the circumstances which have subsequently
occurred (see, e.g. In re T. (Adult: Refusal o f treatment) [1992] 3 W.L.R.
782). I wish to add that, in cases of this kind, there is no question of the
patient having committed suicide, nor therefore of the doctor having aided or
abetted him in doing so. It is simply that the patient has, as he is entitled to
do, declined to consent to treatment which might or would have the effect of
prolonging his life, and the doctor has, in accordance with his duty, complied
with his patient’s wishes.

        But in many cases not only may the patient be in no condition to be
able to say whether or not he consents to the relevant treatment or care, but
also he may have given no prior indication of his wishes with regard to it. In
the case of a child who is a ward of court, the court itself will decide whether
medical treatment should be provided in the child’s best interests, taking into
account medical opinion. But the court cannot give its consent on behalf of
an adult patient who is incapable of himself deciding whether or not to consent
to treatment. I am of the opinion that there is nevertheless no absolute
obligation upon the doctor who has the patient in his care to prolong his life,
regardless of the circumstances. Indeed, it would be most startling, and could
lead to the most adverse and cruel effects upon the patient, if any such
absolute rule were held to exist. It is scarcely consistent with the primacy
given to the principle of self-determination in those cases in which the patient
of sound mind has declined to give his consent, that the law should provide
no means of enabling treatment to be withheld in appropriate circumstances
where the patient is in no condition to indicate, if that was his wish, that he
did not consent to it. The point was put forcibly in the judgment of the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in Superintendent of Belchertown
State School v. Saikewicz (1977) 370 N.E. 2d. 417, 428, as follows:

       "To presume that the incompetent person must always be subjected to
       what many rational and intelligent persons may decline is to
       downgrade the status of the incompetent person by placing a lesser
       value on his intrinsic human worth and vitality."

        I must however stress, at this point, that the law draws a crucial
distinction between cases in which a doctor decides not to provide, or to
continue to provide, for his patient treatment or care which could or might
prolong his life, and those in which he decides, for example by administering
a lethal drug, actively to bring his patient’s life to an end. As I have already
indicated, the former may be lawful, either because the doctor is giving effect
to his patient’s wishes by withholding the treatment or care, or even in certain
circumstances in which (on principles which I shall describe) the patient is
incapacitated from stating whether or not he gives his consent. But it is not
lawftil for a doctor to administer a drug to his patient to bring about his death,
even though that course is prompted by a humanitarian desire to end his
suffering, however great that suffering may be:                see Reg. v. Cox
(Unreported), Ognall J., Winchester Crown Court, 18 September 1992. So

                                      -   11   -
to act is to cross the Rubicon w-uch runs between on the one hand the care of
the living patient and on the other hand euthanasia - actively causing his death
to avoid or to end his suffering. Euthanasia is not lawful at common law. It
is of course well known that there are many responsible members of our
society who believe that euthanasia should be made lawful; but that result
could, I believe, only be achieved by legislation which expresses the
democratic will that so fundamental a change should be made in our law, and
can, if enacted, ensure that such legalised killing can only be carried out
subject to appropriate supervision and control. It is true that the drawing of
this distinction may lead to a charge of hypocrisy; because it can be asked
why, if the doctor, by discontinuing treatment, is entitled in consequence to
let his patient die, it should not be lawful to put him out of his misery straight
away, in a more humane manner, by a lethal injection, rather than let him
linger on in pain until he dies. But the law does not feel able to authorise
euthanasia, even in circumstances such as these; for once euthanasia is
recognised as lawful in these circumstances, it is difficult to see any logical
basis for excluding it in others.

        At the heart of this distinction lies a theoretical question. Why is it
that the doctor who gives his patient a lethal injection which kills him commits
an unlawful act and indeed is guilty of murder, whereas a doctor who, by
discontinuing life support, allows his patient to die, may not act unlawfully -
and will not do so, if he commits no breach of duty to his patient? Professor
Glanville Williams has suggested (see his Textbook o f Criminal Law, 2nd ed.,
p. 282) that the reason is that what the doctor does when he switches off a life
support machine ‘is in substance not an act but an omission to struggle, and
that ‘the omission is not a breach of duty by the doctor because he is not
obliged to continue in a hopeless case’.

         I agree that the doctor’s conduct in discontinuing life support can
properly be categorised as an omission. It is true that it may be difficult to
describe what the doctor actually does as an omission, for example where he
takes some positive step to bring the life support to an end. But
discontinuation of life support is, for present purposes, no different from not
initiating life support in the first place. In each case, the doctor is simply
allowing his patient to die in the sense that he is desisting from taking a step
which might, in certain circumstances, prevent his patient from dying as a
result of his pre-existing condition; and as a matter of general principle an
omission such as this will not be unlawful unless it constitutes a breach of
duty to the patient. I also agree that the doctor’s conduct is to be
differentiated from that of, for example, an interloper who maliciously
switches off a life support machine because, although the interloper may
perform exactly the same act as the doctor who discontinues life support, his
doing so constitutes interference with the life-prolonging treatment then being
administered by the doctor. Accordingly, whereas the doctor, in discontinuing
life support, is simply allowing his patient to die of his pre-existing condition,
the interloper is actively intervening to stop the doctor from prolonging the
patient’s life, and such conduct cannot possibly be categorised as an omission.

                                      -   12   -
        The distinction appears, therefore, to be useful in the present context
in that it can be invoked to explain how discontinuance of life support can be
differentiated from ending a patient’s life by a lethal injection. But in the end
the reason for that difference is that, whereas the law considers that
discontinuance of life support may be consistent with the doctor’s duty to care
for his patient, it does not, for reasons of policy, consider that it forms any
part of his duty to give his patient a lethal injection to put him out of his
agony.


        I return to the patient who, because for example he is of unsound mind
or has been rendered unconscious by accident or by illness, is incapable of
stating whether or not he consents to treatment or care.                    In such
circumstances, it is now established that a doctor may lawfully treat such a
patient if he acts in his best interests, and indeed that, if the patient is already
in his care, he is under a duty so to treat him: see In re F [1990] 2 A.C. 1,
in which the legal principles governing treatment in such circumstances were
stated by this House. For my part I can see no reason why, as a matter of
principle, a decision by a doctor whether or not to initiate, or to continue to
provide, treatment or care which could or might have the effect of prolonging
such a patient’s life, should not be governed by the same fundamental
principle. Of course, in the great majority of cases, the best interests of the
patient are likely to require that treatment of this kind, if available, should be
given to a patient. But this may not always be so. To take a simple example
given by Thomas J. in Re J.H.L. (Unreported) (High Court of New Zealand)
13 August 1992, at p. 35), to whose judgment in that case I wish to pay
tribute, it cannot be right that a doctor, who has under his care a patient
suffering painfully from terminal cancer, should be under an absolute
obligation to perform upon him major surgery to abate another condition
which, if unabated, would or might shorten his life still further. The doctor
who is caring for such a patient cannot, in my opinion, be under an absolute
obligation to prolong his life by any means available to him, regardless of the
quality of the patient’s life. Common humanity requires otherwise, as do
medical ethics and good medical practice accepted in this country and
overseas. As I see it, the doctor’s decision whether or not to take any such
step must (subject to his patient’s ability to give or withhold his consent) be
made in the best interests of the patient. It is this principle too which, in my
opinion, underlies the established rule that a doctor may, when caring for a
patient who is, for example, dying of cancer, lawfully administer painkilling
drugs despite the fact that he knows that an incidental effect of that application
will be to abbreviate the patient’s life. Such a decision may properly be made
as part of the care of the living patient, in his best interests; and, on this
basis, the treatment will be lawful. Moreover, where the doctor’s treatment
of his patient is lawful, the patient’s death will be regarded in law as
exclusively caused by the injury or disease to which his condition is
attributable.
         It is of course the development of modem medical technology, and in
particular the development of life support systems, which has rendered cases
such as the present so much more relevant than in the past. Even so, where
(for example) a patient is brought into hospital in such a condition that,
without the benefit of a life support system, he will not continue to live, the
decision has to be made whether or not to give him that benefit, if available.
That decision can only be made in the best interests of the patient. No doubt,
his best interests will ordinarily require that he should be placed on a life
support system as soon as necessary, if only to make an accurate assessment
of his condition and a prognosis for the future. But if he neither recovers
sufficiently to be taken off it nor dies, the question will ultimately arise
whether he should be kept on it indefinitely. As I see it, that question
(assuming the continued availability of the system) can only be answered by
reference to the best interests of the patient himself, having regard to
established medical practice. Indeed, if the justification for treating a patient
who lacks the capacity to consent lies in the fact that the treatment is provided
in his best interests, it must follow that the treatment may, and indeed
ultimately should, be discontinued where it is no longer in his best interests
to provide it. The question which lies at the heart of the present case is, as
I see it, whether on that principle the doctors responsible for the treatment and
care of Anthony Bland can justifiably discontinue the process of artificial
feeding upon which the prolongation of his life depends.

         It is crucial for the understanding of this question that the question
itself should be correctly formulated. The question is not whether the doctor
should take a course which will kill his patient, or even take a course which
has the effect of accelerating his death. The question is whether the doctor
should or should not continue to provide his patient with medical treatment or
care which, if continued, will prolong his patient’s life. The question is
sometimes put in striking or emotional terms, which can be misleading. For
example, in the case of a life support system, it is sometimes asked: Should
a doctor be entitled to switch it off, or to pull the plug? And then it is asked:
Can it be in the best interests of the patient that a doctor should be able to
switch the life support system off, when this will inevitably result in the
patient’s death? Such an approach has rightly been criticised as misleading,
for example by Professor Ian Kennedy (in his paper in Treat Me Right, Essays
in Medical Law and Ethics (1988), and by Thomas J. in Re J.H.L. at pp. 21-
22. This is because the question is not whether it is in the best interests of the
patient that he should die. The question is whether it is in the best interests
of the patient that his life should be prolonged by the continuance of this form
of medical treatment or care.

        The correct formulation of the question is of particular importance in
a case such as the present, where the patient is totally unconscious and where
there is no hope whatsoever of any amelioration of his condition. In
circumstances such as these, it may be difficult to say that it is in his best
interests that the treatment should be ended. But if the question is asked, as
in my opinion it should be, whether it is in his best interests that treatment

                                      -   14   -
which has the effect of artificially prolonging his life should be continued, that
question can sensibly be answered to the effect that it is not in his best
interests to do so.

         Even so, a distinction may be drawn between (1) cases in which,
having regard to all the circumstances (including, for example, the intrusive
nature of the treatment, the hazards involved in it, and the very poor quality
of the life which may be prolonged for the patient if the treatment is
successful), it may be judged not to be in the best interests of the patient to
initiate or continue life-prolonging treatment, and (2) cases such as the present
in which, so far as the living patient is concerned, the treatment is of no
benefit to him because he is totally unconscious and there is no prospect of
any improvement in his condition. In both classes of case, the decision
whether or not to withhold treatment must be made in the best interests of the
patient. In the first class, however, the decision has to be made by weighing
the relevant considerations. For example, in In re J. (A Minor) (Wardship:
Medical Treatment) [1991] Fam. 33, the approach to be adopted in that case
was stated, at p. 55, by Taylor L.J. as follows:

       "I consider the correct approach is for the court to judge the quality of
       life the child would have to endure if given the treatment and decide
       whether in all the circumstances such a life would be so afflicted as to
       be intolerable to that child."

With this class of case, however, your Lordships are not directly concerned
in the present case; and though I do not wish to be understood to be casting
any doubt upon any of the reported cases on the subject, nevertheless I must
record that argument was not directed specifically towards these cases, and for
that reason I do not intend to express any opinion about the precise principles
applicable in relation to them.

        By contrast, in the latter class of case, of which the present case
provides an example, there is in reality no weighing operation to be
performed. Here the condition of the patient, who is totally unconscious and
in whose condition there is no prospect of any improvement, is such that life-
prolonging treatment is properly regarded as being, in medical terms, useless.
As the Master of the Rolls pointed out in the present case, medical treatment
or care may be provided for a number of different purposes. It may be
provided, for example, as an aid to diagnosis; for the treatment of physical
or mental injury or illness; to alleviate pain or distress, or to make the
patient’s condition more tolerable. Such purposes may include prolonging the
patient’s life, for example to enable him to survive during diagnosis and
treatment. But for my part I cannot see that medical treatment is appropriate
or requisite simply to prolong a patient’s life, when such treatment has no
therapeutic purpose of any kind, as where it is futile because the patient is
unconscious and there is no prospect of any improvement in his condition.
It is reasonable also that account should be taken of the invasiveness of the
treatment and of the indignity to which, as the present case shows, a person

                                     -   15   -
has to be subjected if his life is prolonged by artificial means, which must
cause considerable distress to his family - a distress which reflects not only
their own feelings but their perception of the situation of their relative who is
being kept alive. But in the end, in a case such as the present, it is the futility
of the treatment which justifies its termination. I do not consider that, in
circumstances such as these, a doctor is required to initiate or to continue life-
prolonging treatment or care in the best interests of his patient. It follows that
no such duty rests upon the respondents, or upon Dr Howe, in the case of
Anthony Bland, whose condition is in reality no more than a living death, and
for whom such treatment or care would, in medical terms, be futile.

        In the present case, it is proposed that the doctors should be entitled
to discontinue both the artificial feeding of Anthony, and the use of
antibiotics. It is plain from the evidence that Anthony, in his present
condition, is very prone to infection and that, over some necessarily uncertain
but not very long period of time, he will succumb to infection which, if
unchecked, will spread and cause his death. But the effect of discontinuing
the artificial feeding will be that he will inevitably die within one or two
weeks.

        Objection can be made to the latter course of action on the ground that
 Anthony will thereby be starved to death, and that this T,’ould constitute a
breach of the duty to feed him which must form an essential part of the duty
which every person owes to another in his care. But here again it is necessary
to analyse precisely what this means in the case of Anthony. Anthony is not
merely incapable of feeding himself. He is incapable of swallowing, and
therefore of eating or drinking in the normal sense of those words. There is
overwhelming evidence that, in the medical profession, artificial feeding is
regarded as a form of medical treatment; and even if it is not strictly medical
treatment, it must form part of the medical care of the patient. Indeed, the
function of artificial feeding in the case of Anthony, by means of a nasogastric
tube, is to provide a form of life support analogous to that provided by a
ventilator which artificially breathes air in and out of the lungs of a patient
incapable of breathing normally, thereby enabling oxygen to reach the
bloodstream. The same principles must apply in either case when the question
is asked whether the doctor in charge may lawfully discontinue the life-
sustaining treatment or care; and if in either case the treatment is futile in the
sense I have described, it can properly be concluded that it is no longer in the
best interests of the patient to continue it. It is true that, in the case of
discontinuance of artificial feeding, it can be said that the patient will as a
result starve to death; and this may bring before our eyes the vision of an
ordinary person slowly dying of hunger, and suffering all the pain and distress
associated with such a death. But here it is clear from the evidence that no
such pain or distress will be suffered by Anthony, who can feel nothing at all.
Furthermore, we are told that the outward symptoms of dying in such a way,
which might otherwise cause distress to the nurses who care for him or to
members of his family who visit him, can be suppressed by means of
sedatives. In these circumstances, I can see no ground in the present case for

                                      -   16   -
refusing the declarations applied for simply because the course of action
proposed involves the discontinuance of artificial feeding.

        In In re F [1990] 2 A.C. 1 it was stated that, where a doctor provides
treatment for a person who is incapacitated from saying whether or not he
consents to it, the doctor must, when deciding on the form of treatment, act
in accordance with a responsible and competent body of relevant professional
opinion, on the principles set down in Bolam v. Friem Hospital Management
Committee [1957] 1 W.L.R. 582. In my opinion, this principle must equally
be applicable to decisions to initiate, or to discontinue, life support, as it is to
other forms of treatment. However, in a matter of such importance and
sensitivity as discontinuance of life support, it is to be expected that guidance
will be provided for the profession; and, on the evidence in the present case,
such guidance is for a case such as the present to be found in a Discussion
Paper on Treatment of Patients in Persistent Vegetative State, issued in
September 1992 by the Medical Ethics Committee of the British Medical
Association. Anybody reading this substantial paper will discover for himself
the great care with which this topic is being considered by the profession. Mr
Francis, for the respondents, drew to the attention of the Appellate Committee
four safeguards in particular which, in the committee’s opinion, should be
observed before discontinuing life support for such patients. They are:

        (1)    Every effort should be made at rehabilitation for at least six
months after the injury; (2) The diagnosis of irreversible PVS should not be
considered confirmed until at least twelve months after the injury, with the
effect that any decision to withhold life-prolonging treatment will be delayed
for that period; (3) The diagnosis should be agreed by two other independent
doctors; and (4) Generally, the wishes of the patient’s immediate family will
be given great weight.

        In fact, the views expressed by the Committee on the subject of
consultation with the relatives of PVS patients are consistent with the opinion
expressed by your Lordships’House in In re F [1990] 2 A.C. 1 that it is good
practice for the doctor to consult relatives. Indeed the committee recognises
that, in the case of PVS patients, the relatives themselves will require a high
degree of support and attention. But the committee is firmly of the opinion
that the relatives’ views cannot be determinative of the treatment. Indeed, if
that were not so, the relatives would be able to dictate to the doctors what is
in the best interests of the patient, which cannot be right. Even so, a decision
to withhold life-prolonging treatment, such as artificial feeding, must require
close co-operation with those close to the patient; and it is recognised that,
in practice, their views and the opinions of doctors will coincide in many
cases.

       Study of this document left me in no doubt that, if a doctor treating a
PVS patient acts in accordance with the medical practice now being evolved
by the Medical Ethics Committee of the B.M.A., he will be acting with the
benefit of guidance from a responsible and competent body of relevant

                                      -   17   -
professional opinion, as required by the Bolam test [1957] 1 W.L.R. 582. I
also feel that those who are concerned that a matter of life and death, such as
 is involved in a decision to withhold life support in case of this kind, should
be left to the doctors, would do well to study this paper. The truth is that, in
the course of their work, doctors frequently have to make decisions which
may affect the continued survival of their patients, and are in reality far more
experienced in matters of this kind than are the judges. It is nevertheless the
function of the judges to state the legal principles upon which the lawfulness
of the actions of doctors depend; but in the end the decisions to be made in
individual cases must rest with the doctors themselves.                 In these
circumstances, what is required is a sensitive understanding by both the judges
and the doctors of each other’s respective functions, and in particular a
determination by the judges not merely to understand the problems facing the
medical profession in cases of this kind, but also to regard their professional
standards with respect. Mutual understanding between the doctors and the
judges is the best way to ensure the evolution of a sensitive and sensible legal
framework for the treatment and care of patients, with a sound ethical base,
in the interest of the patients themselves. This is a topic to which I will return
at the end of this opinion, when I come to consider the extent to which the
view of the court should be sought, as a matter of practice, in cases such as
the present.

        I wish however to refer at this stage to the approach adopted in most
American courts, under which the court seeks, in a case in which the patient
is incapacitated from expressing any view on the question whether life-
prolonging treatment should be withheld in the relevant circumstances, to
determine what decision the patient himself would have made had he been able
to do so. This is called the substituted judgment test, and it generally involves
a detailed inquiry into the patient’s views and preferences: see, e.g., Re
Quinlan (1976) 355 A. 2d 647, and Superintendent of Belchertown State
School v. Saikewicz 370 N.E. 2d 417. In later cases concerned with PVS
patients it has been held that, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence
of the patient’s wishes, the surrogate decision-maker has to implement as far
as possible the decision which the incompetent patient would make if he was
competent. However, accepting on this point the submission of Mr Lester,
I do not consider that any such test forms part of English law in relation to
incompetent adults, on whose behalf nobody has power to give consent to
medical treatment. Certainly, in In re F [1990] 2 A.C. 1 your Lordships’
House adopted a straightforward test based on the best interests of the patient;
and I myself do not see why the same test should not be applied in the case
of PVS patients, where the question is whether life-prolonging treatment
should be withheld. This was also the opinion of Thomas J. in Re J.H .L., a
case concerned with the discontinuance of life support provided by ventilator
to a patient suffering from the last stages of incurable Guillain-Barre
syndrome.        Of course, consistent with the best interests test, anything
relevant to the application of the test may be taken into account; and if the
personality of the patient is relevant to the application of the test (as it may be
in cases where the various relevant factors have to be weighed), it may be

                                      -   18   -
taken into account, as was done in In re J (A Minor) (Wardship: Medical
Treatment) [1991] Fam. 33. But where the question is whether life support
should be withheld from a PVS patient, it is difficult to see how the
personality of the patient can be relevant, though it may be of comfort to his
relatives if they believe, as in the present case, and indeed may well be so in
many other cases, that the patient would not have wished his life to be
artificially prolonged if he was totally unconscious and there was no hope of
improvement in his condition.

        I wish to add however that, like the courts below, I have derived
assistance and support from decisions in a number of American jurisdictions
to the effect that it is lawful to discontinue life-prolonging treatment in the
case of PVS patients where there is no prospect of improvement in their
condition. Furthermore, I wish to refer to the section in Working Paper No.
28 (1982) on Euthanasia, Aiding Suicide and Cessation of Treatment published
by the Law Reform Commission of Canada concerned with cessation of
treatment, to which I also wish to express my indebtedness. I believe the
legal principles as I have stated them to be broadly consistent with the
conclusions summarised at pp. 65-66 of the Working Paper, which was
substantially accepted in the Report of the Commission (1983), pp. 32-35.
Indeed, I entertain a strong sense that a community of view on the legal
principles applicable in cases of discontinuing life support is in the course of
development and acceptance throughout the common law world.

         In setting out my understanding of the relevant principles, I have had
very much in mind the submissions advanced by Mr Munby on behalf of the
Official Solicitor, and I believe that I have answered, directly or indirectly,
all his objections to the course now proposed. I do not, therefore, intend any
disrespect to his argument if I do not answer each of his submissions seriatim.
In summary, his two principal arguments were as follows. First, he submitted
that the discontinuance of artificial feeding would constitute an act which
would inevitably cause, and be intended to cause, Anthony’s death; and as
such, it would be unlawful, and indeed criminal. As will be plain from what
I have already said, I cannot accept this proposition. In my opinion, for the
reasons I have already given, there is no longer any duty upon the doctors to
continue with this form of medical treatment or care in his case, and it follows
that it cannot be unlawful to discontinue it. Second, he submitted that
discontinuance of the artificial feeding of Anthony would be a breach of the
doctor’s duty to care for and feed him; and since it will (as it is intended to
do) cause his death, it will necessarily be unlawful. I have considered this
point earlier in this opinion, when I expressed my view that artificial feeding
is, in a case such as the present, no different from life support by a ventilator,
and as such can lawfully be discontinued when it no longer fulfils any
therapeutic purpose. To me, the crucial point in which I found myself
differing from Mr Munby was that I was unable to accept his treating the
discontinuance of artificial feeding in the present case as equivalent to cutting
a mountaineer’s rope, or severing the air pipe of a deep sea diver. Once it
is recognised, as I believe it must be, that the true question is not whether the

                                      -   19   -
doctor should take a course in which he will actively kill his patient, but
rather whether he should continue to provide his patient with medical
treatment or care which, if continued, will prolong his life, then, as I see it,
the essential basis of Mr Munby’s submissions disappears. I wish to add that
I was unable to accept his suggestion that recent decisions show that the law
is proceeding down a "slippery slope", in the sense that the courts are
becoming more and more ready to allow doctors to take steps which will
result in the ending of life. On the contrary, as I have attempted to
demonstrate, the courts are acting within a structure of legal principle, under
which in particular they continue to draw a clear distinction between the
bounds of lawful treatment of a living patient, and unlawful euthanasia.

        I turn finally to the extent to which doctors should, as a matter of
practice, seek the guidance of the court, by way of an application for
declaratory relief, before withholding life-prolonging treatment from a PVS
patient. The President considered that the opinion of the court should be
sought in all cases similar to the present. In the Court of Appeal, the Master
of the Rolls expressed his agreement with the President in the following
words:

       "This was in my respectful view a wise ruling, directed to the
       protection of patients, the protection of doctors, the reassurance of
       patients’ families and the reassurance of the public. The practice
       proposed seems to me desirable. It may very well be that with the
       passage of time a body of experience and practice will build up which
       will obviate the need for application in every case, but for the time
       being I am satisfied that the practice which the President described
       should be followed."

        Before the Appellate Committee, this view was supported both by Mr
Munby, for the Official Solicitor, and by Mr Lester, as amicus curiae. For
the respondents, Mr Francis suggested that an adequate safeguard would be
provided if reference to the court was required in certain specific cases, i.e.
(1) where there was known to be a medical disagreement as to the diagnosis
or prognosis, and (2) problems had arisen with the patient’s relatives -
disagreement by the next of kin with the medical recommendation; actual or
apparent conflict of interest between the next of kin and the patient; dispute
between members of the patient’s family; or absence of any next of kin to
give their consent. There is, I consider, much to be said for the view that an
application to the court will not be needed in every case, but only in particular
circumstances, such as those suggested by Mr Francis. In this connection I
was impressed not only by the care being taken by the Medical Ethics
Committee to provide guidance to the profession, but also by information
given to the Appellate Committee about the substantial number of PVS
patients in the country, and the very considerable cost of obtaining guidance
from the court in cases such as the present. However, in my opinion this is
a matter which would be better kept under review by the President of the
Family Division than resolved now by your Lordships’ House. I understand

                                     -   20   -
that a similar review is being undertaken in cases concerned with the
sterilisation of adult women of unsound mind, with a consequent relaxation of
the practice relating to applications to the court in such cases. For my part,
I would therefore leave the matter as proposed by the Master of the Rolls;
but I wish to express the hope that the President of the Family Division, who
will no doubt be kept well informed about developments in this field, will
soon feel able to relax the present requirement so as to limit applications for
declarations to those cases in which there is a special need for the procedure
to be invoked.

         I wish to add one footnote. Since preparing this opinion, I have had
the opportunity of reading in draft the speech of my noble and learned friend,
Lord Browne Wilkinson, in which he has expressed the view that a doctor, in
reaching a decision whether or not to continue, in the best interests of his
patient, to prolong his life by artificial means, may well be influenced by his
own attitude to the sanctity of human life. The point does not arise for
decision in the present case. I only wish to observe that it has implications not
only in the case of a patient who, like Anthony Bland, is totally unconscious,
but also one who may be suffering from great physical pain or (as in the case
of one suffering from Guillain-Barre syndrome) extreme mental distress; and
it would in theory fall to be tested if the patient’s relatives, dismayed by the
artificial prolongation of the agony of their loved one, were to seek to restrain
by injunction a doctor who was persisting in pulonging his life. I cannot help
feeling, however, that such a situation is more theoretical than real. I suspect
that it is unlikely to arise in practice, if only because the solution could be
found in a change of medical practitioner. It is not to be forgotten, moreover,
that doctors who for conscientious reasons would feel unable to discontinue
life support in such circumstances can presumably, like those who have a
conscientious objection to abortion, abstain from involvement in such work.
For present purposes, however, it is enough to state that the best interests test
is broad and flexible in the sense that room must be allowed for the exercise
of judgment by the doctor as to whether the relevant conditions exist which
justify the discontinuance of life support.

        For these reasons,: I would dismiss the appeal. Having read in draft
the speech of my noble and learned friend Lord Keith of Kinkel, I can see no
significant difference from the opinion which I have expressed.



LORD LOWRY

My Lords,

       I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speeches of my noble
and learned friends and, for the reasons given by my noble and learned friend
Lord Goff of Chieveley, with which I understand the remainder of your
Lordships to be generally in agreement, I agree that this appeal should be
dismissed.

       I cannot usefully elaborate on your Lordships’ careful analysis of the
arguments. There are, however, four points in relation to your Lordships’
reasoning and conclusions which it may be worth my while to make.

 1.    I do not believe that there is a valid legal distinction between the
omission to treat a patient and the abandonment of treatment which has been
commenced, since to recognise such a distinction could quite illogically confer
on a doctor who had refrained from treatment an immunity which did not
benefit a doctor who had embarked on treatment in order to see whether it
might help the patient and had abandoned the treatment when it was seen not
to do so.

2.      As noted in In re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) [1990] 2 A.C. 1 and
again in your Lordships’ speeches, the parens patriae jurisdiction over adults
who are for whatever reason mentally incompetent was abolished by statute.
I have never heard a rational, or indeed any, explanation for this step, which
has placed under a further disadvantage a class of adults who are already
handicapped. Parliament has done nothing since In re F was decided, but I
sincerely hope that the parens patriae jurisdiction over adults will soon be
restored. The corresponding jurisdiction in wardship has continued to prove
its value and it is most unfortunate that the court’s armoury in relation to
adults remains thus depleted. The prospect of restoration of this lost power
is not controversial, since it does not conjure up the spectre of euthanasia; the
decisions which can be made by the courts on behalf of incompetent persons
would, as in wardship cases, be confined within lawful bounds.

3.      Procedurally I can see no present alternative to an application to the
court such as that made in the present case. This view is reinforced for me
when I reflect, against the background of your Lordships’ conclusions of law,
that, in the absence of an application, the doctor who proposes the cessation
of life-supporting care and treatment on the ground that their continuance
would not be in the patient’s best interests will have reached that conclusion
himself and will be judge in his own cause unless and until his chosen course
of action is challenged in criminal or civil proceedings. A practical alternative
may, however, be evolved through the practice of the Family Division and
with the help of the Medical Ethics Committee, which has already devoted so
much thought to the problem, and possibly of Parliament through legislation,
it will of course be understood that the court has no power to render lawful
something which without the court’s sanction would have been unlawful.
When I take into account that the case now before your Lordships could not
be clearer on its facts, I have to say that I am left with the feeling that the
general position is not satisfactory.

4.      Although entirely satisfied with your Lordships’ consensus, I ought
finally to touch on the real point in the case. The strength of the Official

                                     -   22   -
Solicitor’s argument lies in its simplicity. In answer to the respondent’s
reliance on accepted medical opinion that feeding (nutrition and hydration),
particularly by sophisticated artificial methods, is part of the life-supporting
medical treatment, he says that the duty to feed a helpless person, such as a
baby or an unconscious patient, is something different - an elementary duty
to keep the patient alive which exists independently of all questions of
treatment and which the person in charge cannot omit to perform: to omit
deliberately to perform this duty in the knowledge that the omission will lead
to the death of the helpless one, and indeed with the intention, as in the
present case, of conducing to that death, will render those in charge guilty of
murder. One of the respondent’s counter arguments, albeit not conclusive, is
based on the overwhelming verdict of informed medical opinion worldwide,
with particular reference to the common law jurisdictions, where the relevant
law generally corresponds closely with our own, that therapy and life-
supporting care, including sophisticated methods of artificial feeding, are
components of medical treatment and cannot be separated as the Official
Solicitor contends. In this connection it may also be emphasised that an
artificial feeding regime is inevitably associated with the continuous use of
catheters and enemas and the sedulous avoidance and combatting of potentially
deadly infection. I consider that the court, when intent on reaching a decision
according to law, ought to give weight to informed medical opinion both on
the point now under discussion and also on the question of what is in the best
interests of a patient and I reject the idea, which is implicit in the appellant’s
argument, that informed medical opinion in these respects is merely a disguise
for a philosophy which, if accepted, would legalise euthanasia.

        The real answer to the Official Solicitor, as your Lordships are already
agreed, is that his argument starts from the fallacious premiss, which can be
taken as correct in ordinary doctor-patient relationships, namely, that feeding
in order to sustain life is necessarily for the benefit of the patient. But in the
prevailing circumstances the opposite view is overwhelmingly held by the
doctors and the validity of that view has been accepted by the courts below.
The doctors consider that in the patient’s best interests they ought not to feed
him and the law, as applied by your Lordships, has gone further by saying
that they are not entitled to feed him without his consent, which cannot be
obtained. So the theory of the "duty to feed" is founded on a misapprehension
and the Official Solicitor’s argument leads to a legally erroneous conclusion.
Even though the intention to bring about the patient’s death is there, there is
no proposed guilty act because, if it is not in the interests of an insentient
patient to continue the life-supporting care and treatment, the doctor would be
acting unlawfully if he continued the care and treatment and would perform
no guilty act by discontinuing.

        I have no difficulty in accepting both this legal conclusion and its
practical effect, but it is not hard to see how the case might appear to a non­
lawyer, who might express himself on the following lines:
        "Yes, I understand the point, now that you have explained it to me.
       There is no duty, or indeed right to feed, when feeding is not in the
       best interests of the patient. But the real reason for withdrawing
       feeding is that the doctors consider that it would be in the patients best
       interests for him to be allowed to die. (I also know that the same
       result could be achieved, if not so quickly, by allowing the patient’s
       next infection to go untreated, but that is not just the point which we
       have been discussing here.) The solution here seems to me to
       introduce what lawyers call a distinction without a difference: the
       intention is to terminate life, but the acceptable way of doing it is to
       discontinue a regime which the law has said that the doctors have no
       duty or even right to continue. And, incidentally, In re F (not that I
       would venture to query your reliance on that authority) was not
       concerned with matters of life and death at all. So might it not be
       suggested, no doubt quite wrongly, that this case is, in effect if not in
       law, an example of euthanasia in action? I can of course appreciate
       the arguments in a case like this, for indirectly terminating the
       patient’s life and I believe that very many of my friends would be in
       favour of what is now proposed, but equally there must be many
       people who, from conviction or simply by virtue of their conventional
       upbringing, are unconvinced that someone who can be kept alive
       should be allowed to die."

        My Lords, I have used the homely expedient of attributing these words
to my hypothetical non-lawyer in order to demonstrate the possible gap which
my noble and learned friend Lord Mustill sees between old law and new
medicine and perhaps also, I might add, new ethics. It is important,
particularly in the area of criminal law which governs conduct, that society’s
notions of what is the law and what is right should coincide. One role of the
legislator is to detect any disparity between these notions and to take
appropriate action to close the gap.

       At all events, for the reasons already relied on by your Lordships, I,
too, would dismiss this appeal.



LORD BROWNE-WILKINSON

My Lords,

      In this case the courts are asked to give the answer to two questions:
whether the Airedale N.H.S. Trust and the physicians attending Anthony
Bland may:

       "(1) lawfully discontinue all life-sustaining treatment and medical
       support measures designed to keep [Mr. Bland] alive in his existing
       persistent vegetative state including the termination of ventilation,
       nutrition and hydration by artificial means; and

       "(2) lawfully discontinue and thereafter need not furnish medical
       treatment to [Mr. Bland] except for the sole purpose of enabling [Mr.
       Bland] to end his life and die peacefully with the greatest dignity and
       the least of pain, suffering and distress."

         Those are questions of law. But behind the questions of law lie moral,
ethical, medical and practical issues of fundamental importance to society. As
Hoffman L.J. in the Court of Appeal emphasised, the law regulating the
termination of artificial life support being given to patients must, to be
acceptable, reflect a moral attitude which society accepts. This has led judges
into the consideration of the ethical and other non-legal problems raised by the
ability to sustain life artificially which new medical technology has recently
made possible. But in my judgment in giving the legal answer to these
questions judges are faced with a dilemma. The ability to sustain life
artificially is of relatively recent origin. Existing law may not provide an
acceptable answer to the new legal questions which it raises. Should judges
seek to develop new law to meet a wholly new situation? Or is this a matter
which lies outside the area of legitimate development of the law by judges and
requires society, through the democratic expression of its views in Parliament,
to reach its decisions on the underlying moral and practical problems and then
reflect those decisions in legislation?

        I have no doubt that it is for Parliament, not the courts, to decide the
broader issues which this case raises. Until recently there was no doubt what
was life and what was death. A man was dead if he stopped breathing and his
heart stopped beating. There was no artificial means of sustaining these
indications of life for more than a short while. Death in the traditional sense
was beyond human control. Apart from cases of unlawful homicide, death
occurred automatically in the course of nature when the natural functions of
the body failed to sustain the lungs and the heart.

       Recent developments in medical science have fundamentally affected
these previous certainties. In medicine, the cessation of breathing or of
heartbeat is no longer death. By the use of a ventilator, lungs which in the
unaided course of nature would have stopped breathing can be made to
breathe, thereby sustaining the heartbeat. Those, like Anthony Bland, who
would previously have died through inability to swallow food can be kept
alive by artificial feeding. This has led the medical profession to redefine
death in terms of brain stem death, i.e. die death of that part of the brain
without which the body cannot function at all without assistance. In some
cases it is now apparently possible, with.the use of the ventilator, to sustain
a beating heart even though the brain stem, and therefore in medical terms the
patient, is dead; "the ventilated corpse".
        I do not refer to these factors because Anthony Bland is already dead,
either medically or legally. His brain stem is alive and so is he; provided that
he is artificially fed and the waste products evacuated from his body by skilled
medical care, his body sustains its own life. I refer to these factors in order
to illustrate the scale of the problem which is presented by modem
technological developments, of which this case is merely one instance. The
physical state known as death has changed. In many cases the time and
manner of death is no longer dictated by nature but can be determined by
human decision. The life of Anthony Bland, in the purely physical sense, has
been and can be extended by skilled medical care for a period of years.

        To my mind, these technical developments have raised a wholly new
series of ethical and social problems. What is meant now by "life" in the
moral precept which requires respect for the sanctity of human life? If the
quality of life of a person such as Anthony Bland is non-existent since he is
unaware of anything that happens to him, has he a right to be sustained in that
state of living death and are his family and medical attendants under a duty to
maintain it? If Anthony Bland has no such right and others no such duty,
should society draw a distinction (which some would see as artificial) between
adopting a course of action designed to produce certain death, on the one hand
through the lack of food, and on the other from a fatal injection, the former
being permissible and the latter (euthanasia) prohibited? If the withdrawal of
life support is legitimate in the case of Anthony Bland, whose P.V.S. is very
severe, what of others in this country also in P.V.S. (whom we were told
numbered between 1,000 and 1,500) and others suffering from medical
conditions having similar impact, e.g. the Guillain-Barre syndrome? Who is
to decide, and according to what criteria, who is to live and who to die?
What rights have the relatives of the patient in taking that decision?

        In addition to these ethical questions, the new technology raises
practical problems. Given that there are limited resources available for
medical care, is it right to devote money to sustaining the lives of those who
are, and always will be, unaware of their own existence rather than to treating
those who, in a real sense, can be benefitted e.g. those deprived of dialysis
for want of resources. Again, the timing of the patient’s death may have a
direct impact on the rights of other parties. In the case of a patient suffering
from P.V.S. as a result of a road accident, the amount of damages recoverable
will depend on whether the patient is kept alive or allowed to die. We were
told by the Official Solicitor that there have already been cases in which this
factor has been taken into account by relatives of the patient, though there is
no question of that in the present case. Again, rights of succession to the
estate of the patient may well depend on the timing of his death.

        On the moral issues raised by this case, society is not all of one mind.
Although it is probably true that the majority would favour the withdrawal of
life support in the present case, there is undoubtedly a substantial body of
opinion that is strongly opposed. The evidence shows that the Roman
Catholic church and orthodox Jews are opposed. Within the medical

                                     -26   -
profession itself, there are those, including one of the very distinguished
doctors who gave evidence in this case, who draw a distinction between
withholding treatment on the one hand and withholding food and care on the
other, the latter not being acceptable. The present case is an extreme one,
since Anthony Bland can appreciate nothing whether he is alive or dead: but
I have no doubt that less extreme cases will come before the courts on which
public opinion may be more sharply divided.

        The position therefore, in my view, is that if the judges seek to
develop new law to regulate the new circumstances, the law so laid down will
of necessity reflect judges’ views on the underlying ethical questions,
questions on which there is a legitimate division of opinion. By way of
example, although the Court of Appeal in this case, in reaching the conclusion
that the withdrawal of food and Anthony Bland’s subsequent death would be
for his benefit, attach importance to impalpable factors such as personal
dignity and the way Anthony Bland would wish to be remembered but do not
take into account spiritual values which, for example, a member of the Roman
Catholic church would regard as relevant in assessing such benefit. Where a
case raises wholly new moral and social issues, in my judgment it is not for
the judges to seek to develop new, all embracing, principles of law in a way
which reflects the individual judges’ moral stance when society as a whole is
substantially divided on the relevant moral issues. Moreover, it is not
legitimate for a judge in reaching a view as to what is for the benefit of the
one individual whose life is in issue to take into account the wider practical
issues as to allocation of limited financial resources or the impact on third
parties of altering the time at which death occurs.

        For these reasons, it seems to me imperative that the moral, social and
legal issues raised by this case should be considered by Parliament. The
judges’ function in this area of the law should be to apply the principles which
society, through the democratic process, adopts, not to impose their standards
on society. If Parliament fails to act, then judge-made law will of necessity
through a gradual and uncertain process provide a legal answer to each new
question as it arises. But in my judgment that is not the best way to proceed.

        The function of the court in these circumstances is to determine this
particular case in accordance with the existing law, and not seek to develop
new law laying down a new regimen. The result of this limited approach may
be unsatisfactory, both in moral and practical terms, but it is for Parliament
to address the wider problems which the case raises and lay down principles
of law generally applicable to the withdrawal of life support systems.

        Before turning to the strict legality of what is proposed, I must say
something about the procedure adopted in this case. The application asks the
court to make declarations as to the legality of proposed future actions i.e. if
granted, the declarations will purport to decide whether the proposed
discontinuance of life support will constitute a crime. In general the court sets
its face against making declarations as to the criminality of proposed future

                                     -   27   -
actions. But I agree with my noble and learned friend Lord Goff of Chieveley
that in this case it is absolutely necessary to do so. The doctors responsible
for Anthony Bland’s care have reached the view that it is for his benefit to
withdraw life support but have been warned by the coroner that it may
constitute a criminal offence if they do so. In the past, doctors exercised their
own discretion, in accordance with medical ethics, in cases such as these. To
the great advantage of society, they took the responsibility of deciding whether
the perpetuation of life was pointless. But there are now present amongst the
medical and nursing staff of hospitals those who genuinely believe in the
sanctity of human life, no matter what the quality of that life, and report
doctors who take such decisions to the authorities with a view to prosecution
for a criminal offence. I am not criticising such people: they are acting in
accordance with their own moral standards. But their actions have made it
extremely risky for a doctor to take a decision of this kind when his action
may lie on the borderline of legality. I have no doubt that the courts should,
by declaration, provide to doctors faced with such decisions clear rulings
whether the course they propose to adopt is or is not lawful.

        I turn then to the question whether, under existing law, the proposed
discontinuance of the artificial feeding of Anthony Bland would be lawful.
Such discontinuance might be unlawful because (a) it would constitute a
criminal offence or (b) it will give rise to civil liability to Anthony Bland or
his personal representatives after his death.

A.     Criminal Liabilitv/Murder

         It is the submission of the Official Solicitor that the withdrawal of
artificial feeding would constitute murder. The Official Solicitor has been
criticized for using emotive language in this case. In my judgment this
criticism is misplaced: much the most difficult question is indeed whether the
proposed course of action is, in law, murder notwithstanding the best motives
from which everyone concerned is acting.

        Murder consists of causing the death of another with intent so to do.
What is proposed in the present case is to adopt a course with the intention of
bringing about Anthony Bland’s death. As to the element of intention or mens
rea, in my judgment there can be no real doubt that it is present in this case:
the whole purpose of stopping artificial feeding is to bring about the death of
Anthony Bland.

       As to the guilty act, or actus reus, the criminal law draws a distinction
between the commission of a positive act which causes death and the omission
to do an act which would have prevented death. In general an omission to
prevent death is not an actus reus and cannot give rise to a conviction for
murder. But where the accused was under a duty to the deceased to do the
act which he omitted to do, such omission can constitute the actus reus of
homicide, either murder (Rex. v. Gibbins and Proctor (1918) 13 Cr. App.
Rep. 134) or manslaughter (Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354) depending upon

                                     -   28   -
the mens rea of the accused. The Official Solicitor submits that the actus reus
of murder is present on two alternative grounds, viz.

        1.     The withdrawal of artificial feeding is a positive act of
               commission; or

        2.     If what is proposed is only an omission, the hospital and the
                doctors have assumed a duty to care for Anthony Bland
                (including feeding him) and therefore the omission to feed him
                would constitute the actus reus of murder.

1.      Positive Act of Commission

         Mr Munby, in his powerful but balanced argument for the Official
Solicitor, submits that the removal of the nasogastric tube necessary to provide
artificial feeding and the discontinuance of the existing regime of artificial
feeding constitute positive acts of commission. I do not accept this. Apart
from the act of removing the nasogastric tube, the mere failure to continue to
do what you have previously done is not, in any ordinary sense, to do
anything positive: on the contrary it is by definition an omission to do what
you have previously done.

         The positive act of removing the nasogastric tube presents more
difficulty. It is undoubtedly a positive act, similar to switching off a ventilator
in the case of a patient whose life is being sustained by artificial ventilation.
But in my judgment in neither case should the act be classified as positive,
since to do so would be to introduce intolerably fine distinctions. If, instead
of removing the nasogastric tube, it was left in place but no further nutrients
were provided for the tube to convey to the patient’s stomach, that would not
be an act of commission. Again, as has been pointed out (Skegg, Law, Ethics
and Medicine, (1984) p. 169 et seq.) if the switching off of a ventilator were
to be classified as a positive act, exactly the same result can be achieved by
installing a time-clock which requires to be re-set every 12 hours: the failure
to re-set the machine could not be classified as a positive act. In my
judgment, essentially what is being done is to omit to feed or to ventilate: the
removal of the nasogastric tube or the switching off of a ventilator are merely
 incidents of that omission: see Glanville Williams, Textbook of Criminal Law,
2nd ed. (1983), p. 282, Skegg p. 169 et seq.

         In my judgment, there is a further reason why the removal of the naso­
gastric tube in the present case could not be regarded as a positive act causing
the death. The tube itself, without the food being supplied through it, does
nothing. The removal of the tube by itself does not cause the death since by
itself it did not sustain life. Therefore even if, contrary to my view, the
removal of the tube is to be classified as a positive act, it would not constitute
the actus reus of murder since such positive act would not be the cause of
death.
2.      Omission: Duty to provide care

       Mr Munby submits that by starting to treat Anthony Bland as a patient
and instituting a regime of artificial feeding, the hospital and doctors have
undertaken a duty to provide him with medical care and food for an indefinite
period. That being their duty, the withdrawal of artificial feeding, even
though a mere omission, will be a breach of that duty and therefore constitute
murder.

        The crux of this submission is the extent of the duty owed by the
hospital and the doctors to Anthony Bland. In order to analyse the nature of
that duty, it is necessary first to consider the relationship between a doctor and
a patient who, through mental disability, is unable to consent to treatment.
Any treatment given by a doctor to a patient which is invasive (i.e. involves
any interference with the physical integrity of the patient) is unlawful unless
done with the consent of the patient: it constitutes the crime of battery and
the tort of trespass to the person. Thus, in the case of an adult who is
mentally competent, the artificial feeding regime (and the attendant steps
necessary to evacuate the bowels and bladder) would be unlawful unless the
patient consented to it. A mentally competent patient can at any time put an
end to life support systems by refusing his consent to their continuation. In
the ordinary case of murder by positive act of commission, the consent of the
victim is no defence. But where the charge is one of murder by omission to
do an act and the act omitted could only be done with the consent of the
patient, refusal by the patient of consent to the doing of such act does,
indirectly, provide a defence to the charge of murder. The doctor cannot owe
to the patient any duty to maintain his life where that life can only be
sustained by intrusive medical care to which the patient will not consent.

        How then does the matter stand in the case of a patient who, by reason
of his being under age or, like Anthony Bland, of full age but mentally
disabled, is unable to give consent to treatment? So far as minors are
concerned, the guardian of the child can consent, failing which the court,
exercising the Crown’s rights as parens patriae under the wardship
jurisdiction, can consent on the child’s behalf. Until 1960, the court had the
 same parens patriae jurisdiction over adults who were mentally incompetent.
But by the joint effect of the Mental Health Act, 1959, and the revocation of
the Warrant under the Signed Manual under which the jurisdiction of the
Crown as parens patriae over those of unsound mind was conferred on the
courts, the courts ceased to have any parens patriae jurisdiction over the
person of a mentally incompetent adult, being left only with the statutory
jurisdiction over his property (as opposed to his person) conferred by the Act
of 1959: In re F [1990] 2 A.C. 1. Although no one has been able to explain
why Parliament chose to take this course (indeed it has been suggested that it
was an accident) no step has been taken to restore to the courts the parens
patriae jurisdiction over the body of a mentally disabled adult. As a result the
court, even if it thought fit, has no power on Anthony Bland’s behalf either

                                      -   30   -
to consent or refuse consent to the continuation of the invasive procedures
involved in artificial feeding.

        Faced with this lacuna in the law, this House in In re F developed and
laid down a principle, based on concepts of necessity, under which a doctor
can lawfully treat a patient who cannot consent to such treatment if it is in the
best interests of the patient to receive such treatment. In my view, the correct
answer to the present case depends on the extent of the right to continue
lawfully to invade the bodily integrity of Anthony Bland without his consent.
If in the circumstances they have no right to continue artificial feeding, they
cannot be in breach of any duty by ceasing to provide such feeding.

        What then is the extent of the right to treat Anthony Bland which can
be deduced from In re FI Both Lord Brandon of Oakbrook (p. 64) and Lord
Goff (pp. 75 and 77) make it clear that the right to administer invasive
medical care is wholly dependent upon such care being in the best interests of
the patient. Moreover, a doctor’s decision whether invasive care is in the best
interests of the patient falls to be assessed by reference to the test laid down
in Bolam v. Friem Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1 W.L.R. 582
viz. is the decision in accordance with a practice accepted at the time by a
responsible body of medical opinion: see ger Lord Brandon (pp. 66-67) Lord
Goff (p. 78). In my judgment it must follow from this that if there comes a
stage where the responsible doctor comes to the reasonable conclusion (which
accords with the views of a responsible body of medical opinion) that further
continuance of an intrusive life support system is not in the best interests of
the patient, he can no longer lawfully continue that life support system: to do
so would constitute the crime of battery and the tort of trespass to the person.
Therefore he cannot be in breach of any duty to maintain the patient’s life.
Therefore he is not guilty of murder by omission.

3.     What is the correct Question?

        If I am right so far in my analysis, the critical decision to be made is
whether it is in the best interests of Anthony Bland to continue theinvasive
medical care involved in artificial feeding. That question is notthesame as,
"Is it in Anthony Bland’s best interests that he should die?" The latter
question assumes that it is lawful to perpetuate the patient’s life: but such
perpetuation of life can only be achieved if it is lawful to continue to invade
the bodily integrity of the patient by invasive medical care. Unless the doctor
has reached the affirmative conclusion that it is in the patient’s best interest
to continue the invasive care, such care must cease.

        The answer to the question must of course depend on the circumstances
of each case and there will be no single "right" answer. Different doctors
may take different views both on strictly medical issues and the broader
ethical issues which the question raises. It follows that the legal question in
this case (unlike the question which would arise if there were a parens patriae
jurisdiction under which the court has to make the decision) is not whether the

                                     -31   -
court thinks it is in the best interests of Anthony Bland to continue to receive
intrusive medical care but whether the responsible doctor has reached a
reasonable and bona fide belief that it is not. The doctor’s answer may well
be influenced by his own attitude to the sanctity of human life. In cases
where there is no strictly medical point in continuing care, if a doctor holds
the view that the patient is entitled to stay alive, whatever the quality of such
life, he can quite reasonably reach the view that the continuation of intrusive
care, being the only way of preserving such life, is in the patient’s best
interests. But, in the same circumstances another doctor who sees no merit
in perpetuating a life of which the patient is unaware can equally reasonably
reach the view that the continuation of invasive treatment is not for the
patient’s benefit. Accordingly, on an application to the court for a declaration
that the discontinuance of medical care will be lawful, the courts only concern
will be to be satisfied that the doctor’s decision to discontinue is in accordance
with a respectable body of medical opinion and that it is reasonable.

4.      The answer to the question

         Anthony Bland has been irreversibly brain damaged: the most
distinguished medical opinion is unanimous that there is no prospect at all that
the condition will change for the better. He is not aware of anything. If
artificial feeding is continued, he will feel nothing; if artificial feeding is
discontinued and he dies he will feel nothing. Whether he lives or dies he
will feel no pain or distress. All the purely physical considerations indicate
that it is pointless to continue life support. Only if the doctors responsible for
his care held the view that, though he is aware of nothing, there is some
benefit to him in staying alive, would there be anything to indicate that it is
for his benefit to continue the invasive medical care. In Anthony Bland’s
case, the doctors do not take that view. The discontinuance of life support
would be in accordance with the proposals contained in the Discussion Paper
on Treatment of Patients in Persistent Vegetative State issued in September
1992 by the Medical Ethics Committee of the British Medical Association.
Therefore the Bolam requirement [1975] 1 W.L.R. 582 is satisfied.

       In these circumstances, it is perfectly reasonable for the responsible
doctors to conclude that there is no affirmative benefit to Anthony Bland in
continuing the invasive medical procedures necessary to sustain his life.
Having so concluded, they are neither entitled nor under a duty to continue
such medical care. ^Therefore they will not be guilty of murder if they
discontinue such care.

B.     Civil Liability

         The discontinuance of life support could expose the plaintiffs to a
liability in tort to Anthony Bland or, more realistically, to his personal
representatives. But such liability would have to be founded on a breach of
some duty owed by them to Anthony Bland to maintain such life support. For
the reasons which I have given in dealing with criminal liability, no such

                                     -   32   -
breach of duty can exist in this case. Therefore th? discontinuance of life
support will also be lawful under civil law.

        I am very conscious that I have reached my conclusions on narrow,
legalistic, grounds which provide no satisfactory basis for the decision of cases
which will arise in the future where the facts are not identical. I must again
emphasise that this is an extreme case where it can be overwhelmingly proved
that the patient is and will remain insensate: he neither feels pain from
treatment nor will feel pain in dying and has no prospect of any medical care
improving his condition. Unless, as I very much hope, Parliament reviews
the law, the courts will be faced with cases where the chances of improvement
are slight, or the patient has very slight sensate awareness. I express no view
on what should be the answer in such circumstances: my decision does not
cover such a case. I therefore consider that, for the foreseeable future,
doctors would be well advised in each case to apply to the court for a
declaration as to the legality of any proposed discontinuance of life support
where there has been no valid consent by or on behalf of the patient to such
discontinuance.

        Finally, the conclusion I have reached will appear to some to be almost
irrational. How can it be lawful to allow a patient to die slowly, though
painlessly, over a period of weeks from lack of food but unlawful to produce
his immediate death by a lethal injection, thereby saving his family from yet
another ordeal to add to the tragedy that has already struck them? I find it
difficult to find a moral answer to that question! But it is undoubtedly the law >
and nothing I have said casts doubt on the proposition that the doing of a
positive act with the intention of ending life is and remains murder.



LORD MUSTILL

My Lords,

        The pitiful state of Anthony Bland and the suffering of his devoted
family must attract the sympathy of all. The devotion to duty of the medical
staff, and the complete propriety of those who have faced up to the painful
dilemma must equally attract the respect of all. This combination of sympathy
and respect can but yield an urgent desire to take up the burden, to reach a
conclusion on this deep moral issue of life and death, and to put that
conclusion into effect as speedily and humanely as possible. The compelling
nature of this task does however have its own risks, for it leads to an
assumption that the central question of ethics is the only question, and that
anything which stands in the way of a solution should be brushed aside as an
empty technicality. However natural this impulse may be I believe that it must
be resisted, for the authority of the state, through the medium of the court, is
being invoked to permit one group of its citizens to terminate the life of
another. Thus, although the issues spring from a private grief and the course

                                     -   33   -
which is proposed is also private, in the sense that it will not be put into effect
by the state, we are nevertheless here in the field of public law. The court
must therefore be concerned not only to find a humane and morally justified
solution to the problems of those directly involved, but also to examine
rigorously both the process by which the solution is reached and the legal
foundation on which it rests. Otherwise, the pressures created by this very
extreme case may distort the law in a way which leads to false conclusions in
situations where the issues are similar but more finely-balanced, and may in
addition create unforeseen anomalies in criminal cases far-removed from the
present. This appeal obviously raises acute problems of ethics, but this should
not obscure the fact that it is also exceptionally difficult in point of law, and
it is essential that these difficulties should be clearly recognised and
objectively analyzed, not in a spirit of obstruction or pedantry, but because
they are an inescapable part of any decision on whether the declarations made
in the High Court should be allowed to stand.

        Accordingly I shall concentrate in what follows on the legal rather than
the ethical aspects of the appeal, although I have of course given the latter the
most careful and anxious consideration. The moral issues have already been
extensively discussed. I agree with the conclusion of all those who have
delivered judgments in the case that the declarations ought to stand and I also
agree broadly, although not necessarily in every detail, with the way in which
that conclusion has been reached. Rather than traverse the same ground again
in different language I think it more useful to concentrate on two important
matters which received comparatively little attention in the courts below.
First, the role of the court; that is, the nature of the function which the court
is being called upon to perform, and the suitability of the court to perform it.
Second, the consistency of the steps authorised by the two declarations now
under appeal (which I will call "the proposed conduct") with the existing
criminal law. In placing these matters firmly before the House the Official
Solicitor, through the medium of Mr. Munby Q.C., has performed a most
valuable service.

        When performing this task it is essential to face up squarely to the true
nature of what is proposed, and to have in mind what has been called "the
distinction between the right to choose one’s own death and the right to
choose someone else’s". (103 (1989) Harv. Law Rev. Development in the
Law; "Medical Technology and the Law”), 519, 1665. Emollient expressions
such as "letting nature take its course" and "easing the passing" may have
their uses, but they are out of place here, for they conceal both the ethical and
the legal issues, and I will try to avoid them. I will also abstain from debate
about whether the proposed conduct will amount to euthanasia. The word is
not a term of art, and what matters is not whether the declarations authorise
euthanasia, but whether they authorise what would otherwise be murder. I will
say only this. The conclusion that the declarations can be upheld depends
crucially on a distinction drawn by the criminal law between acts and
omissions, and carries with it inescapably a distinction between, on the one
hand what is often called "mercy-killing", where active steps are taken in a

                                      -   34   -
medical context to terminate the life of a suffering patient, and a situation such
as the present where the proposed conduct has the aim for equally humane
reasons of terminating the life of Anthony Bland by withholding from him the
basic necessities of life. The acute unease which I feel about adopting this way
through the legal and ethical maze is I believe due in an important part to the
sensation that however much the terminologies may differ the ethical status of
the two courses of action is for all relevant purposes indistinguishable. By
dismissing this appeal I fear that your Lordships’ House may only emphasise
the distortions of a legal structure which is already both morally and
intellectually misshapen. Still, the law is there and we must take it as it
stands.

                      I THE ROLE OF THE COURT

        The issues now before the House fall into three groups-

        1. Is it right, as a matter of general ethical principle, that the lives of
        persons in the           position of Anthony Bland should be brought to
        an end, and if so is it right that they should be brought to an end in the
        manner proposed?

        2. Under the law as it now stands, can the proposed conduct
        be put into effect without committing a criminal offence, and
        particularly the offence of murder?

        3. If the answer to the second question is "Yes, provided that
        certain conditions are shown to exist", do those conditions exist
        in the case of Anthony Bland?

        What is the function of the courts in relation to these groups of issues?
It is convenient to begin with the third. If the criteria for the legitimacy of the
proposed conduct are essentially factual, a decision upon them is one which
the court is well accustomed to perform, and may properly be obtained
through the medium of an application for declaratory relief. If however they
contain an element of ethical judgement, for example if the law requires the
decision-maker to consider whether a certain course is "in the best interests"
of the patient, the skill and experience of the judge will carry him only so far.
They will help him to clear the ground by marshalling the considerations
which are said to be relevant, eliminating errors of logic, and so on. But when
the intellectual part of the task is complete and the decision-maker has to
choose the factors which he will take into account, attach relevant weights to
them and then strike a balance the judge is no better equipped, though no
worse, than anyone else. In the end it is a matter of personal choice, dictated
by his or her background, upbringing, education, convictions and
temperament. Legal expertise gives no special advantage here.

       Questions within the second group are entirely within the province of
the courts. It is these questions which have exercised the family and all those

                                      -   35   -
in the medical and nursing professions who have cared for Anthony Bland and
given advice on his case.(For brevity, I will call these "the doctors"). As I
understand the position they have all, with heavy hearts, taken the ethical
decision that since their efforts have run their course it is better from every
point of view that Anthony Bland’s life should be brought to an end. But they
wish to act within the law, and the very proper warning given by the coroner
has been taken to heart. It is therefore natural that they should turn to the
court for authority to do what they believe to be best. It is also natural that the
court should wish to do everything proper to ensure that the doctors act, as
they themselves wish to act, only in accordance with the law. No sensible
person could want the doctors to take the risk of having to validate their
conduct after the event in the context of a trial for murder.

        Because all this is perfectly natural, everyone concerned has pressed
ahead without I believe having analyzed at all closely just what it is the court
is being required to do. Very many applications to the Family Division raise
issues of what is essentially social management, as for example where the
court decides whether, in the light of guidance given by the appellate courts
as to the correct general approach, it is better for a child to go to one parent
rather than the other. The present case is quite different, for the declarations
under appeal assume the answers to a set of hypothetical questions of criminal
law. Not of course hypothetical through being divorced from real life, but
hypothetical because they put in suit the criminal consequences of conduct
which not only has not happened but never will happen, if the present appeal
succeeds. We are thus embarked on a kind of proleptic criminal trial, without
charge, jury or verdict.

        My Lords, no procedure exists, nor so far as I am aware has ever
been proposed, for conducting such an enquiry before the criminal courts. Not
only would the notion that it is a proper function of the criminal courts to
provide a decision, intended to be legally binding as to the future, on the
criminality of acts or omissions as yet only in contemplation be rejected out
of hand, but there exists no mechanism which would enable an application for
this purpose even to be brought before the court. Yet we find that the present
proceedings have been brought in the Family Division without demur, and that
the extremely important questions of the criminal law to which they give rise
have reached your Lordships’ House not through the criminal appellate system
but through the civil.

        My Lords, by raising this point I am not of course suggesting that your
Lordships should allow this appeal because the procedure adopted was
impermissible. The appeal has reached this House, and your Lordships must
decide it. Anything else would be unthinkable in human terms. Nor do I
suggest that the grant of declarations as to criminality can never be granted in
civil cases. The principle so strongly urged in Imperial Tobacco v. Attorney
General [1981] A.C. 718 is, as was there acknowledged, subject to exception,
and this is an exceptional case. Nor am I troubled by the fact that the decision
in the present case does not create an issue estoppel in the criminal courts and

                                      -   36   -
therefore does not form a conclusive bar to any future prosecution. I think it
a great pity that the Attorney General did not appear in these proceedings
between private parties to represent the interests of the state in the
maintenance of its citizens’ lives and in the due enforcement of the criminal
law, for although Mr. Munby Q.C. for the Official Solicitor and Mr. Lester
Q.C. as Amicus Curiae have made invaluable submissions they were here in
a different interest. Nevertheless it would be fanciful to suppose that if this
appeal is dismissed and the proposed conduct goes ahead the prosecuting
authorities would even think of starting proceedings against the doctors. What
troubles me is very different.

        In the first place, whilst the members of the House have all picked a
way through the minefields of the existing law to the conclusion that the
proposed conduct is lawful it would in my opinion be too optimistic to
suppose that this is the end of the matter, and that in the future the doctors (or
perhaps the judges of the High Court) will be able without difficulty to solve
all future cases by ascertaining the facts and applying to them the precepts
established in the speeches delivered today. The dozens of cases in the
American courts have shown that the subject is too difficult, and the situations
too diverse, for the law to be settled by a single appeal. I foresee that the
appellate courts will be visited again, and that we shall find important areas
of the criminal law in the course of elaboration through declaratory relief in
the civil courts. Whilst I do not say that this is technically impossible it may
not be the right way ahead. At all events I think it plain that the court is
engaged on an unusual task and that it will be necessary to be sure, before this
procedure becomes firmly established, just how it is that the civil courts can
do in a criminal matter what the criminal courts themselves cannot do. The
present appeal is not the right vehicle for this task, but since the House is
invited to uphold the declarations granted in the High Court it is I believe
necessary to consider what their effect will be.Three possibilities have been
canvassed.

        1. The effect of the declarations is to change the legal status of the
proposed conduct in this particular case. On this view, even if the proposed
conduct would have been unlawful without the decision of the court the
declarations have made it lawful. This could be accomplished either by
enlarging the category of proper medical treatment, which already stands
outside the criminal law, so as to include a termination of life which the court
has sanctioned in advance, or alternatively (and perhaps it comes to much the
same) by altering the content of the doctors’ duty to maintain life in cases
where declarations such as the present have been made. This proposition
would require a change in the law which I would hesitate long before
endorsing, but the matter need not be further pursued, since it became plain
during argument that none of the counsel were advocating this route.

       2. The effect of the declaration, upheld by your Lordships’ House,
would be to create, through a binding precedent, a new common-law
exception to the offence of murder, which in future would not only bind all

                                     -   37   -
courts faced with criminal proceedings arising from the termination of life for
medical reasons, but would also form a point of growth for the development
of the criminal law in new and at present unforeseeable directions. This
approach would have the great attraction of recognising that the law has been
left behind by the rapid advances of medical technology. By starting with a
clean slate the law would be freed from the piecemeal expedients to which
courts throughout the common-law world have been driven when trying to fill
the gap between old law and new medicine. It has however been rightly
acknowledged by counsel that this is a step which the courts could not
properly take. Any necessary changes would have to take account of the whole
of this area of law and morals, including of course all the issues commonly
grouped under the heading of euthanasia. The formulation of the necessary
broad social and moral policy is an enterprise which the courts have neither
the means nor in my opinion the right to perform. This can only be achieved
by democratic process through the medium of Parliament.

3.      The declarations will simply apply the law as it now stands to the
undisputed facts of the present case. By upholding them the House will bind
all courts charged in the future with a similar task to approach it in the same
way. The declarations will not however alter the legal status of the proposed
conduct from what it would have been even if no declarations had been
sought, nor will it make any change in the existing criminal law. The
declarations will therefore achieve no more in the present case than the useful
but limited function of reassuring the doctors that what they wish to do was
lawful when proposed and will be lawful when carried out, and will as a by­
product ensure that in practice if the proposed conduct goes ahead no
prosecution will ensue. I will not repeat what I have said about the unusual
nature of this process, which must I believe be carried out by supposing that
the doctors have already put into effect their proposals, have been charged
with murder, and are now in the course of obtaining a ruling on whether on
the undisputed facts they have a good defence.

         My Lords, a little while ago I suggested that the present appeal raised
three questions. Having discussed the nature of the second and third, I turn
to the first which asks whether it is right to terminate the lives of persons in
the position of Anthony Bland, and in particular whether it is right that this
should be done in the manner proposed. (I mention the latter question because
it is a striking fact that in twenty out of the thirty nine American states which
have legislated in favour of'living wills" the legislation specifically excludes
termination of life by the withdrawal of nourishment and hydration) These are
only fragments of a much wider nest of questions, all entirely ethical in
content, beginning with the most general-" Is it ever right to terminate the life
of a patient, with or without his consent?" I believe that adversarial
proceedings, even with the help of an amicus curiae, are not the right vehicle
for the discussion of this broad and highly contentious moral issue, nor do I
believe that the judges are best fitted to carry it out. On the latter aspect I
would adopt the very blunt words of Scalia J. in Cruzan v. Director, Missouri
Department of Health (1990) 110 S.Ct. 2841, 2859, where a very similar

                                     -   38   -
problem arose in a different constitutional and legal framework. These are
problems properly decided by the citizens, through their elected
representatives, not by the courts.

        My Lords, I believe that I have said enough to explain why, from the
outset, I have felt serious doubts about whether this question is justiciable, not
in the technical sense, but in the sense of being a proper subject for legal
adjudication. The whole matter cries out for exploration in depth by
Parliament and then for the establishment by legislation not only of a new set
of ethically and intellectually consistent rules, distinct from the general
criminal law, but also of a sound procedural framework within which the rules
can be applied to individual cases. The rapid advance of medical technology
makes this an ever more urgent task, and I venture to hope that Parliament
will soon take it in hand. Meanwhile, the present case cannot wait. We must
ascertain the current state of the law and see whether it can be reconciled with
the conduct which the doctors propose.

                 II THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

        Since it is common ground that the function of the court on this appeal
is to apply and if necessary develop the existing law, rather than create
entirely new exceptions to the law of murder, it is convenient to begin by
taking stock.

1. Consent to bodily invasion. Any invasion of the body of one person by
another is potentially both a crime and a tort. At the bottom end of the scale
consent is a defence both to a charge of common assault and to a claim in
tort. The concentration in most discussions of this topic on this end of the
scale has tended to divert attention from the fact that whatever the scope of
the civil defence of volenti non fit injuria there is a point higher up the scale
than common assault at which consent in general ceases to form a defence to
a criminal charge. The precise location of this point is at present under
consideration by another Committee of your Lordships’ House in Reg. v.
Laskey & Others, and I need not explore it here, but that the point exists is
beyond question. If one person cuts off the hand of another it is no answer to
say that the amputee consented to what was done.

2.      Proper medical treatment. How is it that, consistently with the
proposition just stated, a doctor can with immunity perform on a consenting
patient an act which would be a very serious crime if done by someone else?
The answer must be that bodily invasions in the course of proper medical
treatment stand completely outside the criminal law. The reason why the
consent of the patient is so important is not that it furnishes a defence in itself,
but because it is usually essential to the propriety of medical treatment. Thus,
if the consent is absent, and is not dispensed with in special circumstances by
operation of law, the acts of the doctor lose their immunity.
3.      Paramountcy of the patient’s choice. If the patient is capable of making
a decision on whether to permit treatment and decides not to permit it his
choice must be obeyed, even if on any objective view it is contrary to his best
interests. A doctor has no right to proceed in the face of objection, even if it
is plain to all, including the patient, that adverse consequences and even death
will or may ensue.

4.       Cessation of treatment. Thus it is that the patient who is undergoing
life-maintaining treatment and decides that it would be preferable to die, must
be allowed to die, provided that all necessary steps have been taken to be sure
that this is what he or she really desires.

5.      Emergencies. Although the consent of the patient is normally essential
to the immunity of the doctor from criminal (and also from civil) process
there are occasions when the law permits him to proceed without it. Notably,
where urgent action is imperative in the interests of the patient, and because
the patient is unconscious, or disorientated, or for some other reason the
consent cannot be obtained until it is too late.

 6.     Necessity. In In re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) [1990] 2 A.C. 1
your Lordships’ House has extended this general exception to the special
situation where the patient is permanently incapacitated from making any
decision about treatment. In that case, the nature of the bodily invasion was
such that unless the acts of the doctors fell into the special category of proper
medical treatment they would have amounted to a most serious crime. If the
patient had been capable of deciding whether or not she wished to be treated,
and had either not been asked for her consent or had refused it, the doctors
would have been criminally liable since consent is normally an essential
element in proper medical treatment. As matters stood, however, the patient
was incapable of making a decision, so that to abstain from proceeding
without her consent would have meant that a decision adverse to treatment
would mean that a decision against treatment would have been taken by
default. The necessity for a decision to be made, one way or the other,
coupled with her inability to make it enabled treatment to be made in what
was considered her best interest.

7. Murder. It has been established for centuries that consent to the deliberate
infliction of death is no defence to a charge of murder. Cases where the
victim has urged the defendant to kill him and the defendant has complied are
likely to be rare, but the proposition is established beyond doubt by the law
on duelling, where even if the deceased was the challenger his consent to the
risk of being deliberately killed by his opponent does not alter the case.

8.      "Mercy killing." Prosecutions of doctors who are suspected of having
killed their patients are extremely rare, and direct authority is in very short
supply. Nevertheless, that "mercy killing" by active means is murder was
taken for granted in the directions to the jury in Adams, Arthur (The Times
5 November 1981, Farquhason J.) and Cox, was the subject of direct decision

                                     -   40   -
by an appellate court in Barber v. Superior Court o f State of California
(1983) 147 Cal. App. 3rd. 1032 and has never so far as I know been doubted.
The fact that the doctor’s motives are kindly will for some, although not for
all, transform the moral quality of his act, but this makes no difference in
law. It is intent to kill or cause grievous bodily harm which constitutes the
mens rea of murder, and the reason why the intent was formed makes no
difference at all.

9.     Consent to "mercy killing". So far as I am aware no satisfactory reason
has ever been advanced for suggesting that it makes the least difference in
law, as distinct from morals, if the patient consents to or indeed urges the
ending of his life by active means. The reason must be that, as in the other
cases of consent to being killed, the interest of the state in preserving life
overrides the otherwise all-powerful interest of patient autonomy.

10.     Acts and omissions. The English criminal law, and also it would
appear from the cases cited, the law of transatlantic state jurisdictions, draws
a sharp distinction between acts and omissions. If an act resulting in death is
done without lawful excuse and with intent to kill it is murder. But an
omission to act with the same result and with the same intent is in general no
offence at all. So also with lesser crimes. To this general principle there are
limited statutory exceptions, irrelevant here. There is also one important
general exception at common law, namely that a person may be criminally
liable for the consequences of an omission if he stands in such a relation to the
victim that he is under a duty to act. Where the result is death the offence will
usually be manslaughter, but if the necessary intent is proved it will be
murder: see Rex. v. Gibbins and Proctor, (1918) 13 Cr. App. Rep. 134.

        Precisely in what circumstances such a duty should be held to exist is
at present quite unclear. No doubt it would be too stem a morality to place
human beings on the same footing as regards criminal responsibility for
allowing an undesirable state of affairs to continue as for bring that state of
affairs into being, but even if there is sense in the distinction the current state
of the law is unsatisfactory both morally and intellectually, as shown by the
troubling case of Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354. We cannot however try to
put it in order here. For the time being all are agreed that the distinction
between acts and omissions exists, and that we must give effect to it.

        My Lords, this sketch of the law immediately brings forward two very
difficult questions. The first is this. A doctor who kills his patient even with
the consent of the patient is guilty of murder. Plainly a second doctor who
kills his patient in circumstances where the obtaining of consent is
impracticable cannot be in a better position than the first, even if the
termination of life is in the best interests of the patient; for the combination
of necessity and best interests is no more than a replacement for consent. How
then can best interests legitimate the conduct proposed in the present case?
       The second question requires a comparison between this case and
Gibbins and Proctor. In the latter, the appellant had a helpless person in her
care; because that person was helpless, she could not furnish herself with
nourishment and was dependent for it on the appellant; the appellant intended
to bring about the death of the helpless person by withholding nourishment;
she did so, and the helpless person died. Of course the cases are miles apart
from an ethical standpoint, but where is the difference on the essential facts?

        These and kindred questions have given rise to an extensive and
understandably contentious literature, and to thoughtful discussions in the
courts of the United States, Canada and New Zealand, and no doubt
elsewhere. It is impossible to study it all, but the sources placed before the
House, supplemented by a few others, have been sufficient to bring out the
main lines of the possible arguments. I gratefully acknowledge the great help
which this material has furnished, without thinking it necessary to give any
but the barest of citation in what follows.

         It is convenient now to discuss in turn the grounds upon which it
might be held that under the existing law, and independently of the
intervention of the court, the doctors may lawfully put the proposed conduct
into effect.

                       m POTENTIAL DEFENCES

1.     Attenuation of the interest in preserving life.

         The interest of the state in preserving the livesof its citizens is very
strong, but it is not absolute. There are contrary interests, and sometime these
prevail; as witness the over-mastering effect of the patient’s refusal of
treatment, even where this makes death inevitable. It has been suggested, for
example in Re Quinlan (1976) 355 A 2d 647, that the balance may also be
tipped, not by the weight of an opposing policy but by the attenuation of the
interest in preserving life, where the "quality" of the life is diminished by
disease or incapacity. My Lords, I would firmly reject this argument. If
correct it would validate active as well as passive euthanasia, and thus require
a change in the law of murder. In any event whilst the fact that a patient is in
great pain may give him or her a powerful motive for wanting to end it, to
which in certain circumstances it is proper to accede, is not at all the same as
the proposition that because of incapacity or infirmity one life is intrinsically
worth less than another. This is the first step on a very dangerous road
indeed, and one which I am not willing to take.

2.     The patient’s choice.

        In the majority of cases where the American courts have sanctioned the
withdrawal of life-supporting medical care they have done so by developing
the rule that informed consent can release the doctor from his duty to treat.
For this purpose they have founded upon the constitutional rights of the

                                     -   42   -
patient, either the express right of due process or the still developing implied
right of privacy. It is unnecessary to explore whether a similar approach
would be appropriate in England, where constitutional rights play a much less
theoretically important role, for I cannot see that the doctrine has anything to
offer in the present case. It is perhaps sufficient to say that it takes two forms.
In the first, the court looks for the making of an antecedent choice by a
patient who can no longer make one, or communicate one, by the time that
the question of termination has arisen. What is often called a "living will" has
been held sufficient for this purpose. If no explicit choice has been made, the
courts have on occasion felt able to infer from other evidence what they
believe were the general feelings of the patient about termination of life in the
case of incurable illness. In any event since there is no evidence that Anthony
Bland ever thought or said anything on the subject the question of making an
imputed choice does not arise. Whilst this course is in many ways attractive
there are obvious dangers which may well be felt to justify the cautious
attitude adopted by the courts of New York State in cases such as Re Storar
(1981) 420 N.E. 2d. 64.

        The second method, which is adopted if the evidence is insufficient to
justify an inference of what the patient chose in the past so that it can be
projected to the present, involves the appointment of a surrogate to make on
behalf of the patient the choice which he believes the patient would now make
if able to do so. For this purpose the surrogate builds up a picture of the
patient’s former character, feelings, convictions and so on from which the
putative choice is deduced. This process may perhaps have some justification
where the patient is sentient but unable to communicate a choice, but it breaks
down totally in a case such as the present. To postulate a patient who is in
such a condition that he cannot know that there is a choice to be made, or
indeed know anything at all, and then ask whether he would have chosen to
terminate his life because that condition made it no longer worth living is
surely meaningless, as is very clearly shown by the lengths to which the court
was driven in Superintendent of Belchertown State School v. Saikewicz (1977)
370 N.E. 2d 247. The idea is simply a fiction, which I would not be willing
to adopt even if there were in the case of Anthony Bland any materials upon
which a surrogate could act, which as far as I can see there are not.

3.      Causation. One argument in support of the conclusion that if the
proposed conduc _is carried out and Anthony Bland then dies the doctors will
nevertheless be guilty of no offence depends upon a very special application
of the doctrine of causation. This has powerful academic support: P.D. G.
Skegg, "Law, Ethics and Medicine”, Chapter 6, where it represents the
author’s chosen solution, and also Glanville Williams, "Textbook o f Criminal
Law”, 2nd ed, pp. 282-283, and I.M. Kennedy, "Treat me Right, Essays in
Medical Law and Ethics”, (1988), at pp. 360-361, where it is offered by way
of alternative. Nevertheless I find it hard to grasp. At several stages of his
discussion Professor Skegg frankly accepts that some manipulation of the law
of causation will be needed to produce the desired result. I am bound to say
that the argument seems to me to require not manipulation of the law so much

                                      -43   -
as its application in an entirely new and illogical way. In one form the
argument presented to the House asserts that for the purpose of both civil and
criminal liability the cause of Anthony Bland’s death, if and when it takes
place, will be the Hillsborough disaster. As a matter of the criminal law of
causation this may well be right, once it is assumed that the conduct is lawful.
See Reg. v. Blaue [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1411; Reg. v. Malcherek [1981] 1
W.L.R. 690; Finlayson v. H.M. Advocate 1978 S.L.T. (Notes) 60. It does not
perhaps follow that the conduct of the doctors is not also causative, but this
is of no interest since if the conduct is lawful the doctors have nothing to
worry about. If on the other hand the proposed conduct is unlawful, then it is
in the same case as active euthanasia or any other unlawful act by doctors or
laymen. In common sense they must all be causative or none; and it must be
all, for otherwise euthanasia would never be murder.

        A variant of the argument appears to put the ordinary law of causation
into reverse. Normally, when faced with an act and a suggested consequence
one begins by ascertaining the quality of the act and then, if it is found to be
unlawful, one considers its connection to the consequence. This variant, by
contrast, seems to begin the enquiry with the connection and then by applying
a special rule of causation determine the character of the act. I confess that I
cannot understand what mechanism enables this to be done. If the declarations
are wrong and the proposed conduct is unlawful it is in my judgment perfectly
obvious that the conduct will be, as it is intended to be, the cause of death,
and nothing in the literature or the reported cases from other jurisdictions
persuades me to any other conclusion. I should add that although part of the
thoughtful judgment of Thomas J. in the High Court of New Zealand in In re
J.H.L. (Unreported) 13 August 1992 discusses the question of causation, the
main thrust of the reasoning was aimed elsewhere, towards a solution which
is broadly in line with the one which all your Lordships have preferred.

4. Best interests of the community.

         Threaded through the technical arguments addressed to the House
were the strands of a much wider position, that it is in the best interests of the
community at large that Anthony Bland’s life should now end. The doctors
have done all they can. Nothing will be gained by going on and much will be
lost. The distress of the family will get steadily worse. The strain on the
devotion of a medical staff charged with the care of a patient whose condition
will never improve, who may live for years and who does not even recognise
that he is being cared for, will continue to mount. The large resources of skill,
labour and money now being devoted to Anthony Bland might in the opinion
of many be more fruitfully employed in improving the condition of other
patients, who if treated may have useful, healthy and enjoyable lives for years
to come.

       This argument was never squarely put, although hinted at from time
to time. In social terms it has great force, and it will have to be faced in the
end. But this is not a task which the courts can possibly undertake. A social

                                      -4 4   -
cost-benefit analysis of this kind, which would have to embrace "mercy-
killing" to which exactly the same considerations apply, must be for
Parliament alone, and the outcome of it is at present quite impossible to
foresee. Until the nettle is grasped, we must struggle on with the existing law,
imperfect as it is.


5.     Best interests: the termination of life.

          An alternative approach is to develop the reasoning of In re F [1990]
2 A.C. 1 by concentrating on the best interests, not of the community at large,
but of Anthony Bland himself. Just as in In re F, so the argument runs, the
best interests of the patient demand a course of action which would normally
be unlawful without the patient’s consent. Just as in In re F the patient is
unable to decide for himself. In practice, to make no decision is to decide that
the care and treatment shall continue. So that the decision shall not thus be
made by default it is necessary that someone other than Anthony Bland should
consider whether in his own best interests his life should now be brought to
an end, and if the answer is affirmative the proposed conduct can be put into
effect without risk of criminal responsibility.

        I cannot accept this argument which, if sound, would serve to
legitimate a termination by much more direct means than are now
contemplated. I can accept that a doctor in charge of a patient suffering the
mental torture of Guillain-Barre syndrome, rational but trapped and mute in
an unresponsive body, could well feel it imperative that a decision on whether
to terminate life could wait no longer and that the only possible decision in the
interests of the patient, even leaving out all the other interests involved, would
be to end it here and now by a speedy and painless injection. Such a
conclusion would attract much sympathy, but no doctrine of best interests
could bring it within the law.

        Quite apart from this the case of Anthony Bland seems to me quite
different. He feels no pain and suffers no mental anguish. Stress was laid in
argument on the damage to his personal dignity by the continuation of the
present medical regime, and on the progressive erosion of the family’s happy
recollections by month after month of distressing and hopeless care.
Considerations of this kind will no doubt carry great weight when Parliament
comes to consider the whole question in the round. But it seems to me to be
stretching the concept of personal rights beyond breaking point to say that
Anthony Bland has an interest in ending these sources of others’ distress.
Unlike the conscious patient he does not know what is happening to his body,
and cannot be affronted by it; he does not know of his family’s continuing
sorrow. By ending his life the doctors will not relieve him of a burden become
intolerable, for others carry the burden and he has none. What other
considerations could make it better for him to die now rather than later?
None that we can measure, for of death we know nothing. The distressing
truth which must not be shirked is that is that the proposed conduct is not in
the best interests of Anthony Bland, for he has no best interests of any kind.

6.     Best interests: the termination of treatment

        After much expression of negative opinions I turn to an argument
which in my judgment is logically defensible and consistent with the existing
law. In essence it turns the previous argument on its head by directing the
enquiry to the interests of the patient, not in the termination of life but in the
continuation of his treatment. It runs as follows-

       (i). The cessation of nourishment and hydration is an omission
       not an act.

       (ii). Accordingly, the cessation will not be a criminal act
       unless the doctors are under a present duty to continue the
       regime.

       (iii) At the time when Anthony Bland came into the care of the
       doctors decisions had to be made about his care to which he
       was unable to make for himself. In accordance with In re F,
       [1990] 2 A.C. 1 these decisions were to be made in his best
       interests. Since the possibility that he might recover still existed
       his best interests required that he should be supported in the
       hope that this would happen. These best interests justified the
       application of the necessary regime without his consent.

       (iv) All hope of recovery has now been abandoned. Thus,
       although the termination of his life is not in the best interests
       of Anthony Bland, his best interests in being kept alive have
       also disappeared, taking with them the justification for the non-
       consensual regime and the co-relative duty to keep it in being.

       (v). Since there is no longer a duty to provide nourishment and
       hydration a failure to do so cannot be a criminal offence.

        My Lords, I must recognise at once that this chain of reasoning makes
an unpromising start by transferring the morally and intellectually dubious
distinction between acts and omissions into a context where the ethical
foundations of the law are already open to question. The opportunity for
anomaly and excessively fine distinctions, often depending more on the way
in which the problem happens to be stated than on any real distinguishing
features, has been exposed by many commentators, including in England the
authors above-mentioned, together with Smith and Hogan "Criminal Law" 6th
ed. (1988), p. 51, H. Beynon at [1982] Crim. L.R. 17 and M.J. Gunn and
J.C. Smith at [1985] Crim. L.R. 705. All this being granted we are still
forced to take the law as we find it and try to make it work. Moreover,
although in cases near the borderline the categorisation of conduct will be

                                     -   46   -
exceedingly hard, I believe that nearer the periphery there will be many
instances which fall quite clearly into one category rather than the other. In
my opinion the present is such a case, and in company with Compton J. in
Barber 159 Cal. Rptr. 489, 490 amongst others I consider that the proposed
conduct will fall into the category of omissions.

        I therefore consider the argument to be soundly-based. Now that the
time has come when Anthony Bland has no further interest in being kept alive,
the necessity to do so, created by his inability to make a choice, has gone; and
the justification for the invasive care and treatment, together with the duty to
provide it have also gone. Absent a duty, the omission to perform what had
previously been a duty will no longer be a breach of the criminal law.

        In reaching this conclusion I have taken into account the fact that
whereas for almost all concerned the adoption of the proposed course will be
a merciful relief, this will not be so for die nursing staff, who will be called
on to act in a way which must be contrary to all their instincts, training and
traditions. They will encounter the ethical problems, not in a court or in a
lecture room, but face to face. As the United Kingdom Council for Nursing,
Midwifery and Health Visiting has emphasised, for the nurses involved the
interval between the initiation of the proposed conduct and the death of
Anthony Bland will be a very stressful period. Acknowledging this I hope that
the nurses will accept, as I believe, that sadly it is for the best.

        For these reasons I would uphold the declarations. Whilst there is no
need to go further it is better to mention one further point. The reasoning
which I propose is, I believe, broadly in line with that of your Lordships. But
I venture to feel some reservations about the application of the principle of
civil liability in negligence laid down in Bolam v. Friem Hospital
Management Committee [1957] 1 W.L.R.582 to decisions on "best interests"
in a field dominated by the criminal law. I accept without difficulty that this
principle applies to the ascertainment of the medical raw material such as
diagnosis,prognosis and appraisal of the patient’s cognitive functions. Beyond
this point, however, it may be said that the decision is ethical, not medical,
and that there is no reason in logic why on such a decision the opinions of
doctors should be decisive. If there had been a possibility that this question
might make a difference to the outcome of the appeal I would have wished to
consider it further, but since it does not I prefer for the moment to express no
opinion upon it.

                      IV. THE ETHICAL QUESTION

        After discussing the legal issues at length I will deal only briefly with
the ethical question which must be for most lay people what the case is really
about. With the general tenor, if not with the details, of what was said in the
courts below I respectfully agree. But I prefer to advance on a narrower front.
In law, if my conclusion is right, the way is clear for the doctors to proceed
as they and the family think best. If the principle of Bolam applies that is the

                                     -   47   -
end of the matter, since nobody could doubt that a body of reasonable medical
opinion would regard the proposed conduct as right. But even if Bolam is left
aside, I still believe that the proposed conduct is ethically justified, since the
continued treatment of Anthony Bland can no longer serve to maintain that
combination of manifold characteristics which we call a personality. Some
who have written on this subject maintain that this is too narrow a perspective,
so I must make it clear that I do not assert that the human condition
necessarily consists of nothing except a personality, or deny that it may also
comprise a spiritual essence distinct from both body and personality. But of
this we can know nothing, and in particular we cannot know whether it
perishes with death or transcends it. Absent such knowledge we must measure
up what we do know. So doing, I have no doubt that the best interests of
Anthony Bland no longer demand the continuance of his present care and
treatment. This is not at all to say that I would reach the same conclusion in
less extreme cases, where the glimmerings of awareness may give the patient
an interest which cannot be regarded as null. The issues, both legal and
ethical, will then be altogether more difficult. As Mr. Munby has pointed out,
in this part of the law the court has moved a long way in a short time. Every
step forward requires the greatest caution. Here however I am satisfied that
what is proposed, and what all those who have considered the matter believe
to be right, is in accordance with the law.

       My Lords, having said this I must admit to having felt profound
misgivings about almost every aspect of this case. I will not rehearse them.
I need only say that I entirely agree with and adopt everything said by my
noble and learned friend Lord Browne-Wilkinson at the conclusion of his
judgment.

       I would dismiss this appeal. ;
