Mr. C. P. Dorries,                                           My ref: RLW/AP/11K-93
H. M. Coroner,
H. M. Coroner’s Office,
Medico Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.                                                              15 August 1997
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

Re:    Hillsborough

Further to our conversations yesterday and as requested, I enclose the preamble to the
opening and resumption of the inquest into the circumstances surrounding the death of
Anthony Bland.

I await hearing from you with copy correspondence from those conducting the judicial
enquiry and before responding, as a matter of courtesy, I will seek the views of James.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




R. LI. Whittaker
H. M. CORONER

Enc.
                    Office of H.M. Coroner
                     The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                           South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                     (0114) 273 -87 21



                                                                               15 August 1997
Your ref:
Our ref:

Mr Roger Whittaker                                           18 AUG ^Cj?
HM Coroner
City Courts
The Tyrls
BRADFORD
West Yorkshire
BD211LA




Dear Roger
Hillsborough Inquest
Tony Bland (deceased)
I enclose a copy of a letter dated the 7th August from the Secretary to Lord Justice
Stewart Smith’s enquiry. I particularly draw your attention to the paragraph numbered six.
As you may know, the Tony Bland inquest was dealt with by James primarily because of
my own involvement with Hillsborough.
I would be grateful if you would consider the request that a copy of the summing up is sent
to Lord Justice Stewart Smith. No doubt you would also be able to answer questions
about when the Bland inquest took place and whether or not it was held before a jury.
As you will see, I have asked Mr Bone to write to you.
Kind regards.




C P Dorries
HM Coroner




                                      Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                     CMJ5465I.DOC
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 528
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171273 4347 Fax 2703



C P Dorries Esq                                                Your reference:
HM Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre                                            Our reference:
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET                                              Date:               August 1997



X><2<v             r    O Df>lo,
HILLSBOROUGH


Thank you for your letter of 5 August and for our helpful telephone discussion.

2.     As you know, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary to
conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I
am acting as Secretary to the scrutiny.

3.      It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence which was not
previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police
disciplinary authorities. If there is significant new evidence, he will aim to see if it would
have affected the outcome of any of the proceedings.

4.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary by the
end of the year. I attach a copy of his terms of reference.

5.     In the course of this exercise we will need to have access to the documents about the
incident and the proceedings arising out of it which are held by the various authorities
involved, including your office. I was grateful for your offer of assistance on this. I assume
that your Archive contains a full record of the proceedings at the Inquests and of the evidence
which was available at them. But it would be helpful to have a summary in some form of
any other material relating to the disaster which they contain.

6.     I am sure that would be useful to us as the scrutiny continues. As I said, the Judge has
specifically asked at this stage to see Dr Popper’s summing-up to the jury. Would you be
able to supply a copy of that, please? I would also be grateful for some material about the
inquest on the 96th Hillsborough victim, Tony Bland. I am not clear about when it took
place. Was it also held before a jury? If so, could we see the summing-up for that case also?

7.     We are of course in contact with the police, DPP, Attorney General and so on as well
as with the Hillsborough Family Support Group and others. As his scrutiny of the evidence

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\CORONER.Q28
proceeds Lord Justice Stuart-Smith may wish to interview some witnesses directly. He is
also willing to consider interviewing individual witnesses at their request. These interviews
will be private.

8.      I am of course happy to discuss arrangements with you or Dr Popper if you or he
wish. Please note that the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will
notify you of our permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HiLLSBOR\MAIN\CORONER.Q28
T erm s o f reference



To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;


       (a)   to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


      (b)    to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
             Generalfo r the purpose o f discharging their respective
             statutory responsibilities; or


      (c)    to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation
             to police disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
available is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the
Secretary o f State fo r the Home Department o f a further public
nquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any
evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
which should be taken in the public interest.
Mr. C. P. Dorries,                                                     My ref: RLW/AP
H. M. Coroner,
H. M. Coroner’s Office,
The Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.                                                               19 August 1997
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

Re:    Hillsborough Inquest
       Tony Bland, deceased

Many thanks for your letter of the 15th August with enclosure from the Hillsborough
Scrutiny. You did not enclose a copy of your response, but I am grateful that you have
asked Mr. Bone to write to me. Pending that letter I have written to James as a matter of
courtesy.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




R. LI. Whittaker
H. M. CORONER
Mr. Turnbull rang - re your letter regarding
the Hillsborough case and Tony Bland.

He is in ■-'?Smplete agreement with you and thanks you for
your courtesy in contacting him.

Ang.
21- 8 -97
Mr. J. A. Turnbull,                                                        My ref: RLW/AP




                                                                               19 August 1997



Dear James,

Re:    Hillsborough Inquest
       Tony Bland, deceased

Last week Chris Dorries contacted me following receipt of a letter from the Secretary to the
Hillsborough Scrutiny under Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. He wanted me to forward the
papers relating to Tony Bland to the Scrutiny and I suggested that he should write to the
Secretary indicating that you dealt with this matter within my current jurisdiction, and asking
him to write to me on the Tony Bland aspect. Chris Dorries’ main concern appeared to be
what, if anything, was said about him at your inquest, and the reasons for it being held in
this jurisdiction, rather than being offered back to Sheffield.

In a spirit of co-operation, which I felt you would approve, I copied him the preamble to
the opening and to the resumption, which record those reasons.

I now enclose a copy of a letter from Chris Dorries, together with details from the
Hillsborough Scrutiny, and ask you, as a matter of courtesy, what your views are with regard
to providing information to the Scrutiny concerning Tony Bland. My own inclination, subject
to your agreement, would be to confirm that you sat without a jury, the matter having been
thoroughly ventilated up to the House of Lords, and provide a copy of your summation and
findings.

You will see that in Chris Dorries’ final paragraph he must have thought to include his
response to the Secretary, which was however omitted.

Regards.

Yours sincerely,



R. LI. Whittaker
H. M. CORONER                                                                             Enc.
