                                                                      %

                                              13th May 1993




Professor the Lord McColl of Dulwich,
House of Lords,
Westminster,
London,
SW1


Dear Lord McColl

      Select Committee on Medical Ethics - Anthony Bland Deceased

On 29th March 1993 Mr.Dorries H.M Coroner for South Yorkshire (West
District) sent me a copy of your letter to him dated 19th March 1993
together with his reply dated 29th March. I am sorry that I have not
written to you sooner and I hope that this will not have
inconvenienced your committee.

I understand that you have been sent a copy of my letter to Dr. Howe
dated 24th August 1989. You will see from that letter that there
were a number of conversations with Dr. Howe and it may be that there
would be file notes of these amongst the papers. Unfortunately I am
not in a position to search for these as the papers,if any, are
located in Sheffield.

However I agree with Mr. Dorries that the substance of what I said to
Dr Howe would probably be in the letter which you already have. It
may however be worth pointing out that in the fourth paragraph of a
letter of 7th September 1989 to Dr. Howe I said:

"As you had raised the problem of future management with me it was
essential that I should point out that this was outside my
jurisdiction and that clinical decisions and management must be for
you but that they have to be reached or taken within the terms and
provisions of English Law both civil and criminal. This is of course
not only in your interests but also in the interests of Tony's
family.11

You will see both from the above quotation and also my letter of 24th
August 1989 that I tried to make it plain that as coroner I had no
jurisdiction. Nevertheless in the event of Tony's death a coronal
interest might well arise and it would not therefore have been wise
to find myself in a position where I might have to hold an
inquest on actions taken by others on what may have been
construed as permission from me.

Furthermore I was also of the opinion that even if I disclaimed any
jurisdiction there was nevertheless the risk that any direct or
indirect consents which I may be held to have given to a particular
course of conduct might still have been acted upon with possible
unfortunate consequences of liability in law, civil or criminal, to
the parties involved and possibly even to myself as a person having
knowledge of such actions.

Any advice given should therefore be on the side of caution.

You will see from my letter to Mr. Howe that although I included
antibiotic cover within the terms of my letter I seemed to have
distinguished to an extent between what might be called tender loving
care including the provision of the necessities of life on the one
hand and medical care as such on the other. As you will notice from
the 7th paragraph of my letter Dr Howe had apparently indicated that
he wished to withhold antibiotic cover and it was therefore not
possible for me to simply ignore this point in my response to him. I
have already stated the need for caution in any response that I might
give particularly as I had no power or authority to grant any
dispensations nor did I have jurisdiction over for example the crown
prosecution service.

You will also see from my letter that I was well aware that there
were clinical situations where it might be proper not to seek to
prolong a person's life by medical means including drug therapy. The
difficulty that I saw with this young man was that it was arguable
that he was not even terminally ill.

I understand from a report in the Times on 20th November 1993 that
the BMA in a discussion paper proposed that "intensive efforts"
to stimulate patients in a persistent vegatative state should be made
for at least 6 months and that no decision should be taken to
withdraw treatment for at least a year. Various other safeguards are
also laid down.

You will be aware that the Hillsborough disaster occurred on 15th
April 1989. My letter to Dr Howe is dated 24th August 1989 ie a
period of just over 4 months. I cannot now remember whether the time
element was a factor which at that time I took into account (possibly
my file notes might reveal this). However whether I did or did not it
seems that my view with regard to withholding treatment then is in
line with current thinking in cases such as these. Perhaps
serendipity played a part.

You will also see that I did not have the clinical management of the
patient and I was anxious that nothing should be done which might be
held to contravene the law and in particular the criminal law which
neither I nor the family or Dr Howe had power to dispense with.

Nevertheless I could see the dilemma that was facing Dr Howe and I
did even at that time suggest that advice should be taken as to
applying to the High Court for directions. This as you know was
eventually done and the case turned out to be both difficult and
novel and needed a decision from your House before final resolution.


In a nutshell then whilst recognising that in certain defined
situations clinical decisions regarding the discontinuation of
medical treatment might be taken by the clinician in charge of the
case I did not have the authority nor did I wish to give the
appearance of authorising any act or omission which might lay any of
the parties (including myself) open to liability and in particularly
criminal liability. In the events if the the BMA's view quoted above
prevails then the timing of the proposed actions would not have met
the BMA critiria.

I hope that the foregoing is of assistance to you. If there is any
thing further that I can usefully add please let me know.



Yours sincerely,




S . L . Popper




cc. Mr. C. Dorries      for information
    Rev. J. Turnbull^     11    11
