                                                                                                                                        Form MG11(T)


                                                          Witness Statement

Statement o f.................... .......................................................................................................................

Age if under 21 .....Q.Y.f.r..21...                              (if over 21 insert 'over 21').

This statement (consisting o f 4        pages each signed by me) is true to the best of my knowledge
and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
have w ilfu lly stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

Dated the          3rd     day o f        March                            19 93

S ignature              A ....& U M ....................................................




                   I am the natural father of ANTHONY DAVID BLAND who was born to

                  my wife,                                       on the 21st September 1970, in Keighley.

                  My son was a single man who lived all his life, excepting the last

                  three years, with my wife and I at the address shown overleaf.




                  I am able to say that my son has no history of any form of natural

                  serious illness.                   He was involved in a road traffic accident when

                  aged about four years.                         In that accident he sustained a fractured

                  pelvis, however, he made a good recovery and never suffered any

                  effects from it in his later years.




                  My son left school at age sixteen years and took up employment with

                                                                                 He remained in employment with that

                  company until sustaining serious injury in the Sheffield Hillsborough

                  disaster of the 15th April 1989.




                  I can say that my son had the usual hobbies of a single young man.

                  Amongst these and probably his greatest was following as a supporter

                  the Liverpool football team.                               He was an agent for the club development

                  fund, selling "scratch" game cards to raise funds.                                                  For his services




                                                                         Signature w itnessed by
Tele:
                                                                                 Form MG11A(T)
                                                                  Continuation sheet N o    ?........


Continuation of Statement of



               to the club he was given a ticket for the Sheffield Semi-final

               of the F.A. Cup.




               On Saturday, 15th April 1989, he left home about 9.40 am in company

               with two friends, IAN GREW and ALAN GILL, both               lads.    They

               travelled to the match in IAN's car.      I believe now that they reached

               the ground at or about 11 am and went into the ground well in advance

               of kick-off time to get a good place.




               IAN also being a member of the supporters club received a ticket from

               them.   There was a problem in so far as TONY, my son, had a seating

               ticket and IAN had one for the stand.      IAN wanted to be seated so they

               swapped tickets, TONY standing at the Leppings Lane end in pen three,

               with ALAN GILL.




               As is part of the history of that afternoon my son was one of those

               seriously injured in the crush which occurred when the gates were

               opened to the rear of the stand allowing many more spectators to

               flood in.




              About 6.15 pm on that Saturday evening IAN GREW informed me that TONY

              had not returned to his car.     I then travelled to SHEFFIELD and

              reported my son missing to the police.       About 12.30 am the following

              morning we learned that he was unconscious in the Northern General

              Hospital, Sheffield.   On our arrival he had been moved to Intensive

              Care at the Royal Hallamshire.




Signature      A. Bland                                           A. R. Meredith
                                        Signature w itnessed by
                                                                                  Form MG11A(T)
                                                                  Continuation sheet N o   .3.

Continuation of Statement of




               From the time my son was removed from the crush at Leppings Lane

               until his death on Ward 3, Airedale General Hospital on Wednesday,

               3rd March 1993, he has never regained consciousness.       He has remained

               deeply unconscious throughout that time.      My wife and I have been

               in complete agreement with the medical treatment he has received

               throughout his time in hospital and in particular his treatment under

               Dr HOWE at Airedale General Hospital, Steeton.



               At 10.30 pm Wednesday, 3rd March 1993, I formally identified the body of

               my son, ANTHONY DAVID BLAND, to PC MEREDITH the Coroner's Officer.




Signature                                                        A. R. Meredith
                                       Signature w itnessed by
