14/01   ‘94       13:36   ©0274    721794           ff.YORKS CORONER   l&IUUl




                                            ACTIVITY REPORT
              %


                          TRANSMISSION OK



                          TRANSACTION #            0009

                           CONNECTION TEL          0712733205

                           CONNECTION ID                  G3

                           START TIME              14/01 13:34

                          USAGE TIME                 01' 34

                           PAGES                     3
HER MAJESTY’S CORONER                                                    City Courts
For the County of West Yorkshire                                         The Tyrls
        (Western District)                                               BRADFORD BD1 1LA
                                                                         Tel: 0 2 7 4 -3 9 1 3 6 2




                                   FAX. INFORMATION SHEET




  For the Attention of                                                      oil      i l l     350




  FROM:                            Coroner’s Office, Bradford (Fax. No. 0274 721794)

  DATE:                            14 01-94
                                     -




  NO.PAGES
  (inc. this sheet)                 Three

  MESSAGE:
                                    Memorandum Relative to the Death of
                                    Anthony David Bland
     MEMORANDUM RELATIVE TO THE DEATH OF ANTHONY DAVID BLAND


Tony Bland died within my jurisdiction at Airedale General Hospital. The death was
known to be associated with injuries sustained in the Hillsborough football disaster. It
would have been appropriate to invite the Sheffield Coroner to deal with the inquest, but
he had been concerned whilst in private practice with the Hillsborough inquest in
Sheffield and it was therefore agreed that the Bland inquest should be held by me.

As is well known, Tony Bland never recovered consciousness as it is understood following
his injuries and because of the prospect of his death I was kept fully informed of
progress. At an appropriate time I interviewed the consultant in charge of his case from
a medical point of view and I also spoke with his parents.

When a decision was taken to consider the withdrawal of medical treatment the
consultant sought the advice of the former Sheffield Coroner, Dr. Popper, and was told
that he ran the risk of being charged with murder. With the full support of the parents
the Health Authority therefore applied to the High Court for leave to withdraw medical
treatment. I prepared to resume the inquest as soon as death occurred, but when it did
there was outstanding an application for judicial review of the principal inquest findings.
The result was not known until the 5th November 1993 and I decided, although Bland
died on the 3rd March 1993, that I would not resume the inquest until after the result
of this application was known.

Following the judgment in respect of the application for judicial review, which was
delivered on the 5th November 1993,1 proceeded to make arrangements to resume the
inquest and kept in consultation with the Blands’ solicitors throughout the course of this
preparation.

I came to the conclusion:-

1.     That having read the transcript of the Hillsborough inquest (which runs to
       80 volumes) no useful purpose could be served by a "re-run" of that
       procedure, which took many months.

2.     That I was bound by the decision of the High Court in respect of the
       originating summons confirmed by the Court of Appeal and the House of
       Lords and that therefore to seek to come to a different conclusion in
       respect of the medical treatment and that aspect of matters would be
       perverse, if not improper.

3.     That the proper purpose of the inquest would be fulfilled by restricting the
       evidence given to that which concerned Tony Bland personally.

4.     That these procedures would be adequate to answer the questions set for
       the inquest under the Coroners’ Rules.


                                                                           Continued/.
The Blands, through their solicitors, agreed entirely with my proposals and I resumed the
inquest on the 21st December 1993. I called evidence relating to Bland’s attendance at
the football match, of his removal from the ground to the hospital and his subsequent
treatment and the cause of his death disclosed at post mortem. I recorded a verdict of
accidental death. I decided not to sit with a jury for similar reasons to the ones I have
mentioned above.

I supply this summary as a matter of courtesy to the Home Secretary, though of course
there is no obligation upon me to do so. I hope that it is helpful to the Secretary of
State in answering questions which I understand are to be raised in the House.

I shall be glad to give further assistance should this be thought to be necessary.
