r- w ■ - |
Futile
Treatment
- or Futile
Patients?

  A conference to discuss
 the Implications of the Law
   Lords’ Judgment in the
   case of Anthony Bland

             to be held in the
Moses Room, House of Lords, S.W.1.,
  at the invitation of Lord Ashbourne,
               on behalf of
ALERT - Information on Euthanasia



 Tuesday 25th May 1993,
     10 a.m. - 5 p.m.
 Programme
10.00 Opening of Conference

10.10 Professor John Finnis, FBA, LLB, DPhil,
      Legal Implications of the Bland Judgment

10.50 Questions

11.00 Professor Peter Millard, FRCP
     Morals and Ethics: understanding the
     difference and the need for balance
11.40 Questions

11 50 Miss Sarah Whitfield, SRN
      Nurses in the Front Line
12.30 Questions

12.45-2.00 p.m. LUNCH INTERVAL
     (see overleaf for ticket application)

2.00 Dr. Maureen Tudor
     Patients with severe brain damage - some
     surprises

2.30 Questions

2.45 Mrs. Lilian Sailery
     F u tile -o r Fruitful?

3.30 Questions
4.00 Dr. Peggy Norris
     Hippocratic Medicine: the ethic which
     protects the vulnerable
4.30 Questions and Discussion
5.00 Close of Conference
Access to the House of Lords is via St. Stephen’s
Entrance - please show inivitation. If access for a
wheelchair is required, please notify ALERT, tel.
071-730 2800
D o e s the provision of food and water through a
tube to iielpjess patients constitute “medical treat­
ment,” as the Law Lords decided in the case of Tony
Bland?

“The distressing truth which must not be shirked
is that the proposed conduct Is not in the best
interests of Anthony Bland, for he has no best
interests of any kind,” wrote Lord Mustill in his
Judgment. Is it ethical for doctors and nurses to take
steps to end the lives of patients in the interests of
society at large?

Can medical ethics change along with changes in
law and government policy? Or could the time come
when “the ideas of those who hold political power
would lead to the denial of the fundamental values
on which Medicine is based”? (War Crimes and
Medicine, British Medical Association, 1947.)

 “Doctors who for conscientious reasons would
feel unable to discontinue life support” (food
and fluids) “can presumably, like those who
have a conscientious objection to abortion,
abstain from involvement in such work.” (Lord
Goff of Chievely in his Judgment.) How difficult
would such abstention be for doctors, and for nurses?
The new law which follows from the Tony Bland
judgment contains no Conscience clause. Is fresh
legislation needed?

Supporters of euthanasia have proposed Bills, one
of which will be considered by the House of Lords
Select Committee on Medical Ethics (originally
entitled the Select Committee on Euthanasia) which
is due to report at the end of this year. Neither of
these Bills acknowledges the right, or the duty, of a
doctor or nurse to have nothing to do with procuring
the death of a patient.

Some families of P.V.S. patients feel that their
relatives are now under threat. Nurses, who will be
responsible for the care of those selected for death,
fear that their voice may be unheard. Hospital
doctors may face discrimination in employment.
This conference has been called to give a forum to
some of the many people affected by the Anthony
Bland judgment and to propose action.
LUNCH TICKETS ORDER FORM
Lunch for conference participants has      arranged
at Grandma Lee’s restaurant, Bridge Street, opposite
Big Ben, price £5.


To: ALERT - Information on Euthanasia 27 Walpole
Street, London SW3 4QS

I would lik e              tickets for lunch @ £5 each
Name (s)............................................ ....................


Address.


Cheques payable to ALERT


Alert aims to act as a bridge between individuals
and organisations, in Britain and abroad, which are
concerned by the growing threat of legalised
euthanasia. It has been founded to provide well-
documented information on euthanasia and related
issues, and to defend the lives and rights of the
medically vulnerable. Alert is a British initiative,
funded only by donations from people in this country.
It is affiliated to the International Anti-Euthanasia
Task Force, the U.S.A.’s primary source of
information opposing euthanasia, and is in touch
with the World Federation of Doctors who Respect
Human Life, of which the headquarters is in Belgium.
Subscription for mailings £10 yearly (£2 unwaged).


Patrons: Mr David Alton MP,The Lord Ashbourne, Mr Alistair
Burt MP, Councillor Adrian Fitzgerald, Mr Kenneth
Hargreaves MP, Dame Jill Knight DBE MP, The Earl of
Longford KG PC, Baroness Masham of llton, Professsor
Peter Millard FRCP, Mr Anthony Nelson MP, The Lord
Robertson of Oakridge, Baroness Ryder of Warsaw CMG
OBE, Sir Teddy Taylor MBE MP, Mr Gary Waller MP,
Advisers: Professor Elizabeth Anscombe FBA, Dr Anthony
Cole FRCP DCH, Professor John Finnis FBA LLB DPhil, Dr
D. J. Hill FFARCS, Mr Piers Paul Read, Rabbi Dr Nisson E.
Shulman, Dr Jampa Thaye, Dr D. Wainwright Evans MD
FRCP DCH
Chairman: Dr. Peggy Norris Hon. Secretary: Mrs. E.
Chowdharay-Best
                                                                    ALERT
                                                  INFORMATION ON EUTHANASIA
A conference to discuss the implications o f the Law Lords’ Judgment in the case of Anthony Bland
is being sponsored by Lord Ashbourne in the Moses Room, House of Lords, from 10 am to 5 pm
on Tuesday 25th May. Please take this as an invitation to attend.
Speakers include Professor John Finnis, FBA, Professor Peter Millard, FRCP, Dr. Peggy Norris,
Dr. Maureen Tudor and Mrs. Lillian Sallery. Below are some propositions from Professor Finnis’
talk.


NOT FOR PUBLICATION BEFORE TUESDAY 25th MAY

Some propositions from Professor John Finnis’ talk on the legal implication of Bland
The “requirement” of prior “approval” by a Judge, before discontinuance of food and water will
soon be dropped. It is incoherent with the Lords’ opinion that discontinuance of food and water is
often a legal duty, and continuance often a legal wrong (perhaps even a crime).
The most striking legal “development” in Bland is the wholly novel principle that it can be lawful
(and even compulsory) to embark on a course of conduct with the precise aim, purpose and intention
to bring about the death of an innocent person.
The judges all failed even to mention the obvious legal alternative to their position. This alternative,
which would have been a genuine development of the previous law, instead of its reversal, was: people
who have a duty to care for someone may never exercise that duty in a manner intended to bring about
the death of the person in their care. There was much more legal authority for that proposition than for
the position embraced by the Lords. Most of the judges simply ignored that authority, which was not
even cited to the judge at first instance and was not mentioned in oral argument in the Court of Appeal.
The law should be restored by Act of Parliament to its former position, clarified in the following terms:
those who have a duty to care for someone may never exercise that duty in a manner intended to bring
about the death of the person in their care.
The judgments in Bland are full of a dualistic assumption that there can be a living human being who
is not a person or has no personal or human life. This is philosophically indefensible.
The judgments all fallaciously assume that if tube-feeding is part of medical treatment or care it is
therefore not part of the non-medical care which decent families and communities provide for their
utterly dependent members.
The ruling in Bland probably applied even where the unconscious patient is being fed by spoon.
The judgments confuse being in an undignified position with suffering an indignity. This has the
absurd implication that the nurses who devotedly cared for Anthony Bland were humiliating and
demeaning him.
The judgments give a status to “reputable medical opinions” which is inconsistent with the Rule of
Law. On the same day as the first judgm ent in Bland, the highest court in Australia unanim ously
rejected this sort of deference to medical opinions.


FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE RING 051-489 5996 or 071-730 2800
