AMBULANCEMAN              - HOYLAND STATION


Vehicle:   B1202


Incident at Hillsborough Football Stadiua


On Saturday 15th April 1989, my c o l l e a g u e a n d         myself were
approaching Barnsley District General Hospital, Casualty Department, when
we heard on the radio that a Barnsley mobile was also en-route to Barnsley
District General Hospital to pick up a team of Doctors.


Unaware of what had happened we contacted control while we were at Barnsley
District General Hospital casualty and asked if we would be of assistance
and control asked if there was a medical team waiting to go.     There was
not, but shortly afterwards the Barnsley mobile arrived; he was single
manned and told us he had come to take a medical team to Hillsborough.        I
went into casualty and found a team had been formed.            myself and the
driver of the Barnsley mobile,                loaded the equipment and the
medical team onto the Barnsley mobile and control then instructed us to
escort the Barnsley mobile to Hillsborough on "red".      En-route to
Hillsborough we were told to report to the medical centre at the ground and
on arrival asked where the medical centre was - the Police directed us.


At no time were we informed of what had occurred during the journey from
Barnsley District General Hospital to Hillsborough and on arrival we joined
the end of the line of SYMAS crews who had lined their vehicles up in
single file.   We were the last two vehicles in line and had to carry the
team's heavy equipment all the way to the front of the queue where we were
met by a SYMAS officer.    When I told him the medical team from Barnsley
District General Hospital were with us he told us to go to the gymnasium
inside the ground and report to the SYMAS officer there.      On doing this he
said the team was not required and that we should take them back to the
Barnsley vehicle and collect body bags off all SYMAS vehicles waiting
outside and when this was done asked me to get some blankets and place two
beside each of the deceased.     Having done this, he told me to return to my
colleague who was with our vehicle but when I got there he had been teamed
up with another member of the service so I continued to help other members
of SYMAS with the incident until it had calmed down.
Ambulanceman




At about 1730 hours all SYMAS personnel and vehicles congregated at the
rear of the gymnasium and told crews on 1400/1600 hours to return to normal
duties and those on 1000/1800 hours to return to their stations.   Also
SYMAS Personnel who had volunteered to attend the incident to continue and
assist control if they wished.   As far as 1 am aware the additional
personnel were to be picked to help return the remainder to their stations.


We returned from the incident at approximately 1805 hours.
