      1.                     born 6.8.49 am 39 years old.   I am a control
           assistant with SYMAS stationed in the Rotherham control

           unit.    I have been employed in the same work for almost 9
           years.


      2.   I usually work shifts, but Saturday 15th April 1989 was my
           day off.   I was at home at about 1545 when I received a

           telephone call from Rotherham control.       The call was from

                         She informed me that there had been a major
           incident, and could I go to control at Rotherham at once.


      3.   My husband drove me to the control room:- I arrived at 1600.

           When I arrived I noticed that a number of control room staff

           who were off duty had come in:- they were all busy but
           everything seemed to be calm and orderly.


      4.   In the control room I saw a telephone that was not being
           used, next to control officer             He told me to sit by
           that telephone.


      5.              told me as much as he knew of the incident and I
           then took calls on the telephone.      During the next hour I

           took many calls,      mainly from press but some were from

           medical staff who were unable to contact the hospitals.


      6.   These calls from medical staff came to us because they were

           unable to contact the hospitals themselves, and they wished




571
      to know if they were required to go to work.



7.    I arranged for               to go to Barnsley General as a

      liaison officer.   I also tried to contact           |to go to

      Rotherham District General but when there was no reply I
      contacted               and sent him to Rotherham District

      General to act as liaison officer.



8.    I also took calls from the Northern General hospital,

      requesting transfer of a total of three patients to the
      Hallamshire for C.T.Scans.                   took care of the

      requests and they were completed.



9.    I took calls from off duty ambulance personnel who were

      offering to come in and help.        I took their telephone

      numbers and asked them to standby.    They would be contacted
      if required.



10.   During the afternoon I took a call from police force control

      telling us no more ambulances were required at Hillsborough,

      I passed the message on to both controls.


11.   It was 2100 when I left and even though it had been a very

      busy afternoon I felt from my experience that the work had

      been carried out efficiently and without fuss.
Dated the   day of
