                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                  REPORT



NAME:      Leading Ambulanceman                  |

VEHICLE:

SHIFT:     Off-duty

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:    19 April 1989 - 0940 - 1010 hours



I was off-duty on Saturday 15 April 1989, I became aware through local
radio at approximately 1530 hours, that there was a serious incident at
Hillsborough Football Ground.     I telephoned Ambulance Control offering my
services and was told to report to my Station (Longley).


I arrived on Station at approximately 1600 hours and crewed up with off
duty Ambulancewoman                 on Renault Ambulance S482.     We travelled
from Longley to the ground via Herries and Penistone Road, and arrived at
the entrance to the gymnasium.      I went immediatley to the gymnasium with
all my equipment which included defibrillator, I & I box and all the fluids
which had been stored at Longley.


I saw Mr Hopkins in the Gymnasium and he told me to get all the body bags
that I could lay my hands on.       I collected approximately five body bags
from vehicles that were standing by on Penistone Road and took them back to
the Gymnasium.    I then went back to Penistone Road and liaised with both Mr
Jones and Mr Eason and assisted with vehicle organisation and movement.       I
also assisted with the evacuation of the last minor injured casualties.


Mr Jones then sent me along with other staff and Station Officer Higgins to
collect bodies from the Leppings Lane end of the ground and we brought them
back to the temporary mortuary in the Gymnasium.         I assisted with the
transportation of six bodies from that area in two ambulances.
2


19 April 1989


Leading Ambulanceman




Mr Jones then asked me to walk up to Leppings Lane and collect his staff
car from that area and bring it back to the Gymnasium Car Park.      Mr Jones
asked me to check all the fuel levels on all Ambulances that were parked in
the Gymnasium Car Park.   Shortly after this I took with other crews two
Ambulances to refuel at Longley Station.     I returned to the ground and
eventually left the scene and signed off at Station at 2040 hours.
