DATE OF BIRTH 4.4.1945
QUALIFIED AMBULANCEMAN (SYMAS)

1.   I have been with the service for about 14 years.   I attended
     the Markfield Training College at Leicester in about 1977.
     I obtained the Miller certificate which enables me to cover
     all aspects of ambulance work including outpatients and
     emergency.    I am stationed at Barnsley ambulance station.     I
     work a fifteen week rota system and the duties vary
     according to which rota we are on.     The duties are normally
     for emergency vehicles though occasionally outpatient work
     is covered.


2.   We are all aware of the major incident plan.    The procedure
     is on the rear or the   ID cards.    In addition to this there
     is a manual on station covering procedures in more details.


3.   On the week leading up to the Hillsborough incident I was on
     rota one which is nights.       This was from Wednesday to
     Tuesday inclusive 2200 to 0600.


4.   On the afternoon of Saturday the 15th I returned home and
     was watching the football on the TV.     At about 1510 the TV
     went live to Hillsborough and covered the incident.           I
     realised that there was an emergency situation developing at
     the ground and therefore telephoned Symas control.     I spoke
     to someone on duty and asked if they needed help.        They
replied yes and asked me to go to my station as soon as
possible.I changed into uniform and drove to Barnsley
station which is about 3 miles from my home.


On arrival at the station I reported to the leading
ambulance on duty,             .   I told him briefly about the
situation at Sheffield Football Ground and that control had
asked me to come in.                informed control that I had
arrived and control requested I take a vehicle to Barnsley
General Hospital to pick up an emergency medical team and
their equipment and transport them to Hillsborough.


I took vehicle 1104 which is an emergency vehicle and went
single handed to Barnsley General to collect the team and
their equipment.       I informed control on my arrival at
Barnsley General and met the team.      I assisted them to load
the equipment and then the one doctor and two nursing staff
boarded the vehicle.      At Barnsley General there was a
Hoyland vehicle with ambulancemen             and             We
agreed to go in convoy to the ground having regard to the
emergency.


We set off at speed using lights and sirens.        We came down
the Ml turning off at Birdwell and then approached Sheffield
through Grenoside.     We were contacted by control en route
who requested we approach the incident by Leppings Lane
entrance to the ground.       We came down from Grenoside, the


                         20
Halifax road to the roundabout with Penistone Road.       There
were police on duty who directed us to Leppings Lane.


Leppings Lane was packed solid with supporters on foot.
With the sirens of both our vehicles the crowd parted and we
made our way through with the Hoyland Vehicle in front.       I
was concentrating on avoiding colliding with any of the
pedestrians.


We entered the ground at Leppings Lane and were directed by
police.     We drove round the rear of the south stand access
road to join Penistone Road.     I turned left and could see
that there were three ambulances parked up on Penistone Road
by the ground.     We parked to the rear of them.    Mr D Jones
who appeared to be the incident officer came up to our
vehicles.    He asked me who I was and what I had got with the
vehicle.     I told him I had brought a medical team from
Barnsley general Casualty together with their equipment.     He
directed me to take the team and their equipment to the
gymnasium.


Leaving the ambulance secured we took what equipment we
could carry between us and I got a traffic warden to help us
carry it.    I went into the Gymnasium entrance to the ground.
It was busy with supporters milling around.    Ambulances were
reversing in and loading casualties.          We got to the
gymnasium entrance with the team and equipment.     We were met
      by Alan Hopkins who asked me who we were and what equipment
      we had.     I Informed him that It was Barnsley General Medical
      team and their equipment.    He suggested that at that time we
      were not required.     We returned to the vehicle and loaded
      the equipment back on.           On return to the vehicle the
      ambulances in front had gone and we were effectively at the
      front with vehicles to the rear of us.


11.   I was preparing to leave the incident and drove up a few
      yards to Mr D Jones.        I informed him that we were not
      required.     Jones said that as we had a Doctor he should go
      to the gymnasium.    I asked about their equipment and he said
      to leave it on the vehicle.         the team then left for the
      gymnasium.


12.   D Jones then asked me to go to the parked ambulance vehicles
      and collect blankets and body bags.     The blankets were to be
      left at the gate and the body bags had to go into the
      gymnasium.     I went to the parked ambulances and as far as I
      can recall there were three.      I collected their blankets and
      body bags.     I left the blankets at the gate and took the
      body bags to the gymnasium.       As I went to the gymnasium I
      guided an ambulance driven by            (from Rotherham) up to
      the loading point near the gymnasium.


13.   I took the body bags into the gymnasium and laid them out by
      the deceased. Together with a police officer I moved two or


                                 22.
         three bodies a distance of a few feet in order to make
         access.


14   .   I then left the gymnasium and reported to D Jones at the
         gate.     He directed me to take my vehicle and park up at the
         Herries Road Bus Depot.        I drove to the depot directed by
         police.    There was an ambulance officer on site directing us
         where to park.    I waited there    for   about one and a quarter
         hours..


15.      I was then requested by the duty officer to park up on the
         Penistone Road duel carriage way.         I was on the opposite
         side of Penistone Road to the ground.              As far as I can
         recall there were about three vehicles at the same point.
         The scene appeared to have calmed down.


16.      We were asked to go into the rear of the gymnasium car park
         leaving our vehicles on Penistone Road.       Mr D Jones asked us
         to wait as Mr Page was wanting to speak to us.            We got a
         drink from the police canteen.      After a short while Mr Page
         went into the gymnasium.


17.      I asked Mr Jones if I could be excused at about 1815
         because I was on night duty at 2200.        He said that I could
         leave and I took the vehicle back to Barnsley General and
         off loaded the medical teams equipment.        I made my way back
                                                   /9 o o   I
         to Barnsley station and signed off at 2100. ________


                                   £3
Dated this   (0   day of     1989*




                           ll\
