                       states:-


1.   I am employed as an ambulance woman for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is 26th July 1968.


3.   From September     1984 to September 1986 I wasan ambulance
     cadet at SYMAS.      In September 1986 I passed outas a   cadet.


4.   Since passing out as a cadet I have been based at Rotherham
     Ambulance Station.


5.   On Saturday 15th April I was on duty from 0900 to 1630.        I
     had been off duty the previous day.        I was on duty with
     ___________ . The call sign of our vehicle was Romeo 505.


6.   At about 1510 we had called in green at Badsley Moor where
     we had just     transferred a patient       from casualty at
     Rotherham District General Hospital.     We were told to go to
     the Wednesday football ground at Hillsborough.     We proceeded
     on red.   Whilst on the way to the ground I heard control say
     "proceed to gym entrance";      this may have been a general
     instruction or specifically directed to us.


7.   We approached the ground from Herries Road where we saw a
     policeman.    I asked him to direct us to the gym entrance and
     he did so.        I think there was one ambulance outside the
      ground and two in the yard.                   When one of the ambulances from
      the yard drove off we reversed into the yard.


8.    Mr Hopkins was in the yard.                   He helped us take a young man,
      aged about 20, from under the cop and put him onto a
      stretcher.     He seemed to have crush injuries and a broken
      leg.   We got him back to the ambulance to find that our
      other stretcher had gone as had our suction unit and some
      other equipment.       Some people then came up with a child of
      about ten years olcL on an advertising board.                     We put the
                   C/)<S<&xro&
      child on a canopy sheet on the floor of the ambulance and
      put him on oxygen.                              stayed with the patient.    I
      recall that there were a number of police on horses in this
      area at the time.


9.    I drove out of the ground and the police escorted us on
      motorbike to Northern General Hospital.                   That is the nearest
      hospital to the ground and any ambulance man or woman would
      have known to go there unless instructed otherwise.                         I
      radioed control that we were going to Northern General.                    We
      unloaded our patients at Northern General where staff were
                                 -w d i'c d
      waiting for them, tpeQ up the back of the ambulance, and
      radioed in green at Northern General, returning to ground.


10.   When we got back to the ground there were two ambulances
      waiting to go into the yard and we pulled up behind them.
      After just a couple of minutes our turn came to reverse into



                                              Z5I
      the yard.   Again we collected two patients.     Both came from
      under the cop.   The first patient was about 20 years old,
      male, and seemed to have injuries to his pelvis and ribs, he
      had no feelings in his legs.     The second patient was about
      the same age with crush injuries.     I do not recall seeing
      the police horses in the yard on this occasion.


11.   By this time we had heard an     instruction overthe radio to
      take all patients to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and we,
      therefore, proceeded to the Royal Hallamshire.     Again we had
      a police motorbike escort.     Because of congestion outside
      the ground we had to turn left on leaving the yard and left
      again to go down Leppings Lane, to travel south towards the
      Royal Hallamshire.


12.   We arrived at the Royal Hallamshire, again tidied up and
      called green at the Royal Hallamshire.     We were instructed
      to stand by on Netherthorpe Road, where we joined about four
      ambulances and further ambulances subsequently joined us.
      We probably waited there for something like half anhour,
      listening to the radio all of the time.


13.   We then received an instruction to go to the Royal
      Hallamshire to transfer patients to King Edwards Hospital on
      Rivlin Valley Road.   These were patients who had previously
      been at the Royal Hallamshire who were being moved to make
      room for the Hillsborough victims.   We had to wait some time



                               IS 2.
      at the Royal Hallamshire for these patients to be loaded up
      because of arrangements being made In hospital.


14.   We transferred two stretcher patients to the King Edwards
      Hospital and at about 1815 we called green at King Edwards
      and were told to return to Rotherham Ambulance Station and
      call In before signing off.   We arrived back at Rotherham
      Ambulance Station at 1845, tidied up the ambulance and
      logged the various Items of missing equipment before
      contacting control to sign off.
Dated this   "7   day of                1989.
