                   states:-


1.   I was born on 5th August 1942


2.   My title Is Leading Ambulance man and I joined the service
     In 1969 or 1970 when I was based at Batemoor.    Approximately
     18 months after joining the service the Miller qualification
     scheme was introduced, and so I proceeded to undertake a six
     week residential course in Lancashire.          Thereafter,    I
     carried out full operational duties for the 12 month period,
     and I became qualified.


3.   I was based at Lodge Moor for a short while.     I then became
     an Assistant    Controller,     followed   by   promotion     to
     Controller.   Some time thereafter I decided to revert back
     to being an ambulance man, initially based at Lodge Moor and
     then on to Middlewood.     Approximately four years ago I was
     promoted to Leading Ambulance man.


4.   I have paramedic training, which is formally known as
     "extended training”.     Approximately eight years ago a few
     colleagues and I decided to learn the theory of extended
     training, all being carried out in our own time as members
     of the Association of Emergency Medical Technicians.
     Approximately 3 years ago the National Health Service
     decided to formally bring in the concept of extended
     training and I applied immediately for extended training,
which in particular included practical training.     From the
theoretical view point,      one is taught anatomical and
physiological training, along with medical and traumatic
jorvtew.      The practical training involves intubation,
defibrillation, ECG interpretation and drug therapy.      This
training was spread over a period of approximately two years
and I am actually still continuing to regualify each year
and I am also attending up dating course, especially when
new drugs are introduced.


My shift for Saturday 15th April 1989 was 1400 until 2200.
I travelled to Middlewood directly from home and I arrived
at approximately 1315.          I proceeded to check all my
equipment including ECT monitor, defibrillation and drugs.
Ambulance man        I, with whom I was crewed, arrived at the
Station a short while afterwards.    I was attendant for this
day.


Prior to our involvement at Hillsborough I recall having to
deal with two incidents, the first in Sheffield with a
No ttingham     Forrest   supporter with asthma    requiring
treatment,    whilst the,/ second involved transferring a
casualty from, J "bullwe, the                 Nursing Home to
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.


As the second patient was being loaded onto our ambulance at
_______, I heard on the vehicle radio that messages were
being passed between Control and ambulance officers at
Hillsborough.     I knew for a fact that there was a semi final
taking place at Hillsborough and when I heard these calls I
immediately thought to myself that there was something
wrong, although I had no idea of the nature of the incident
at this time.


Ambulance man             and I took the transfer to Royal
Hallamshire as quickly as possible, and as we were heading
to the hospital we heard on the vehicle radio that control
was requesting all vehicles with patients on board to off
load as quickly as possible at their destination.     I knew at
this time that there was a major incident taking place
because such messages are very rarely given.          Once the
patient had been off loaded at the transit ward at the RHH,
Mr Smith and I returned to the ambulance and radioed Control
to inform them that we were clear.       We were immediately
directed to the gymnasium entrance at Hillsborough, which is
off Penistone Road.    We were also informed to switch to ERC,
which stands for Emergency Reserve Channel.     We were to use
this channel in relation to Hillsborough, whilst the normal
domestic channel was used for other emergencies.


We approached the football ground from the south, and as we
were travelling along Penistone Road there were quite heavy
traffic queues.    We used the central reservation to get past
a number of vehicles and entered the ground at point A
    marked on the attached plan.        We were actually directed in
    by a police offers to a point marked B on the attached plan.
    We could go no further because of the number of vehicles and
    people at this point.


10 . I immediately saw a casualty being carried out on an
    advertising board through the gap between the North Stand
    and the Spion Kop.     I got out of the vehicle and by the time
    I had made by way to the back, the rear doors were already
    open   and               and I took the casualty off the
    advertising board and put him immediately onto the cot
    inside the vehicle.     I began to examine this male casualty,
    whist a second casualty was put into the vehicle on the
    second cot.     By this time I had decided that the first
    casualty was dead.     The second casualty was also male, but
    he was alive and in a very poor condition.       He was actually
    displaying signs of brain damage, probably as a result of
    hypoxia, because he had dilated pupils and his left arm was
    twitching, which indicated possible cerebral irritation.
    The casualty was breathing, he had a good pulse, but was
    clearly unconscious.     I decided as a matter of priority to
    treat this casualty.


11. There was an attempt to put a third casualty on the
    ambulance between the two cots but I refused this request as
    it would have meant my being unable to work on the second
    casualty.    I instinctively told             that we should go



                              5^
      directly to Northern General Hospital, with the fatality
      still on board.             got back into the cab and drove to
      the Northern General whilst I treated the second casualty.
      I monitored the casualty to make sure that he was breathing
      and gave him oxygen via a venti-mask.


12 . As we arrived at casualty, and the doors were opened, we
      were met by a number of porters with hospital trolleys
      waiting to receive casualties.     Dr Jim Wardrup and Charge
      Nurse Batty were also waiting at casualty entrance.      With
      the assistance of some hospital porters, the live casualty
      was placed on the hospital trolley and              and I were
      directed to take the casualty into resuscitation.      At this
      point,   we handed the casualty over to a doctor and I
      indicated to him what I thought were the casualty's
      injuries, namely chest injuries and brain damage.


13.               and I went back to our vehicle, took the fatality
      out on a cot, and Charge Nurse Batty directed us down to the
      orthopaedic clinic which was being used as a temporary
      mortuary.     When we arrived at the orthopaedic clinic I
      noticed that there were a number of dead bodies, including a
      young boy, who we placed onto an examination couch.
            and I placed our fatality from the ambulance onto the
      couch.


14.   On arrival back at our ambulance, I radioed Control, and



                                60
appeared to not be making contact on ERC.       I then reverted
to channel 2, i.e. the domestic channel, and was able to
speak to Control Officer                   I informed
that we were clear and asked for confirmation that we could
return   to    Hillsborough.                  replied   in the
affirmative.              drove straight back to Hillsborough,
with the intention of entering the ground at point A marked
on the attached plarL*»   As we were approaching point A, we
met Station Officer Eason, who told                Ito go to a
specific location which I cannot remember.      Mr Eason wanted
me to take my specialist equipment into the gymnasium which
I quickly did.   On entering the gymnasium I saw a number of
fatalities laid on the floor to my right, at a point marked
C on the attached plan.      The gymnasium had actually been
divided into three areas, with two nets being the dividers.
I attended a number of casualties and gave whatever
assistance I could to the doctors, in particular to set up
infusions by using my infusion and intubation box.       After
some time I turned by attention to evacuation because a
number of doctors were saying that casualties required
transportation to hospital as quickly as possible.           I
carried out a quick count of stretcher cases, and organised
sufficient stretchers for each casualty.


One of the doctors inside the gymnasium then sent me over to
the first aid room of the St. John's Ambulance Brigade,
which is underneath the North Stand, at a point marked D on
      the attached plan.      When I arrived at this room I found a
      casualty being looked after by a doctor, who required no
      assistance apart from someone to organise the transfer of
      this casualty to hospital.     I organised for this casualty to
      be loaded onto a vehicle and taken up to hospital.


16.   By this time,    Alan Hopkins was Inside the gymnasium
      directing operations.     Once the stretcher cases had been
      taken away, I toured the third area Inside the gymnasium,
      which appeared to contain walking wounded.      There were not
      many casualties inside this area, and I understand that all
      were transferred to hospital by mini bus.      Whilst walking
      around this area, I collected contaminated sharps (i.e.
      needles put into veins to set up an IVI) and placed them in
      my   "sharp   case",    i.e.   a y ellow   plastic   container
      specifically for contaminated items.


17.   I then began to assist with the matter of organising for the
      transportation of fatalities out of the gymnasium, which
      included handing out body bags.


18.   David Jones then gathered together all SYMAS staff at the
      parking area behind the gymnasium,     and ascertained which
      crew members were on which particular shifts.         Mr Jones
      wanted to stand emergency crews down so that they could
      return to normal duties, and by this time my driver, __
             had returned into the ground with his vehicle.       ___



                               U
             and I were told to stand down and we returned to
     Middlewood.             drove straight back to Middlewood and
     I would say that we arrived back shortly after 1800.
             and I returned to normal duties until our shift
     finished at 2200.




Dated this         day of   Ha     1989.
                                                                                                    Main Police Access

  Sheffield Wednesday F.                C.                                                 Police
    Hillsborough Grnunrl                                                         Room



                                                                     Gymnasium




                                                             NORTH STAND




                                                            Player ’«
Away Fans Entrance                                          Tunnel

  and Enclosures


        Police Control      19-22                         so uth s ta n d
                                                                                                                   I
                                    f" i f      w in m
                                    Official
                                                                                    2 9 -3 2 3 3 -3 6       Park
                                                                                        C ar           \
      KEY

     TURNSTILES    P777T)
                                               D irectort Entrance
