                 states:

1.   I was born on the 7th August 1943.

2.   I am a qualified ambulance man.

3.   I joined the Sheffield ambulance service on      the 4th May 1970

     at Corporation Street Ambulance Station, Sheffield.          I moved

     to Longley Ambulance Station in 1973 and I have remained

     there since.

4.   I obtained the Miller Certificate in 1972,after attending

     the compulsory six week residential course.        I     have since

     attended refresher courses and in-house training exercises.



5.   On Saturday the 15th April,     I was at home when a neighbour

     informed me there was    an incident     at the H i l l s b o r o u g h

     Football Ground.   The neighbour was listening to a radio and

     he relayed to me that there was a report of an incident

     involving crush injuries and that there had been a request

     for doctors and any first aiders to go to the ground.
6.   I telephoned Control and had difficulty contacting them. My

     home is only three minutes away from Longley Station and I

     drove to the Station.

7.   I tried to telephone Control from the Station but I could

     not get through.   I took a ten seater mini-bus and used the

     radio   in the vehicle to contact Control.             I eventually

     managed to make contact with Control using Channel 2.             The

     call sign of the vehicle is Sierra 45/ and its number 670,

     registration number UWG    140 T.     I estimate my time           of

     arrival at Longley Ambulance Station was between 1520 and


                               3^1
       1540.

8.     I picked up my bag from my locker and told Control I was

       ready to go as a single handed crew.      Whilst pulling out I

       saw ambulance man                      who was arriving at the

       Station.   I left the Station and Control    instructed me to

       report to the gymnasium entrance at the ground.      I did not

       know where the gymnasium entrance to the ground was.         I

       approached the ground using Herries Road South and followed

       a vehicle    from the Junction of Herries     Road South   and

       Penistone Road and which was directed by the police into the

       gymnasium entrance of the ground.

       The scene which greeted me was chaotic.         I saw Station

       Officer Eason and I reported to him.    He told me to park the

       vehicle up on the pavement and report to the gymnasium.

       There were vehicles and people all over,      ambulances were

       reversing in and there were police vehicles, and St. John's

       ambulance vehicles too.    Added to this there were many fans

       and injured people     in the area.     I made my way to the

       gymnasium and when I entered I saw about 70 bodies laid out

       on the floor in the temporary mortuary.         I spoke to an

       ambulance officer who told me they had been instructed to
                                  /
       expect 50 dead, however -be estimated there were already 70

       laid out dead

10 .   I saw    Leading   Ambulanceman                      from the

       Middlewood Ambulance Station.       I believe he is a Para­

       medic.     I told him I had a ten seater ambulance.     I had

       intended to collect walking wounded and ferry them to the
       H osp ita l.    However     from   meeting   Leading Ambulanceman

                      I assisted   loading   casualties     together      wi th

       policemen, firemen and ambulancemen onto emergency vehicles.

       I transferred bodies covered by blankets into body bags and

       spent my time helping to bag the bodies.               Two or three

       officers requested body bags and I remember Alan Hopkins was

       asking for body bags.       I assisted with bagging the bodies as

       best I could.

11.    On returning to my vehicle I was told to stand by. I stood

       by and after 15 minutes or so I helped Station Officer Eason

       to marshall and reverse vehicles into the ground.
12 .   After a short time Station Officer Paul Eason sent me to the

       gymnasium.     This was my second visit to the gymnasium and I

       again   assisted     with   the    bagging   of   bodies   ready    for

       identification.

13.    I remained in the gymnasium bagging bodies until there were

       no more bodies to bag.
14.    I returned to the parked ambulance and ADO Jones told me to

       park the vehicle on the central reservation.          I parked the

       vehicle and waited for a while until a colleague

                    and I paired up as a double handed crew.

                    was to be the driver and I the attendant.       We were

       instructed to park the vehicle to the rear of the gymnasium

       on the instructions of a senior officer.

15.     Later we were briefed by an officer and told that the only

       casualties now at the ground were dead.
                                                           &H/0 I
L6.    Sometime after the briefing                            was instructed
                                                            A


                                      3S3>
      to go to the Royal Hallamshire and collect a body.          We

      travelled to the Royal Hallamshire and collected the body

      after a short delay.    We returned to the ground and took the

      body to the gymnasium.        We were then instructed to go to

      the Royal Hallamshire to collect two bodies.     We arrived at

      the Royal Hallamshire and there were no bodies awaiting

      collection.    The police constables radioed their Control and

      we radioed our Control to try and clarify the situation.    We

      did not collect any bodies and returned to the ground with

      the police constables whereupon we reported to Control and

      were ordered to stand down.

17.   We returned the vehicle to Longley Ambulance Station and
                      0-1
      signed off at ^ 5 5 .

18.   I am aware of a major incident plan but not specifically for

      Hillsborough and I have been on exercises for that plan some

      three years ago.



Dated this     £    day of                1989
