                                                                         DI BB L U P T O N
                                                                         BROOMHEAD
                                                                         -------------------- S O L I C I T O R        S --------------------


                                                                                                                                                                                      6 Butts C o u rt
         V     „ [                                                                                                Leeds LSI 5JX
           ° Ur 6 '                                                                                               Telephone 0532 439301
         0     R f                                                                                               Fax 0532 452632/428891
            Ur '              •»                  ^                                                                                              Telex 557181
                              AJC/SO C                                                                                                                                        M D X 12.017 Leeds


                                                                                                                                                                             6 July 1989

                              R. M. Whalley Esq.,
                              Secretary to the Inquiry into
                              The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
                              50, Queen Anne's Gate,
                              LONDON,
                              SW1H 9AT


                              Dear Sir,
                              Hillsborough Inquiry
                              Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS
                              We refer to your note of 29th June and enclose ten copies of
                              Counsel's closing statement.  We have sent two copies to the
                              Treasury Solicitor and to each of the solicitors for the other
                              parties.
                              The statement is divided in five sections dealing with the
                              following matters
                              I:            Criticisms of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                            Ambulance Service.

                              II:           Interim Recommendations.

                              Ill: The Police's failure to recognise the disaster. You will
                                   recall that when cross examining P.C. Waugh (on the final
                                   day of evidence) our Counsel undertook to provide a
                                   chronology and a r gument r e l a t i n g to P.C. Waugh's
                                   conversation with the police control at Hillsborough at
                                   14.59 in which he asked whether they required ambulances.

                              IV:           Outline Comments on Various Factors Relevant to the Matters
                                            Within the Inquiry's Term of Reference.
                              V:            SYMAS Equipment.


* m i TO [     * A S m ,,h s. N . L. G halton B .B .F in h D .P .R e ad G .D .C .S h a w T. H . Reed L. N . R oberts J. A. V. Wade (N otary PubUc) M .P .W .L ee C D .T rip p e tt C .D .Ibberson M. Jenkins
I M-     B        .         Bentley J. A. B. Buchan M issJ. C. BoJer JL M. Sutton J. JL S. L azenbyJ. D. Sim on T. B. Knight W. M. W righy J. R. H ir n p M. E. Cowell P. M. Anson K. McLoughJin
I   K.  whitiam D. A. Thorpe P. A. Rhodes A. G. Chappell P. D . Barton T. H . Ratdiffe N . P. Dickson N. G . K nowks, Miss A. S. D uchart K. A. Royle J. M. Rowlands A. D. Darwin T. J. Pope
|                                              W . K. P. Ballmann A. J, Callaghan M .G rabiner P. E. Cranston T. J. Whiteside G. J. Smallman C . Staton
I               N * D Slater R*      Bore^am Mrs J. S. Street S. D. Robertson M . S. Jackson Miss J. L. Atkinson A. D . H olt A. M. Kerr D. A. Jameson K. Docherty J. R. H . Sykes P. N . Firth
1 .    M,ss A- G or*j N . L. Thompson Mrs E. W. Wilkinson M rs J . Jackson D . A. Smyllie J. S. Crookes C . T. Tulley M rs S. J. Gaskill A. D. Bennett Miss J. E. Hampson J. Yorke D. J. Gray
I                                                                        D. P. Mosley S. P. Houghton (Scotland) H . C . Evans
|                                                                       Consultants: E. C. Bousfield S. L. Batiste MP C. T. Peach

|   f         i**4 ^   fO                                  Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business
                         DI BB L U P T O N
                         BROOMHEAD(




Continuation


Date           6 July 1989




          The Interim recommendations have been specifically drafted with a
          view to them being Implemented, if the Inquiry agreed with them,
          in time for the commencement of the 1989/90 season.
          Inevitably there is some overlap with Phase Two, but we will
          include these matters again when we come to deal with Phase Two
          of the Inquiry.
          Yours faithfully
                          INDEX

SECTION                                         PAGE

          Criticisms of SYMAS                          1-6

II        SYMAS' Interim Recommendations               7-11

III       South Yorkshire Police Failure
          to Recognise the Disaster
          A.   Summary                                 12 - 14
          B.   Key                                     15 - 16
          C.   Chronology                              17 - 21
          D.   Argument                                22 - 32

IV        Outline Comments on Various Factors
          Relevant to the Matters within the
          Inquiry's Terms of Reference                 33 - 37
          SYMAS's Equipment
          1.   Front Line Emergency Equipment          38 - 39
          2.   Contents of Rescue Box on Front
               Line Ambulance                          40
          3.   Ambulance Aid Satchel                   41
          4.   Extended Trained Ambulanceman's
                Equipment                              42 - 43
                   CRITICISMS OF SYMAS

Implicit criticisms of SYMAS appeared         in quotations
contained in an article which appeared in The Times and The
Independent of 17 April 1989.    They also appeared in other
newspapers.    The remarks were made by two doctors who
attended Hillsborough as Liverpool supporters on 15 April
1989.   During the course of the evidence it became clear
that the first five criticisms by Doctor A related to events
in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand and terrace (day
25 pl21D).




DOCTOR A


1. "At 3.30 pm there were no medical personnel apart from
   one or two St John's ambulancemen. There was no medical
   equipment and there was only one ambulance."
   FACTS:
   a.   Ambulances arriving at Leppings Lane (see video RJH2)
        1513    S407 arrives (leaves 1523)
        1516    S203 arrives (leaves 1528)
                (by 1530         _ from this ambulance is on
                the pitch - video MAPI)
        1521    S208 arrives (leaves 1532)
        1535    R608 arrives
        This doctor cannot have arrived in the concourse
        until about 1535.
   b.   About 40 casualties are taken from the Leppings Lane
        end by SYMAS, of which 5 were removed by 1532.   All
     casualties had been removed from that end of the
     ground by 1606 (SYMAS recording track 19 page 19).
     Therefore about 35 casualties, all of whom survived
     were conveyed by SYMAS vehicles between 1532 and
     1606.



"Lack of triage"
FACTS:
a.   SYMAS personnel operated triage:
     -   see               statement, paragraph 7
     -   see Mr Yoxall's evidence - day 23 page 126F
     -   see             1 statement - paragraphs 15 to 18
     -   see             Istatement - paragraphs 16 and 21
b.   Other personnel - police - also:
     - see               ~1 evidence - day 17 page 159E-H



"A full casualty team with resuscitation equipment did
not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm."
FACTS:
a.   A full casualty team arrived at the designated
     casualty clearing station (the gymnasium) at the
     Penistone Road end of the ground. _____________
     statement paragraph 12 shows that the medical team
     left Northern General Hospital at 1544; it would
     therefore have been at the ground by 1550 at the very
     latest.
b.   A casualty team did not attend at Leppings Lane and
     all casualties had been removed from that end of the
     ground by 1606 (see above).
c.   A further casualty team arrived from Barnsley
     District General Hospital at the designated casualty
     clearing station but was not required.
d.   The implication that only the casualty teams would
     have resuscitation equipment is wrong.   All SYMAS
     frontline ambulances carry portable and fixed
     resuscitation equipment which was used at Leppings
     Lane.   Fire    service also carried resuscitation
     equipment.



"There was no oxygen, airway tubes and drips.
FACTS:
a.   No oxygen       -     Wrong =     All SYMAS frontline
                           ambulances carry pneupac minuteman
                           oxygen resuscitators and have a
                           static supply of oxygen on board.
b.   No airways - Wrong:
                         i. All SYMAS frontline vehicles carry
                            a selection of airways, and a large
                            number were inserted.
                     ii. If the doctor means to refer to the
                         lack of intubation equipment, such
                         equipment is carried by paramedics
                         for use by them as they are trained
                         to use it.     Although there were
                         some doctors present in the crowd
                         who were competent to use such
                         equipment had it been available for
                         general use (apart from that
                         brought by paramedics and the
                         medical team) it is impractical to
                         expect a supply of such equipment,
                         which can only safely be used by
                         those trained to use it, to be
                         available on the offchance that
                         suitably qualified persons may be
                         among spectators. (This doctor
                         admitted that it was some time
                         s i n c e he had c a r ried out an
                         intubation himself - see day 25
                         page 124D).
                    iii. A consultant anaesthetist (day 25
                         p27D) agreed that if the tube were
                         wrongly inserted it could kill the
                         patient. The treatment that was
                         being a d m i n i s t e r e d by police
                         officers, fans, St John's and SYMAS
                         ambulancemen, namely CPR, was the
                         correct treatment               in t h e
                         circumstances and undoubtedly did
                             save lives.
     c.   No drips     -     Wrong:
                           i. Infusion equipment is carried by
                              paramedics, and requires special
                              training, however, there is no
                              evidence that any casualty was
                              prejudiced by the lack of infusion
                              equipment.
                       ii. Medical Team (gymnasium) obviously
                           had I.V. drips because spectator
                           nurse F J Eccleston gave evidence
                           that he set up 10 drips ready for
                           doctors (Transcript day 5 pl5D).



5.   "More lives could have been saved if staff and equipment
     had arrived earlier."

     FACTS:
     a.   Before he was reminded that he had made such a
          statement to the press, Dr in chief (day 25 page 115G
          to 116G) accepted that it was pure speculation
          whether or not further lives could have been saved
          (day 25 page 115G to 116D), and on cross examination
          (day 25 page 127C to D) agreed that it was
          "unfortunate" that he had sought out the press to
          make public pronouncements which it was not possible
          for him to make.
     b.   If as SYMAS submit, the crushing started at the very
          latest at 1459, by the time that any medical
          a s s i s t a n c e got to the most severely crushed
          spectators they had been deprived of oxygen for over
          4 minutes and therefore it is unlikely that the
          presence or otherwise of such equipment made any
          practical difference.



DOCTOR P
6.    "Complains about the lack of defibrillators"

      FACTS:
We believe that the Inquiry accepts that the use of
defibrillators on the pitch in the circumstances of
this t r a g e d y would have been professionally
irresponsible, (day 19 page 31C) (day 24 page 103F)
(day 25 page 24A and 29A).
In case anybody has any doubts about it we list the
difficulties:
  i.   If wrongly used it can kill:
       - the patient
       - the operator
       - any third party coming into contact with the
         patient.
 ii.   Before being used national guidelines for
       ambulancemen lay down that an ECG reading for
       diagnosis should be obtained from the machine.
       In order for the reading and diagnosis to be
       accurate the patient and the defibrillator must
       be completely isolated from any movement and
       the s u r r o u n d i n g e n v i r o n m e n t m u s t be
       sufficiently stable to permit an accurate
       assessment of the ECG recorded. Spurious
       readings can occur in a crowd.
iii.   in the circumstances of this tragedy when
       otherwise relatively fit individuals were
       rendered hypoxic (lack of oxygen), the likely
       heart pattern is asystole (continuous line of
       electrical activity with no effective heart
       contractions) and not ventricular fibrillation.
       The purpose of a defibrillator is to jolt a
       fibrillating heart rhythm back into a normal
       pattern.   The standard treatment for asystole
       is CPR. Successful CPR would normally produce
       a regular heart pattern rather than ventricular
       fibrillation.
 iv.   However, given the length of time during which
       most of the patients had been deprived of
       oxygen, even the use of a defibrillator would
       not have made any practical difference (see Dr
       P's statement to the police, page 7 "my
       thoughts that in view of the length of time he
       was pulseless it would probably be kinder if he
       died.   I am sure he must have been severely
       brain damaged by that time" and at the bottom
       of the page "I looked desperately for somebody
       not dead but seriously ill who needed help. I
       could not find anybody in that category in the
              goal area.   They were either all dead or okay
              with nothing in between.")
Ambulance Equipment
1.   A list of equipment carried by all SYMAS frontline
     ambulances, the contents of a rescue box carried on a
     frontline ambulance, the contents of an ambulanceman's
     satchel and the equipment carried by an extended trained
     ambulanceman are contained in Section V.
2.   This equipment is intended for use by SYMAS personnel and
     not by third parties.
3.   Much of the equipment has to be kept with the ambulance
     for use on the journey to hospital.
4.   The primary purpose of the ambulance is to give immediate
     treatment to casualties and convey them to hospital.
5.   On 15 April 1989 many SYMAS ambulancemen treated
     casualties with CPR and resuscitation, as well as
     conveying 172 injured to hospital. Any criticism of lack
     of equipment on SYMAS vehicles is ill-informed.
           SYMAS' INTERIM   RECOMMENDATIONS


amhulance Service Attendance

At any Specified Activity where the attendance is expected
to exceed 25,000 and/or the past history and/or other
circumstances indicate that ambulance service presence is
desirable (a "critical match"),   the holder of the safety
certificate should invite the statutory ambulance authority
to attend with such personnel, vehicles and equipment as
shall be agreed between them but in any event not less than
an officer with one vehicle and crew,         the appropriate
payment being made by the holder of the safety certificate.
This is in addition to the present attendance of St John
Ambulance Brigade or the British Red Cross.


First Aid Room


Each club being the holder of a safety certificate, should
maintain a first aid room, equipped to a basic standard, as
specified by the licensing authority after consultation with
the appropriate ambulance authority.
    Doctor


    The Football League, Football Association and the relevant
    licensing authority should require clubs holding safety
    certificates and intending to stage a critical match to

    arrange that the doctor in attendance:


    a.    is trained and competent in advanced first aid to a
          standard equivalent to a NHS TA Paramedic;


     b.   is available to treat any injured spectators and to
          attend the first aid room, when called upon to do so.




     Communication


     There shall be an agreed and common method of communication
     between all the emergency services, if necessary with the
     assistance of a dedicated radio and/or telephone direct link
     to the ground and the respective headquarters.




VV
     liaison

.


     Before each critical match the liaison officers from the
     police and ambulance service should make contact and arrange
to be in direct contact with each other during the match.
The police liaison officer should be in direct contact with

police control.


Emergency Plan


For all designated grounds there should be a joint and
common   emergency plan drawn up by the relevant police
authority, fire service, statutory ambulance authority and
the holder of the safety certificate.       The emergency plan

should detail:


a.    The relevant      function of each service during an

      emergency.


b.    The liaison officer from each service, preferably by
      name,   their   respective     station   and   particular

      responsibility.


c.    The agreed rendezvous points for each service and the
      (named) police officer who is responsible for collating
      and issuing     information to,    and coordinating the

      response of, the relevant services.


 d.   Emergency access and egress.
e.    Casualty clearing point.


f.    Preferred routes to and from hospitals, to be kept clear
      by the police during an emergency.




Licensing Authority


The licensing authority should satisfy itself before issuing
the safety certificate that a joint and common emergency
plan (as described in paragraph 6 above) is in existence for

the designated ground.




Advice From Statutory Ambulance Authority


The statutory ambulance authority should be asked to advise
the issuing authority for each safety certificate on the

question of:


a.    access and egress for ambulances


 b.   medical equipment


 c.    attendance of ambulance personnel and vehicles at

       critical matches
1




            and should be consulted before there is any variation in
            the terms of the safety certificate as regards items a,

            b and c above.




    9.   amendment to 1975 Act


         SSGA 1975 be amended so as to require the licensing
         authority to deal with applications for safety certificates
         within six months failing which it shall be deemed to have

         been refused.
                                                                          III

                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - FAILURE TO RECOGNISE THE DISASTER


                                          SUMMARY


                                          SYMAS' submission is that South Yorkshire Police were in a

         • '   .                          position to identify the existence of a disaster by 1459
                                          hours at the very latest.             In fact,   as the attached
                                          chronology shows, they failed to do so before 1505 hours and
               ;        :       :         failed to call SYMAS until 1508 hours.
                   \7 ■ .-, . ' :■
                   K-;--:7,
I';:7'
   .u
                            >.            In view of the unchallenged medical evidence it is SYMAS'
                            v
                                          submission that those 9 minutes were critical,        and of all
                                     ■

                                          the claims that lives could have been saved, this is the
                                     i
                                          only one with any merit.




                                          SYMAS' submission is that there is evidence to indicate that
                                          supporters were being crushed to death by 1459 hours and
                                          that this         was evident    to anyone whose mind was not
                                                     Ltioned by the need to contain supporters within the
                                                itral pens.




                                           7.
                                                                          12




                                            7 '7 7
It is SYMAS' submission that the persons who were in a
position to, and should have recognised the plight of the
persons in pens 3 and 4, are the police officers in the
control box, and those stationed along the perimeter track

in front of pens 3 and 4.




Evidence


a.   Photographs South Yorkshire Composite Album 2.


b.   Photograph produced by leading Counsel for South
     Yorkshire Police on day 19 (transcript          19 p35D).

     DB17/15.


c.   Photographs taken by the Liverpool Echo and produced to
     the Inquiry by Counsel for the Football Supporters

     Association. Document 278.


d.   Transcripts of messages received and despatched by

     Force Control at Snig Hill.


e.   Evidence of witnesses - both fans and police.
In order to follow the above submissions the following
chronology which Counsel undertook to supply to the Inquiry
will be of use.
VIDEOS:


There are four videos "to which reference is made, namely.

RJH2          -    This is the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                   film taken from the camera which has a fixed
                   view onto the back of the courtyard behind
                   turnstiles A-G.

MAPI & MAP9 -      These are tapes of videos made by BBC Outside
                   Broadcast Unit one using an operator set
                   database and the other using a computer set
                   database. For the purposes of this schedule
                   no distinction is drawn.

TB2                This is the film made by South Yorkshire
                   Police on the CCTV system using operator set
                   database.



TRANSCRIPTS


SYMAS 1           Track 9              ) DOCUMENT 128A and 128B
                                         These are a
                                         transcription of tapes
SYMAS 2           Tracks 10 & 11         made at SYMAS HQ of calls
                                         received from Force
                                         Control SNIG HILL.

 SNIG     I       SA/1. KWP 30/15/17    This is a transcription
 Part     1        Document 34          of tapes made at SNIG HILL
                                        Force Control (F/C) con­
                                        taining messages received
                                        from SWFC Police Ground
                                        Control (G/C) and messages
                                        transmitted by F/C to
                                        other police units
               SNIG       I     =   SA/2 KWP 30/15/18    This is a continuation of
               Part       2                              the transcript of SNIG 1

               SNIG       II         SA/6 KWP 30/9/17    This is a transcript of
                                    Document 129         a separate tape made at
                                                         F/C containing messages
                                                         from F/C to the Fire
                                                         Service and SYMAS

               SNIG       III         F1A 1230           This is the Extended
                                    Document 73          Incident Log compiled
                                                         F/C. For the purposes of
                                                         this chronology this tape
                                                         is not relevant.

               SNIG       IV         KWP 30/14/17        This is a further
                                    Document 254         transcript of SNIG 1
                                                         containing the background
                                                         messages on the tapes
                                                         representing inter alia
                                                         traffic picked up from
                                                         VHF Channel 25 which was
..   ■■,
                                                         being monitored by F/C.
                                                         The times on this tape
                                                         are identical to that on
 .    ' i'V.

     '■it3
                                                         SNIG 1.


               NOTE
               -------—




               There is a discrepancy between the times recorded on SYMAS
               computer transcript and SNIG HILL transcript. They are only
                  matter of seconds in most cases and for the purposes of
                  Ls chronology the times have all been taken where two are
               available from the SNIG HILL transcript.        In such cases
                 lere there is no SNIG HILL transcript and the time
                equence, as recorded on the SYMAS transcript, is not in
                 Lne, a figure in brackets represents the best estimate if
                    SNIG HILL time is applied to the SYMAS transcript.




                                                    16
c.     CHRONOLOGY


TIME           SOURCE                   EVENT

14.48.04       Video RJH2               GATE C opened: Surge of about 150
                                        people per HSE Report p .7.



14.48.31       Video RJH2               GATE C closed.



14.51.30       SNIG IV p.l              "Speech heard in background"
                                        "Letting anybody through." "It's
                                        bloody chaos at Leppings Lane
                                        because thousands can't get in,
                                        they have just broken gates down
                                        and Superintendent M a r s h a l l ' s
                                        screaming for them to open the
                                        inner gates and to let people in
                                        and Murray's saying in control,
                                        we've got to monitor tickets, if we
                                        get Liverpool mixed up with Notts
                                        Forest they ' r e going to have
                                        trouble even if we get a serious
                                        problem."



     4.52.06    Video RJH2              GATE C opened for second time.
                                        Entry of about 2,000 people per HSE
                                        Report p.7.



                SNIG I Part 1            F/C giving out messages to other
                                         police v e h i c l e s c o n c e r n i n g a
                                         missing policeman.



       53 to     SNIG II    P P - 2-6    Chat and banter between F/C (PC
       Is';                              Rook) and other forces about not
                                         accepting any loads due to the
                                         footbal1 match.
                                         SYMAS submit that listening to the
                                         tape gives no indication of any
                                         crisis or concern in F/C.

                                           17
SNIG   Part 1    Superintendent Brougham radios
p.7              in that he attended Leppings Lane
                 end with a PA but "they’ve already
                 got a PA in use there so we are now
                 resuming back to driving school".
                 Again listening to the tape no
                 suggestion of any panic or concern
                 in F/C.


RJH2   TB2       GATE C closed.   Area behind GATE C
                 is clear.


SNIG    Part 1
p.7              Reports from traffic control that
                 city centre clear of traffic.


SNIG X Psrt X
p. 8             Telephone call to Ground Control "I
                 don't know whether we need any yet"
                 "No I'm ringing Ground Control".
                 PC Waugh rings G/C (PC Ryan) "Yes
                 i t ’s o p s . Do y o u w a n t any
                 ambulances. We are trying to
                 monitor to you but you know it's
                 ..." Ryan: "It's chaos at the
                 moment, we've got no reports of
                 injuries but we, if you can monitor
                 the situation if you can just keep
                 standing by."



RJH2             GATE C opened third time.   Steady
                 stream being monitored by mounted
                 police.     Fans having to show
                 tickets (see evidence of Macrell
                 transcript day 30 p.99E-G).



 SNIG IV p.8     "Background speech" "Superintendent
                 Marshall are you calling me, over"
                 "Can we close the gates again?"
                 "Yes, they can be closed, God
                 bless?"
SNIG I Part 1
p.9               G/C calls for dog handlers.


SNIG I Part 1
pp.9 & 10         F/C summons dog handlers to GATE 0.



SNIG I   Part 1
p. 10             G/C calls Operation Support.


SNIG I   Part 1
p. 10             F/C sends more dog handlers.


SNIG II p.8       F/C puts SYMAS on notice that
SYMAS 1 p.l       "ambulances might be required".
                  Conversation between PC Rook and
                  Superintendent Clarke.


SNIG I   Part 1
p.11              G/C - F/C: "Fleet of ambulances to
                  Hillsborough."


SNIG II p.9       G/C - SYMAS: (continuation of the
SYMAS 1 p.3       same phone call as at 15.07.01)
                  "Fleet     of a m b u l a n c e s to
                  Hillsborough".


SNIG I   Part 1
p.12              G/C (Ryan) to F/C: "Ambulances to
                  Leppings Lane end please, Leppings
                  Lane." "Roger, a m bulances to
                  Leppings Lane end."
                  PC Waugh to SYMAS



                    19
            SYMAS 1 p. 4
            per SNIG HILL      )   "Ambulances to Leppings Lane end
15.09                              a big fleet immediately, as many as
            times              )
                                   you’ve got please."

15.09.40    SNIG I    Part 1
            p. 13                  F/C to G/C: "Is ACC with you?"
                                   "Please confirm Operation Support"
                                   ACC gives confirmation.



15.10.55    SNIG I Part 1
            p. 10                  F/C (Rook) to SYMAS: "Just to let
            SYMAS 2 p.l            you know we have called Operation
                                   Support.        There are hundreds
                                   i n j u r e d t r a m p l e d underfoot,
                                   everything." SYMAS tells Rook that
                                   they are responding.



15.20.10    SNIG I    Part 2
            p.l                    G/C to F/C: "Can you confirm we
                                   have more ambulances on route-
                                   only have 3 at this location at
                                   present."

 15.23.50    SNIG I   Part 2
             p.3                   F/C to G/C: "Our last instructions
                                   were for ambulances to Leppings
                                   Lane. Is there any change? Over"



 15.24.30    SNIG I   Part 2
             p.4                    F/C to G/C: "We would like some
                                    ambulances also to GATE 0. Things
                                    are getting blocked up at the
                                    Leppings Lane, some ambulances to
                                    GATE 0 please."



 15.24.50    SNIG I    Part 2
             p.4                    F/C to G/C: "Where's GATE 0?"l!




                                      20
SNIG I   Part 2
p.7               G/C to F/C: "Could you ask for
                  radio message Hallam to request t
                  crowd application - yes stand
                  yes. Requesting for doctors
                  attend at the stadium, doctors
                  the stadium."


SNIG I   Part 2
p.7               F/C to G/C: "Roger, requesti
                  Radio Hallam for doctors to atte
                  at the stadium, over.”
D.   ARGUMENT


1.   SUMMARY

a)   SYMAS submit that the telephone call at 14.59 from Snig Hill
     to Ground Control by PC Waugh was not, as claimed by PC
     Waugh, prompted by overhearing the conversation between
     Superintendent Marshall and Ground Control.


b)   It is SYMAS' submission that the length of time that elapsed
     between the end of the communication from Superintendent
     Marshall and the making of that call (some 8 minutes) is
     consistent with an urgent call being made as a result of
     overhearing scenes of desperation and crowd distress
     indicating a need for ambulances.


c)   We propose to deal with each gate in turn in support of our
     contention that in fact it must have been the cries of
     distress from supporters within the perimeter fence and the
     request by officers stationed at the perimeter gates which
     prompted the call by PC Waugh.



2.   WAS IT GATE C?

a)   When was Gate C Opened?
     Gate C was opened for certain on three occasions.
          Opened                        Closed
          14.48.04                      14.48.31
          14.52.06                      14.57.35
          14.59.12                      15.02
                               22
b)     Could P.C. Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate C?


i.          Waugh alleges that it was Gate C in his statement and
            in his evidence to the Tribunal.
ii.         However, his statement was not made until 27 June 1989,
            after the existence of that conversation had been
            discovered by Counsel for SYMAS.
iii.        In chief (day 31 p.lllB) PC Waugh said that he had
            telephoned G/C "immediately after" the repeated
            requests for the gate to be opened.
iv.         In cross examination (day 31 p.H4D) PC Waugh confirmed
            that he had made the telephone call "within seconds" of
            hearing the repeated requests to open the gates.
v.          There is no evidence from Marshall that he asked Gate C
            to be opened on the third occasion.   In any event the
            evidence is that the third opening of Gate C was a
            controlled operation not caused by a crush outside.
            See:
                 - Bain: statement p.4 at the bottom of the page.
                 - Mr Macrell: transcript day 30 p.99E-F
                 - RJH2: supporters still entering at a steady
                 stream               (14.59.12).
vi.         The 8 minute time lapse between "Superintendent
            Marshall's screaming for the gate to be opened"
            (14.51.40) and the telephone call made by PC Waugh
            (14.59.30) is not consistent with PC Waugh's making the
            call "immediately after" or "within seconds of" hearing
            the repeated requests. No panic or dangerous crushing
            evident from the evidence on the video (RJH2) prior to
            Gate C being opened for the third time.
vii.        No evidence as to precisely when Gate C was opened for
            the third time and no evidence that the third opening
            was occasioned by any repeated requests from an officer
            for it to be done.
viii.       SYMAS submit therefore that it is unlikely that it was
            the request to open Gate C which occasioned PC Waugh to
            make the telephone call at 14.59.
3.     WAS IT GATE B?


a)     When was Gate B Opened


i.          Gate B was under the control of serial 15 and Sergeant
            Burns.
ii.         Stewards            and Ridge were also present at Gate B.

iii.        The evidence was as follows:

                         (Statement):        "Gate B not opened before
                                             kick-off."    If this is
                                             correct Gate B was not
                                             opened before 14.59.30.

                 RIDGE (day 21 P.128A)       "Police ordered me to
                                             open the gate at 14.55, I
                                             said "No way"".

                 PC AITKIN
                 (Statement p .4):           "Gate B opened.      200
                                             supporters came through,
                                             then with PC Ford and
                                             ________ we closed the
                                             gate.    I looked at my
                                             watch it was 15.02."

                 (day 17 p.61H
                 -p.62A):                    PC Aitkin confirms _____
                                             (... as to time) but PC
                                             referred to says Gate C
                                             already opened.


       Could PC Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate B?


i.          There is limited evidence as to exactly how Gate B came
            to be opened.   The main evidence comes from Sergeant
            Burns.

                                     24
           SERGEANT BURNS           "I pleaded with Inspector
           (day 17 p.30G):           Bennett to open Gates
                                    (B) and stop the crushing
                                    outside."
But:
           a.     No mention of possible fatalities;
           b.     No mention of reguest being made by radio;
           c.     In any event Sergeant Burns's radio was not
                 working (see day 17 p.33G) "Radio dead since
                 14.30. Not working until I heard the call for
                 pitch invasion."


           INSPECTOR BENNETT (day 15 P.66E-G)

           a.    Not make any request to F/C to open Gate A.
           b.    Not aware of any such request to F/C.     Did
                 not notice how or why Gate B was opened.
            In all the circumstances, and in view of the
            evidence that has been given, we submit it is
            evident that conversations relating to the Gate B
            to be opened could not have been overheard by PC
            Waugh.
            Fans not shouting and screaming. Opening the gate
            probably surprised them because it was towards
            their side per Aitkin (day 17 p.62F-G).


WAS IT GATE A?

When was Gate A Opened?


       According to leading Counsel for the Inquiry Gate A was
       opened at 14.58
            INSPECTOR SYKES
            Statement p.7            "I have no actual time of
                                     the next event, but would
                                     estimate it to be at 2.50
                                     and I then saw Gate A
                                     open wide."
                              25
                SERGEANT HIGGINS
                (day 17 p92C)            "Made a request that Gate
                                         A be opened because I
                                         thought someone might be
                                         killed outside.      That
                                         message was received."
                                         No evidence as to when
                                         this request was made.
                SERGEANT GODDARD
                (day 18 p.86B)           Confirms receiving
                                         Higgins's message.         Says
                                         he p e r s o n a l l y g a v e
                                         permission ( !! ) relying
                                         upon        the previous
                                         i n s t r u c t i o n given by
                                         Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
                                         Duckingfield.         He places
                                         t h e r e q u e s t 3 or 4
                                         minutes after the opening
                                         of Gate C.            If he is
                                         r i g h t t h i s w i l l be
                                         between 14.56 and 14.57.
      Statement p.6 "By the time Gate B was opened C Gate had been
      closed."
                PC CAMMOCK
                (day 29 p.38D-F          "Made     my  way    to
                                         Superintendent Marshall
                                         who was standing on the
                                         parapet.        Asked
                                         permission to open Gate
                                         A.

      No evidence that this request was made by radio and
      therefore submit not been heard by PC Waugh.


ii.        In any event we submit clearly not Gate A because the
           entry through Gate A was orderly and controlled by a
           serial of police officers directing the fans towards
           the north stand.     In any event the weight of the
           evidence seems to suggest that Gate A was opened
           because Gate C was opened and it was thought that a
           general permission to open gates had been given.

                                   26
Ill,        We submit that in all the circumstances this is
            unlikely to have been the urgent and unusual
            circumstances to cause PC Waugh to act as he did.


IV.         In any event there is no evidence of any requests
            having been made over the radio and no evidence that
            such requests were repeated before it was granted.



5.     WAS IT THE PERIMETER FENCE GATE TO PENS 3 AND 4?
a.     We submit this is the most likely explanation for PC Waugh's
        conduct.
b.     The evidence is clear from other sources that by 14.59 the
       disaster had already occurred.
       EVIDENCE:

            (i)    Liverpool Echo Photo document 278.
                   Taken at 14.59
                   Four hallmarks of the crushing clearly present,
                   namely:
            a.     Perimeter gates open;
            b.     Spectators climbing over the top of the perimeter
                   fence;
            c.     Fans climbing up to the seated area of the west
                   stand;
            d.     Press photographer taking close-up pictures of
                   people behind perimeter fence in pen 3.


            (ii)        Further evidence from photograph DB17-15
                        (document 126 and transcript day 19 p.35D-
                        E):-
                        "That is timed at 14.59 and it clearly shows
                        the west end, the Leppings Lane terraces.
                        One can see to the right of the photograph


                                   27
             the back of the goal, the goal netting, and
             one can see the gates in the terraces in the
             perimeter fence open.    I think those gates
             are 3 and 4, and at that time there are a
             considerable number of people already outside
             the perimeter fence. ? ... and your St John’s
             people are already assisting? - answer-
             correct ."
(iii)       Evidence from serial 1 officers on the
            perimeter fence
        PC SMITH
        (day 17 p.114-115)
                                 stationed at Gate 3
                                 "I could see people were
                                 being pressed up tight
                                 against the fence; that
                                 they had not fallen back
                                 as they would normally
                                 fall back."
                                 "I think some people were
                                 shouting "Open the gate,
                                 we a r e c r u s h e d " or
                                 something like that."
                       Q;        "Did y o u try to get
                                 through on your radio to
                                 anyone?"
                       A:       "I tried to shout "Come
                                 and open these gates.
                                 P e o p l e are dying in
                                 here." or something like
                                 that.       Quite honestly
                                 from past experience I
                                 had no doubt that they
                                 would not have received
                                 that at the time due to
                                 the noise of the crowd,
                                 sir. "
                       Q:       "Did you realise by then
                                 that p e o p l e w e r e in
                                 trouble?"


                        28
                  A:    "Certainly, sir."
                  Q:    "So did you in fact open
                        the gate?"
                  A:    "We opened        them,     yes
                        sir."


PC ILLINGWORTH
(day 17 p.l35C)         On duty at Gate 4 after
                        14.50 (day 17 p.l34D)
P.135B-E                "As p e o p l e  became
                        distressed and I realised
                        they were in pain, I put
                        a radio message over to
                        say that there was a
                        serious situation at the
                        front."

                  Q:    "Apart from seeing people
                        in distress, could you
                        hear whether they were in
                        distress?"
                  A:    "Yes"

                  Q:    "In what way, what were
                        they shouting?"
                  A:    "Words to the effect of
                        "Help, I'm hurt, I'm
                        being crushed.""

                  Q:    "It was obvious to you
                        that people were being
                        crushed I take it?"
                  A:    "Blatantly obvious, yes.
                        PC I l l i n g w o r t h t h e n
                        opened Gate 4."




                   29
(iv)        Evidence from the fans
           Numerous fans gave evidence that in the time running up
           to kick-off and at the time of kick-off there were
           screams for help and screams to the police drawing
           attention to the plight of those at the front of pens 3
           and 4.


           We submit that it is unnecessary to recite all the fans
           whose evidence must be very much in the mind of the
           Tribunal. We particularly rely upon the evidence of Mr
           Hicks who was seeking to draw attention of senior
           police officers in the police control box to the
           evident crushing which he could see from his position
           in pens 1 and 2.



6.     CONCLUSION


a      We submit that it is abundantly clear that the tragedy
       commenced some time before 15.00, that the tragedy was
       identified by junior police officers present at the
       perimeter gates at 14.59 and onwards, that that tragedy was
       not identified for whatever reason by senior officers until
       15.05.24 (MAPI) when Superintendent Greenwood went onto the
       pitch.

b      We submit that it is abundantly clear that although it is
       possible that messages in relation to other gates could have
       been picked up by PC Waugh which would have motivated his
       telephone call to SYMAS headquarters, the balance of
       probabilities indicate that it in fact was cries for help
       emanating from the fans crushed behind pens 3 and 4.

c      We reassert this submission in view of the fact that again,
       without request from G/C for them to do so, another officer
       at F/C telephoned SYMAS at 15.06 merely to put them on
       notice.  It is evident that many of the officers at F/C in
       Snig Hill were disturbed by the messages that they were
       receiving by monitoring the VHF radio channel 25 and these
       were by 15.08 totally unconnected with any respect to open
       gates outside by the turnstiles.
                                 30
In our submission these calls for help and calls of concern
must have been coming from officers at the perimeter fence
who were clearly upset and perturbed by the evidence before
their eyes.

It is submitted that this would have been apparent to
officers in the police control box were they prepared to
believe the evidence before their eyes and also to
Superintendent Murray and Superintendent Greenwood when they
went down to the pitch and to investigate why fans were
climbing over the perimeter fence.

Superintendent Greenwood (day 12 p.99E) identified himself
as the inspector in photograph South Yorkshire Police 2
(bundle F) photograph PR1/9A.        At that stage 15.02
Superintendent Greenwood asserted that he was merely
assessing the situation.   He accepted that it was clear if
one looked at those crushed behind the fence that some were
in difficulties and being crushed.        A perusal of the
following photographs: 1/10A shows that far from assessing
the situation Superintendent Greenwood in fact has caught
hold of a fan and is pulling him back towards the fence.

From an early stage shortly after 15.00 the commentators
viewing the pictures being produced by the video (map 9 and
10) o b s e r v e d that the p r o b l e m is being caused by
overcrowding and fans are spilling over onto the pitch.



The call for Operation Support from G/C was clearly in
response to what was then identified as a pitch invasion and
not recognising that in fact a major emergency had occurred.


It is regrettable that no call was made to SYMAS until 15.08
for ambulances because given their response time it is
likely that they would have arrived at the ground in
sufficient numbers to have made a material difference to the
number of deceased than they were otherwise able to.
j   One is not able to say if in fact anybody's life would have
    been saved or, if so, how many but one is able to say that
    undoubtedly had the disaster been recognised by those in
    authority earlier than it was and the appropriate assistance
    been called some 8 minutes earlier than it was then
    undoubtedly the chances of survival for many of the people
    who were pulled out dead would have been enhanced.




                              32
                                       IV

          OUTLINE COMMENTS ON VARIOUS FACTORS RELEVANT TO THE
            MATTERS WITHIN THE INQUIRY’S TERMS OF REFERENCE


PREAMBLE
We expect that most of the matters set out below have beer
accepted already by the Tribunal, but we list them to demonstrate
SYMAS' strength of feeling that the disaster should not have
occurred, and could have been avoided.
1.   CHOICE OF GROUND

     A.      Lepplngs Lane End
             1.1 Inevitably, because of need for segregation,
                 Hillsborough's design was not safe to accommodate
                 one set of supporters if they had to enter the
                 ground at Leppings Lane.
             1.2 There is an obvious bottle neck leading into the
                 outer perimeter gates and there is the added
                 problem of channelling the supporters into the
                 appropriate turnstiles for the north stand, the
                 west stand and the west terracing.
             1.3 It should be noted that the shortest distance
                 across the funnel leading into the outer perimeter
                 gates is only 24 metres.
             1.4 Once the supporters gain access through the outer
                 perimeter gates those heading for turnstiles A-G
                 have to negotiate a minimum bottleneck of 8 metres
                 between the handrail leading down from turnstile G
                 and the edge of turnstile 16.        The maximum
                 distance across turnstiles A-G is only 13 metres.

     B.      Turnstile Flow Rate

             1.1   The L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s were a l l o cated
                   approximately 24,500 tickets for the semi-final,
                   covering the north stand and the west stand and
                   terracing.

                                       33
           1.2   Paragraph 47 of the Green Guide gives a maximum
                 notional rate per turnstile at which spectators
                 can pass through, not exceeding 750 persons per
                 hour.
           1.3   Based on the figure of 23 turnstiles for 24,500
                 spectators, at the rate of 750 per hour, it would
                 take almost 1 1/2 hours for 24,500 spectators to
                 gain entry into the ground.
           1.4   If one then takes the figure of 7 turnstiles for
                 the 10,100 s p e c t a t o r s for the west stand
                 terracing, based upon the notional rate in
                 paragraph 47, it would almost take 2 hours for the
                 10,100 spectators to gain entry.
           1.5   It should be clearly noted that the above
                 estimates represent the minimum possible time to
                 allow spectators into Hillsborough based upon the
                 Green Guide figures.
           1.6   The inadequacy of the turnstiles to accommodate
                 24.500 spectators appears to have been recognised
                 by the South Yorkshire Police and SWFC.       See
                 Transcript day 11 p38D-G.
           1.7 In our submission it was absurd to believe that
               24.500 spectators could have been safely allowed
               entry through Leppings Lane in the time available.


2.   FAILURE TO DELAY KICK-OFF
     2.1   The senior officers inside the police control box
           should have realised by 1430 hours that the crowd of
           supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance could not
           get into the ground by 1500 hours even on the most
           optimistic of flow rates through the turnstiles.
     2.2   It therefore follows that kick-off should have been
           postponed prior to or very shortly after 1430 hours,
           and indeed many people were under the impression that
           kick-off had been delayed.




                                 34
3.   OPENING OF GATE C

     3.1   The decision to open Gate C was inevitable in all
           circumstances, but the failure to prepare and cater for
           the resultant ingress of supporters into the concourse
           behind the west stand and then onto the terracing, was
           a clear and fundamental mistake by the police.


4.   SIGNING AND LAYOUT OF CONCOURSE

     4.1   Once supporters found themselves in the concourse area
           behind the west stand the directional signs onto the
           terracing was so poor that it resulted in the majority
           of supporters quite reasonably deciding that there was
           no way onto the terracing other than through the
           central tunnel.
     4.2   The situation was made worse by the presence of the
           internal wall which although useful for a normal match,
           probably dissuaded many supporters going to their left
           after entering through turnstiles A-G and Gate C.
     4.3   There were clearly enough officers in serial 14 to make
           a line to direct spectators to pens 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7-
           see PC Burton day 17 p21G to p22D.
5.   LAYOUT OF TERRACE

     5.1   The layout of the radial fences, perimeter fence gates
           and barriers was, at the very least, piecemeal,
           haphazard and carried out with little or insufficient
           thought concerning the safety of supporters on the
           terracing.
     5.2   The emphasis in erecting the radial fences, perimeter
           fence gates and barriers was clearly on containment of
           the supporters on the terracing, and for example we
           would point to:
           a.   the disagreements as to the use of the gates in
                the perimeter fences in the event of emergency
                evacuation;



                                35
      b.   Dr Eastwood's assertion (unsupported by othe
           members of the Working Party) that breach o
           paragraph 115 of the Green Guide was a deliberat
           policy decision. Please see Dr Eastwood's plan N
           11424-8 which shows that the gaps were i
           existence before he obtained his retainer from th
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, i.e. pre-1978
           and were made by the removal of existing section
           with no new uprights being constructed.

SIZE OF GATES IN PERIMETER FENCE

The perimeter gates leading onto the perimeter track are
clearly too narrow for the purposes of emergency evacuatior
onto the pitch area.


ESTIMATION OF TERRACE CAPACITY

The capacity of the whole of the west stand terracing, and
in particular pens 3 and 4, has been clearly wrongly
calculated.   Reference should be made to document headed
"Sheffield Wednesday Football Club west terrace - ideal
distribution of persons" for pens 3 and 4.     The Health &
Safety Executive has calculated that the maximum numbers of
spectators for pens 3 and 4 are 822 for pen 3 and 871 for
pen 4. Furthermore, if one takes into account paragraph 216
of the Green Guide, the appropriate capacities of pens 3 and
4 are substantially reduced, to 542 for pen 3 and 605 for
pen 4.


LACK OF ANTICIPATION

8.1   Whatever criticisms can be made of the Liverpool
      supporters, it appears fairly clear that the South
      Yorkshire Police should have anticipated the sort of
      behaviour from the Liverpool fans which they alleged
      took place on 15 April 1989.
8.2   In particular, this is borne out by the evidence
      gathered by the South Yorkshire Police during the
      course of the Inquiry, and served in the last week of
      evidence given to the Inquiry. This documentation

                           36
      contains numerous reports of behaviour by Liverpool
      fans during the course of the 1988-89 football season
      which indicates a pattern of behaviour identical to
      that which took place on 15 April.
8.3   The following are examples of such reports:
         i. Humberside Police - Hull City v Liverpool dated
            18 February 1989.
        ii. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
            dated 12 December 1988.
       iii. Metropolitan Police - Arsenal v Liverpool dated
            9 November 1988.
        iv. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
            dated 24 September 1988.
8.4    In addition, during the course of the 1987-88 season,
       there is a report from the Hertfordshire Constabulary
       concerning the Watford v Liverpool game which took
       place on 13 February 1988 where 1,500 Liverpool
       supporters arrived at the ground without tickets and
       were allowed in.




                                     Michael Kallipetis Q.C
                                     2, Crown Office Row
                                     Temple
                                     EC4
                                      6th July 1989




                           37
                                   V
                    FRONT LINE EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
                            INVENTORY LIST
     LIST ITEMS
Oxygen F 3/4 1/2 1/4
Entonox F 3/4 1/2 1/4
Suction Unit
Resuscitator (Robert Shaw/M.man)
Frac Splints
Bag and Mask
Chloride Tablets (6)
02 Masks
Blankets (x 6)
Pillows (x 2)
Maternity Pack
Waterproof Sheets
Burns Sheet
Nursing/Barrier Gown
Green Sheets (3)
Carrying Sheets
Cervical Collar
Bed Pan
Urine Bottle
Vomit Bowl
Bucket and Lid
Air Freshener Spray
First Aid Box



                            38
Carrying Chair x 1
Scoop Stretcher x 1
Stretcher Poles x 2
Rescue Box
Fire Extinguishes (2)
Wheel Brace
Handle
Ferno Ked x 1
Chemical Protective Suit x
Details and Number of Crew
                      -   1
                      -   2

Body Bag
2 Pairs of Goggles
             LIST OF CONTENTS OF THE RESCUE BOX
              CARRIED ON FRONT LINE AMBULANCES

RESCUE BOX


anti-static gloves
crow-bar
bolt-croppers
screw-driver
hammer
all purpose saw
25 ft. rope lashing




                        40
           AMBULANCE AID SATCHEL
              INVENTORY LIST


QUANTITY                       ITEM


3                     7.5cm Roller Bandages
3                     5cm Roller Bandages
6                     Triangular Bandages
1                      15g Cotton Wool Packet
4                      No 1 Wound Dressings
4                      No 2 Wound Dressings
1                      No 3 Wound Dressings
3                     90cm + lm Gauze
1                     Pkt Gauze Swabs
1                     No 1     Guedal Airway
1                     No 2     Guedal Airway
1                     No 3     Guedal Airway
6                     Safety Pins
3                     Blanket Pins
1                       " Zinc Oxide Plaster
1                     Reflective Jacket
1                     Rubber Torch
1                     Brook Airway
1                     Pair of Dressing Scissors 5”




              41
           EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN’S EQUIPMENT
                           INVENTORY

Carrying Case
Laerdal Resuscitator
Laerdal Adult Mask
Laerdal Child Mask
Airway Size 1
Airway Size 2
Airway Size 3
Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batteries
Laryngoscope Blade Size 3
Laryngoscope Blade Size 4
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 6mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 7mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 8mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 9mm
Catheter Mount (anti static)
Catheter Swivel Connector
Adaptors Female
Lubricating Jelly
Syringes 10 ml
Stethoscope
Sphygmomanometer
Needle Box
Scissors/shears
Magi11 Forceps
Spencer Wells
Aspirator
Laryngoscope Spare Bulb
Tourniquet
Catheter Mount Connector
Vecafix                                  5
Surgical Cloth                           1
Syringe Needles (19g)                    2
Catheter 14g                             2
Catheter 12g                             2
Cannulae 16g                             5
Cannulae 18g                             5
Cannulae 20g                             4
Administration Set                       2
Hartmanns Fluid IV 500 mis               1
Haemaccel Fluid IV 500 mis               1
Pre-injection Swabs                      10
Tape Adhesive Hospital 20metres          1
Tape Sleek 2.5 cm                        1
Tape Sleek 5.0 cm                        1
Arm Splint 18" x 4"                      1
Cotton Wool                              1
Gauze (1 metre)                          1
Triangular Bandages                      2
5.0 cm Bandages x 5 metres               2



                         42
7.5 cm Bandages x 5 metres
Gauze Swabs
Extractor Mucous
Oxygen Mask
Oxygen Tubing 3 metres
Gloves Disposable
Antiseptic Solution
Waterproof Sheet
Micro Pore Tape 2.5 cm
Patient Report Form Pad
Head Lamp and Battery
Security Strap and 2 Keys
Sharps Bin 500 ml
AJC/SO’C

                                                          10 July 1989
R. M. Whalley Esq.,
Secretary to the Inquiry into
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SW1H 9AT


Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Inquiry
Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS
We refer to our letter of 6th July and to Counsel’s closing
statement.

Counsel has asked that the following alterations be made to each
copy of the closing statement
Page 19                        The words "P.C. Waugh to SYMAS"
                               should be at the top of page 20.

Page 22 - Paragraph 1 (b)      The word "not" should be inserted
                               between "is" and "consistent". The
                               words "outside Gate C" should be
                               added to the end of the sentence.

Page 30 - Paragraph 6 (c)      "15.08" should be "15.09"               and
                               "respect" should be "request".

Page 36 - Paragraph 5.2 (b)    The second sentence should be
                               "Please see Doctor Eastwood's plan
                               No: 11424-8 which shows that some
                               of the gaps were in existence
                               before he obtained his retainer
                               from the S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
                               Football Club i.e. pre-1978 and the
                               rest were made by the removal of
                               existing sections with no new
    10 July 1989




                              uprights being constructed".

We apologise for any inconvenience this causes.
We have sent a copy of this letter to each of the solicitors for
the other parties.
Yours faithfuly,
AJC/SO’C

                                                          10 July 1989
R. M. Whalley Esq.,
Secretary to the Inquiry into
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SW1H 9AT


Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Inquiry
Our Clients; Trent RHA/SYMAS

We refer to our letter of 6th July and to Counsel’s closing
statement.

Counsel has asked that the following alterations be made to each
copy of the closing statement:-

Page 19                        The words "P.C. Waugh to SYMAS"
                               should be at the top of page 20.

Page 22 - Paragraph 1 (b)      The word "not" should be inserted
                               between "is" and "consistent". The
                               words "outside Gate C" should be
                               added to the end of the sentence.

Page 30 - Paragraph 6 (c)      "15.08" should be "15.09"               and
                               "respect” should be "request".

Page 36 - Paragraph 5.2 (b)    The second sentence should be
                               "Please see Doctor Eastwood's plan
                               No: 11424-8 which shows that some
                               of the gaps were in existence
                               before he obtained his retainer
                               from the S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
                               Football Club i.e. pre-1978 and the
                               rest were made by the removal of
                               existing sections with no new
    10 July 1989




                              uprights being constructed".

We apologise for any inconvenience this causes.
We have sent a copy of this letter to each of the solicitors for
the other parties.
Yours faithfuly.
                                                                            DI BB L U P T O N
                                                                            BROOMHEAD
                                                                                             SOLI CI TORS

                                                                                                                                                                                         6 Butts C o u n
          Your Ref.                                                                                                                                                                     Leeds LSI 5JX
                                                                                                                                                                                Telephone 0532 439301
          O u r Ref.                                                                                                                                                           Fax 0532 452632/428891
                                                                                                                                                                                          Telex 557181
                                AJC/SO'C                                                                                                                                            M D X 12.017 Leeds


                                                                                                                                                                                    6 July 1989

                                R. M. Whalley Esq.,
                                Secretary to the Inquiry into
                                The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
                                50, Queen Anne's Gate,
                                LONDON,
                                SW1H 9AT


                                Dear Sir,
                               Hillsborough Inquiry
                               Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS
                                We refer to your note of 29th June and enclose ten copies of
                                Counsel's closing statement.  We have sent two copies to the
                                Treasury Solicitor and to each of the solicitors for the other
                                parties.
                                The statement is divided in five sections dealing with the
                                following matters:-
                                I:            Criticisms of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                              Ambulance Service.

                                II:           Interim Recommendations.

                                Ill: The Police's failure to recognise the disaster. You will
                                     recall that when cross examining P.C. Waugh (on the final
                                     day of evidence) our Counsel undertook to provide a
                                     chronology and a r g u m e n t r e l a t i n g to P.C. Waugh's
                                     conversation with the police control at Hillsborough at
                                     14.59 in which he asked whether they required ambulances.

                                IV:           Outline Comments on Various Factors Relevant to the Matters
                                              Within the Inquiry's Term of Reference.
                               V:             SYMAS Equipment.


\A   ;              R A S m ,,h S .N .L .e h a lto n B. B. F irth D. P. Read G .D .C .S h a w T .H .R e e d L .N . R oberts J. A. V. Wade (N otary Public) M .P .W .L ee C D .T rip p e tt C .D .Ibberson M. Jenkins
                      ^      B'          J- A - B- Buctun M issJ- C- S o ! " R- M. Sutton J. R. S. L azenbyJ. D. Simon T. B. Knight W. M. Wrigley J. R. Harrap M. E. Cowell P. M. Anson K. McLoughlm
         C - W llt,am D. A. Thorpe P. A. Rhodes A. G. Chappell P. D. Barton T. H . Ratcliffe N . P. D kkson N. G. Knowles, Miss A. S. Duchart K. A. Royle J. M. Rowlands A. D. Darwin T. J. Pope
                                                     W. K. P. Ballmann A. J, Callaghan M. Grabiner P. E. Cram ton T. J. Whiteside G. J. Smallman C. Suton
         Associates: N . D. SlaterR.W. Boreham Mrs J. S. Street S. D . Robertson M. S. Jackson M issJ. L. Atkinson A. D. H olt A. M. Kerr D. A. Jameson K. Docherty J. R.H . Svkes P. N . Firth
           M m A. Goraj N . L. Thompson Mrs E. W. Wilkinson Mrs J. Jackson D. A. Smyllie J. S. Crookes C. T. T ulky Mrs S. J. Gaskill A. D. Bennett Miss J. E. Hampson J. York* D. j . Gray
                                                                                D. P. Mosley S. P. Houghton (Scotland) H . C. Evans
                                                                              Consultants: E. C. Bousfield S. L. Batiste MP C. T. Peach

                                                              Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business
                          DI BB L U P T O N
                          BROOMHEAD
Continuation


Date           6 July 1989




          The Interim recommendations have been specifically drafted with a
          view to them being Implemented, if the Inquiry agreed with them,
          in time for the commencement of the 1989/90 season.
          Inevitably there is some overlap with Phase Two, but we will
          include these matters again when we come to deal with Phase Two
          of the Inquiry.
          Yours faithfully,
                          INDEX

SECTION                                         PAGE

I         Criticisms of SYMAS                          1-6

II        SYMAS’ Interim Recommendations               7-11

III       South Yorkshire Police Failure
          to Recognise the Disaster
          A.   Summary                                 12 - 14

          B.   Key                                     15 - 16
          C.   Chronology                              17 - 21

          D.   Argument                                22 - 32


IV        Outline Comments on Various Factors
          Relevant to the Matters within the
          Inquiry’s Terms of Reference                 33 - 37

V         SYMAS1s Equipment
          1.   Front Line Emergency Equipment          38 - 39
          2.   Contents of Rescue Box on Front
                Line Ambulance                         40
          3.   Ambulance Aid Satchel                   41
          4.   Extended Trained Ambulanceman's
               Equipment                               42 - 43
                   CRITICISMS OF SYMAS

Implicit criticisms of SYMAS appeared         in quotations
contained in an article which appeared in The Times and The
Independent of 17 April 1989.    They also appeared in other
newspapers.    The remarks were made by two doctors who
attended Hillsborough as Liverpool supporters on 15 April
1989.   During the course of the evidence it became clear
that the first five criticisms by Doctor A related to events
in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand and terrace (day
25 pl21D).




DOCTOR A


1. "At 3.30 pm there were no medical personnel apart from
   one or two St John's ambulancemen. There was no medical
   equipment and there was only one ambulance.n
   FACTS:
   a.   Ambulances arriving at Leppings Lane (see video RJH2)
        1513    S407 arrives (leaves 1523)
        1516    S203 arrives (leaves 1528)
                (by 1530 Mr Early from this ambulance is on
                the pitch - video MAPI)
        1521    S208 arrives (leaves 1532)
        1535    R608 arrives
        This doctor cannot have arrived in the concourse
        until about 1535.
   b.   About 40 casualties are taken from the Leppings Lane
        end by SYMAS, of which 5 were removed by 1532.   All
          casualties had been removed from that end of the
          ground by 1606 (SYMAS recording track 19 page 19).
          Therefore about 35 casualties, all of whom survived
          were conveyed by SYMAS vehicles between 1532 and
          1606.



2.   "Lack of triage"
     FACTS:
     a.   SYMAS personnel operated triage:
          -   see              statement, paragraph 7
          -   see MrYoxall's evidence - day 23 page 126F
          -   see I          H statement - paragraphs 15 to 18
          -   see            1statement - paragraphs 16 and 21
     b.   Other   personnel - police - also:
          - see                    evidence - day 17 page 159E-H



3.   "A full casualty team with resuscitation equipment did
     not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm."
     FACTS:

     a. A full casualty team arrived at the designated
         casualty clearing station (the gymnasium) at the
         Penistone Road end of the ground.
         statement paragraph 12 shows that the medical team
         left Northern General Hospital at 1544; it would
         therefore have been at the ground by 1550 at the very
         latest.

     b. A casualty team did not attend at Leppings Lane and
         all casualties had been removed from that end of the
         ground by 1606 (see above).
     c. A further casualty team arrived from Barnsley
         District General Hospital at the designated casualty
         clearing station but was not required.
     d. The implication that only the casualty teams would
        have resuscitation equipment is wrong.    All SYMAS
         frontline ambulances carry portable and fixed
         resuscitation equipment which was used at Leppings
                               2
     Lane.   Fire service also carried resuscitation
     equipment.



"There was no oxygen, airway tubes and drips.
FACTS:
a.   No oxygen     -   Wro n g =   All SYMAS frontline
                       ambulances carry pneupac minuteman
                       oxygen resuscitators and have a
                       static supply of oxygen on board.
b.   No airways - Wrong:
                    i. All SYMAS frontline vehicles carry
                       a selection of airways, and a large
                       number were inserted.
                   ii. If the doctor means to refer to the
                       lack of intubation equipment, such
                       equipment is carried by paramedics
                       for use by them as they are trained
                       to use it.     Although there were
                       some doctors present in the crowd
                       who were competent to use such
                       equipment had it been available for
                       general use (apart from that
                       brought by paramedics and the
                       medical team) it is impractical to
                       expect a supply of such equipment,
                       which can only safely be used by
                       those trained to use it, to be
                       available on the offchance that
                       suitably qualified persons may be
                       among spectators. (This doctor
                       admitted that it was some time
                       s i n c e he had c a r r i e d out an
                       intubation himself - see day 25
                       page 124D).
                  iii. A consultant anaesthetist (day 25
                       p27D) agreed that if the tube were
                       wrongly inserted it could kill the
                       patient. The treatment that was
                       being a d m i n i s t e r e d by police
                       officers, fans, St John’s and SYMAS
                       ambulancemen, namely CPR, was the
                       correct treatment               in t h e
                       circumstances and undoubtedly did
                             save lives.
     c.   No drips     -     Wrong:
                           i. Infusion equipment is carried by
                              paramedics, and requires special
                              training, however, there is no
                              evidence that any casualty was
                              prejudiced by the lack of infusion
                              equipment.
                        ii. Medical Team (gymnasium) obviously
                            had I.V. drips because spectator
                            nurse F J Eccleston gave evidence
                            that he set up 10 drips ready for
                            doctors (Transcript day 5 pl5D).



5.   "More lives could have been saved if staff and equipment
     had arrived earlier."
     FACTS:
     a.   Before he was reminded that he had made such a
          statement to the press, Dr in chief (day 25 page 115G
          to 116G) accepted that it was pure speculation
          whether or not further lives could have been saved
          (day 25 page 115G to 116D), and on cross examination
          (day 25 page 127C to D) agreed that it was
          "unfortunate" that he had sought out the press to
          make public pronouncements which it was not possible
          for him to make.
     b.   If as SYMAS submit, the crushing started at the very
          latest at 1459, by the time that any medical
          a s s i s t a n c e got to the most severely crushed
          spectators they had been deprived of oxygen for over
          4 minutes and therefore it is unlikely that the
          presence or otherwise of such equipment made any
          practical difference.



DOCTOR P
6.   "Complains about the lack of defibrillators"
     FACTS:

                               4
a.   We believe that the Inquiry accepts that the use of
     defibrillators on the pitch in the circumstances of
     this t r a g e d y would have been professionally
     irresponsible, (day 19 page 31C) (day 24 page 103F)
      (day 25 page 24A and 29A).
b.   In case anybody has any doubts about it we list the
     difficulties:
       i.   If wrongly used it can kill:
            - the patient
            - the operator
            - any third party coming into contact with the
              patient.
      ii.   Before being used national guidelines for
            ambulancemen lay down that an ECG reading for
            diagnosis should be obtained from the machine.
            In order for the reading and diagnosis to be
            accurate the patient and the defibrillator must
            be completely isolated from any movement and
            the s u r r o u n d i n g e n v i r o n m e n t m u s t be
            sufficiently stable to permit an accurate
            assessment of the ECG recorded. Spurious
            readings can occur in a crowd.
     iii.   In the circumstances of this tragedy when
            otherwise relatively fit individuals were
            rendered hypoxic (lack of oxygen), the likely
            heart pattern is asystole (continuous line of
            electrical activity with no effective heart
            contractions) and not ventricular fibrillation.
            The purpose of a defibrillator is to jolt a
            fibrillating heart rhythm back into a normal
            pattern.   The standard treatment for asystole
            is CPR. Successful CPR would normally produce
            a regular heart pattern rather than ventricular
            fibrillation.
      iv.   However, given the length of time during which
            most of the patients had been deprived of
            oxygen, even the use of a defibrillator would
            not have made any practical difference (see Dr
            P's statement to the police, page 7 "my
            thoughts that in view of the length of time he
            was pulseless it would probably be kinder if he
            died.   I am sure he must have been severely
            brain damaged by that time" and at the bottom
            of the page "I looked desperately for somebody
            not dead but seriously ill who needed help. I
            could not find anybody in that category in the
                             5
                    goal area.   They were either all dead or okay
                    with nothing in between.")
B.   Ambulance Equipment
     1.   A list of equipment carried by all SYMAS frontline
          ambulances, the contents of a rescue box carried on a
          frontline ambulance, the contents of an ambulanceman's
          satchel and the equipment carried by an extended trained
          ambulanceman are contained in Section V.
     2.   This equipment is intended for use by SYMAS personnel and
          not by third parties.
     3.   Much of the equipment has to be kept with the ambulance
           for use on the journey to hospital.
     4.   The primary purpose of the ambulance is to give immediate
          treatment to casualties and convey them to hospital.
     5.   On 15 April 1989 many SYMAS ambulancemen treated
          casualties with CPR and resuscitation, as well as
          conveying 172 injured to hospital. Any criticism of lack
          of equipment on SYMAS vehicles is ill-informed.




                                  6
            SYMAS’ INTERIM     RECOMMENDATIONS


Ambulance Service Attendance

At any Specified Activity where the attendance is expected
to exceed 25,000 and/or the past history and/or other
circumstances indicate that ambulance service presence is
desirable (a "critical match"),     the holder of the safety
certificate should invite the statutory ambulance authority
to attend with such personnel, vehicles and equipment as
shall be agreed between them but in any event not less than
an officer with one vehicle and crew,            the appropriate
payment being made by the holder of the safety certificate.
This is in addition to the present attendance of St John
Ambulance Brigade or the British Red Cross.


First Aid Room


Each club being the holder of a safety certificate, should
maintain a first aid room, equipped to a basic standard, as
specified by the licensing authority after consultation with
the appropriate ambulance authority.
3.   Doctor


     The Football League, Football Association and the relevant
     licensing authority should require clubs holding safety
     certificates and intending to stage a critical match to
     arrange that the doctor in attendance:


     a.   is trained and competent in advanced first aid to a
          standard equivalent to a NHS TA Paramedic;


     b.   is available to treat any injured spectators and to
          attend the first aid room, when called upon to do so.




4.   Communication


     There shall be an agreed and common method of communication
     between all the emergency services, if necessary with the
     assistance of a dedicated radio and/or telephone direct link
     to the ground and the respective headquarters.




5.   Liaison


     Before each critical match the liaison officers from the
     police and ambulance service should make contact and arrange
                                 8
     to be in direct contact with each other during the match.
     The police liaison officer should be in direct contact with
     police control.


6.   Emergency Plan


     For all designated grounds there should be a joint and
     common emergency plan drawn up by the relevant police
     authority, fire service, statutory ambulance authority and
     the holder of the safety certificate.         The emergency plan
     should detail:


     a.   The   relevant    function of each service during an
          emergency.


     b.   The liaison officer from each service, preferably by
          name,   their    respective    station    and   particular
          responsibility.


     c.   The agreed rendezvous points for each service and the
          (named) police officer who is responsible for collating
          and issuing      information to,   and coordinating the
          response of, the relevant services.


     d.   Emergency access and egress.


                                  9
e.   Casualty clearing point.


f.   Preferred routes to and from hospitals, to be kept clear
     by the police during an emergency.




Licensing Authority


The licensing authority should satisfy itself before issuing
the safety certificate that a joint and common emergency
plan (as described in paragraph 6 above) is in existence for
the designated ground.




Advice From Statutory Ambulance Authority


The statutory ambulance authority should be asked to advise
the issuing authority for each safety certificate on the
question of:


a.   access and egress for ambulances


b.   medical equipment


c.   attendance of ambulance personnel and vehicles at
     critical matches
                            10
   and should be consulted before there is any variation in
   the terms of the safety certificate as regards items a,

   b and c above.




Amendment to 1975 Act


SSGA 1975 be amended    so as to require     the licensing
authority to deal with applications for safety certificates
within six months failing which it shall be deemed to have

been refused.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - FAILURE TO RECOGNISE THE DISASTER


 SUMMARY


 SYMAS' submission is that South Yorkshire Police were in a
 position to identify the existence of a disaster by 1459
 hours at the very latest.          In fact,   as the attached
 chronology shows, they failed to do so before 1505 hours and
 failed to call SYMAS until 1508 hours.




 In view of the unchallenged medical evidence it is SYMAS'
 submission that those 9 minutes were critical, and of all
 the claims that lives could have been saved, this is the
 only one with any merit.




 SYMAS' submission is that there is evidence to indicate that
 supporters were being crushed to death by 1459 hours and
 that   this   was   evident   to anyone whose mind was not
 conditioned by the need to contain supporters within the
 central pens.
It is SYMAS' submission that the persons who were in a
position to, and should have recognised the plight of the
persons in pens 3 and 4, are the police officers in the
control box, and those stationed along the perimeter track

in front of pens 3 and 4.




Evidence


a.    Photographs South Yorkshire Composite Album 2.


b.    Photograph produced by leading Counsel for South
      Yorkshire Police on day 19 (transcript 19 p35D).

      DB17/15.


 c.   Photographs taken by the Liverpool Echo and produced to
      the Inquiry by Counsel for the Football Supporters

      Association. Document 278.


 d.   Transcripts of messages received and despatched by

       Force Control at Snig Hill.


 e.    Evidence of witnesses - both fans and police.
In order to follow the above submissions the following
chronology which Counsel undertook to supply to the Inquiry
will be of use.
KEY


VIDEOS:


There are four videos to which reference is made, namely:
r j H2               - This is the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                        film taken from the camera which has a fixed
                       view onto the back of the courtyard behind
                       turnstiles A-G.
MAPI     &   MAP9 - These are tapes of videos made by BBC Outside
                     Broadcast Unit one using an operator set
                     database and the other using a computer set
                     database. For the purposes of this schedule
                     no distinction is drawn.
TB2                  - This is the film made by South Yorkshire
                        Police on the CCTV system using operator set
                        database.



TRANSCRIPTS


SYMAS 1          =   Track 9              ) DOCUMENT 128A and 128B
                                            These are a
                                            transcription of tapes
 SYMAS 2         =   Tracks 10 & 11         made at SYMAS HQ of calls
                                            received from Force
                                            Control SNIG HILL.

 SNIG        I   *   SA/1. KWP 30/15/17    This is a transcription
 Part        1        Document 34          of tapes made at SNIG HILL
                                           Force Control (F/C) con­
                                           taining messages received
                                           from SWFC Police Ground
                                           Control (G/C) and messages
                                           transmitted by F/C to
                                           other police units


                                   15
SNIG   I     =       SA/2 KWP 30/15/18    ) This is a continuation of
Part   2                                  ) the transcript of SNIG 1


SNIG   II        =    SA/6 KWP 30/9/17    )   This is a transcript of
                     Document 129         )   a separate tape made at
                                          )   F/C containing messages
                                          )   from F/C to the Fire
                                          )   Service and SYMAS


SNIG   III           » F1A 1230           )   This is the Extended
                      Document 73         )   Incident Log compiled
                                          )   F/C. For the purposes of
                                          )   this chronology this tape
                                          )   is not relevant.


SNIG   IV        =    KWP 30/14/17        ) This is a further
                     Document 254         ) transcript of SNIG 1
                                          ) containing the background
                                          ) messages on the tapes
                                          ) representing inter alia
                                          ) traffic picked up from
                                          ) VHF Channel 25 which was
                                          ) being monitored by F/C.
                                          ) The times on this tape
                                          ) are identical to that on
                                          ) SNIG 1.



NOTE


 There is a discrepancy between the times recorded on SYMAS
 computer transcript and SNIG HILL transcript. They are only
 a matter of seconds in most cases and for the purposes of
 this chronology the times have all been taken where two are
 available from the SNIG HILL transcript.       In such cases
 where there is no SNIG HILL transcript and the time
 sequence, as recorded on the SYMAS transcript, is not in
 line a figure in brackets represents the best estimate if
 the SNIG HILL time is applied to the SYMAS transcript.




                                     16
            c.     CHRONOLOGY


            TIME         SOURCE            EVENT
            14.48.04     Video RJH2        GATE C opened: Surge of about 150
                                           people per HSE Report p.7.


            14.48.31      Video RJH2       GATE C closed.


            14.51.30      SNIG IV p.l      "Speech heard in background"
                                           "Letting anybody through." "It's
                                           bloody chaos at Leppings Lane
                                           because thousands can't get in,
                                           they have just broken gates down
                                           and Superintendent M a r s h a l l ' s
                                           screaming for them to open the
                                           inner gates and to let people in
                                           and Murray's saying in control,
                                           we've got to monitor tickets, if we
                                           get Liverpool mixed up with Notts
                                           Forest they're going to have
                                           trouble even if we get a serious
                                           problem."



            14.52.06      Video RJH2       GATE C opened for second time.
                                           Entry of about 2,000 people per HSE
                                           Report p.7.


            14.53         SNIG I Part 1    F/C giving out messages to other
                                           police ve h i c l e s c o n c e r n i n g a
                                           missing policeman.



            14.53 to      SNIG II pp.2-6   Chat and banter between F/C (PC
            14.58                          Rook) and other forces about not
                                           accepting any loads due to the
                                           football match.
  ' \ k
. : ‘   .
                                           SYMAS submit that listening to the
                                           tape gives no indication of any
                                           crisis or concern in F/C.
                                             17
SNIG [ Part 1    Superintendent Brougham radios
p.7              in that he attended Leppings Lane
                 end with a PA but "they've already
                 got a PA in use there so we are now
                 resuming back to driving school".
                 Again listening to the tape no
                 suggestion of any panic or concern
                 in F/C.


RJH2 & TB2       GATE C closed.   Area behind GATE C
                 is clear.


SNIG    Part 1
p.7              Reports from traffic control that
                 city centre clear of traffic.


SNIG I Part 1
p. 8             Telephone call to Ground Control "I
                 don't know whether we need any yet"
                 "No I'm ringing Ground Control".
                 PC Waugh rings G/C (PC Ryan) "Yes
                 i t ' s o p s . Do y o u w a n t any
                 ambulances. We are trying to
                 monitor to you but you know it's
                 ..." Ryan: "It's chaos at the
                 moment, we've got no reports of
                 injuries but we, if you can monitor
                 the situation if you can just keep
                 standing by."



RJH2             GATE C opened third time.   Steady
                 stream being monitored by mounted
                 police.     Fans having to show
                 tickets (see evidence of Macrell
                 transcript day 30 p.99E-G).



SNIG IV p.8      "Background speech" "Superintendent
                 Marshall are you calling me, oyer"
                 "Can we close the gates again?"
                 "Yes, they can be closed, God
                 bless?"
15.04      SNIG I Part 1
           p.9               G/C calls for dog handlers.


15.04 to   SNIG I Part 1
           pp.9 & 10         F/C summons dog handlers to GATE 0.
15.06


15.06.10   SNIG I   Part 1
           p.10              G/C calls Operation Support.


15.06.30   SNIG I   Part 1
           p. 10             F/C sends more dog handlers.


15.07.01   SNIG II p.8       F/C puts SYMAS on notice that
           SYMAS 1 p.l       "ambulances might be required".
                             Conversation between PC Rook and
                             Superintendent Clarke.


15.07.50   SNIG I   Part 1
           p. 11             G/C - F/C: "Fleet of ambulances to
                             Hillsborough."


15.08      SNIG II p.9       G/C - SYMAS: (continuation of the
           SYMAS 1 p.3       same phone call as at 15.07.01)
                             "Fleet     of  ambulances       to
                             Hillsborough".


15.08.50   SNIG I   Part 1
           p. 12             G/C (Ryan) to F/C: "Ambulances to
                             Leppings Lane end please, Leppings
                             Lane." "Roger, ambula nces to
                             Leppings Lane end."
                             PC Waugh to SYMAS



                              19
                   SYMAS 1 p.4
        15.09      per SNIG HILL     "Ambulances to Leppings Lane end
                   times             a big fleet immediately, as many as
                                     you’ve got please."
        15.09.40   SNIG I   Part 1
                   p.13              F/C to G/C: "Is ACC with you?"
                                     "Please confirm Operation Support"
                                     ACC gives confirmation.


        15.10.55   SNIG ] Part 1
                   p. 10             F/C (Rook) to SYMAS: "Just to let
                   SYMAS 2 p.l       you know we have called Operation
:                                    Support.        There are h u ndreds
                                     i n j u r e d t r a m p l e d underfoot,
                                     everything." SYMAS tells Rook that
                                     they are responding.
■




        15.20.10   SNIG I   Part 2
                   p.l               G/C to F/C: "Can you confirm we
                                     have more ambulances on route-
                                     only have 3 at this location at
                                     present."
        15.23.50   SNIG I   Part 2
                   p.3               F/C to G/C: "Our last instructions
                                     were for ambulances to Leppings
    .
                                     Lane. Is there any change? Over"


        15.24.30   SNIG I   Part 2
                   p.4               F/C to G/C: "We would like some
                                     ambulances also to GATE 0. Things
                                     are getting blocked up at the
                                     Leppings Lane, some ambulances to
                                     GATE 0 please."


        15.24.50   SNIG I   Part 2
                   p.4               F/C to G/C: "Where's GATE 0?"!!
15.28.30   SNIG I   Part 2
           p.7               G/C to F/C: "Could you ask for a
                             radio message Hallam to request the
                             crowd application - yes stand by
                             yes. Requesting for doctors to
                             attend at the stadium, doctors at
                             the stadium."


15.29      SNIG I   Part 2
           p.7               F/C to G/C: "Roger, requesting
                             Radio Hallam for doctors to attend
                             at the stadium, over."
D.   ARGUMENT


1.   SUMMARY

a)   SYMAS submit that the telephone call at 14.59 from Snig Hill
     to Ground Control by PC Waugh was not, as claimed by PC
     Waugh, prompted by overhearing the conversation between
     Superintendent Marshall and Ground Control.


b)   It is SYMAS' submission that the length of time that elapsed
     between the end of the communication from Superintendent
     Marshall and the making of that call (some 8 minutes) is
     consistent with an urgent call being made as a result of
     overhearing scenes of desperation and crowd distress
     indicating a need for ambulances.


c)   We propose to deal with each gate in turn in support of our
     contention that in fact it must have been the cries of
     distress from supporters within the perimeter fence and the
     request by officers stationed at the perimeter gates which
     prompted the call by PC Waugh.



2.   WAS IT GATE C?

a)   When was Gate C Opened?
     Gate C was opened for certain on three occasions.
          Opened                        Closed
          14.48.04                      14.48.31

          14.52.06                      14.57.35

          14.59.12                      15.02
                               22
b)     Could P.C. Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate C?


i.         Waugh alleges that it was Gate C in his statement and
            in his evidence to the Tribunal.
ii.        However, his statement was not made until 27 June 1989,
            after the existence of that conversation had been
            discovered by Counsel for SYMAS.
iii.       In chief (day 31 p. 11 IB) PC Waugh said that he had
            telephoned G/C "immediately after" the repeated
            requests for the gate to be opened.
iv.        In cross examination (day 31 p.H4D) PC Waugh confirmed
           that he had made the telephone call "within seconds" of
           hearing the repeated requests to open the gates.
v.         There is no evidence from Marshall that he asked Gate C
           to be opened on the third occasion.    In any event the
           evidence is that the third opening of Gate C was a
           controlled operation not caused by a crush outside.
           See:
                 - Bain: statement p.4 at the bottom of the page.
                 - Mr Macrell: transcript day 30 p.99E-F
                 - RJH2: supporters still entering at a steady
                 stream               (14.59.12).
vi.        The 8 minute time lapse between "Superintendent
           Marshall's screaming for the gate to be opened"
            (14.51.40) and the telephone call made by PC Waugh
            (14.59.30) is not consistent with PC Waugh's making the
           call "immediately after" or "within seconds of" hearing
           the repeated requests. No panic or dangerous crushing
           evident from the evidence on the video (RJH2) prior to
           Gate C being opened for the third time.
vii.       No evidence as to precisely when Gate C was opened for
            the third time and no evidence that the third opening
           was occasioned by any repeated requests from an officer
            for it to be done.
viii.      SYMAS submit therefore that it is unlikely that it was
            the request to open Gate C which occasioned PC Waugh to
           make the telephone call at 14.59.
3.     WAS IT GATE B?


a)     When was Gate B Opened


i.          Gate B was under the control of serial 15 and Sergeant
            Burns.
ii.         Stewards            and Ridge were also present at Gate B.
iii.        The evidence was as follows:

                         (Statement):        "Gate B not opened before
                                             kick-off."    If this is
                                             correct Gate B was not
                                             opened before 14.59.30.
                 RIDGE (day 21 p.!28A):      "Police ordered me to
                                             open the gate at 14.55, I
                                             said "No way"".
                 PC AITKIN
                 (Statement p ♦4):           "Gate B opened.      200
                                             supporters came through,
                                             then with PC Ford and
                                                       we closed the
                                             gate.    I looked at my
                                             watch it was 15.02."
                 (day 17 p.61H
                 -p.62A):                    PC Aitkin confirms Ridge
                                             (... as to time) but PC
                                             referred to says Gate C
                                             already opened.


b)     Could PC Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate B?


i.          There is limited evidence as to exactly how Gate B came
            to be opened.   The main evidence comes from Sergeant
            Burns.

                                     24
          SERGEANT BURNS             "I pleaded with Inspector
          (day 17 p.30G)              Bennett to open Gates
                                     (B) and stop the crushing
                                     outside."
But
          a.      No mention of possible fatalities;
          b.      No mention of request being made by radio;
          c.      In any event Sergeant Burns's radio was not
                 working (see day 17 p.33G) "Radio dead since
                 14.30. Not working until I heard the call for
                 pitch invasion."


           INSPECTOR BENNETT (day 15 P.66E-G)

          a.     Not make any request to F/C to open Gate A.
          b.     Not aware of any such request to F/C.     Did
                 not notice how or why Gate B was opened.
           In all the circumstances, and in view of the
           evidence that has been given, we submit it is
           evident that conversations relating to the Gate B
           to be opened could not have been overheard by PC
           Waugh.
           Fans not shouting and screaming. Opening the gate
           probably surprised them because it was towards
           their side per Aitkin (day 17 p.62F-G).


WAS IT GATE A?

When was Gate A Opened?


      According to leading Counsel for the Inquiry Gate A was
      opened at 14.58
           INSPECTOR SYKES
           Statement p.7             "I have no actual time of
                                     the next event, but would
                                     estimate it to be at 2.50
                                     and I then saw Gate A
                                     open wide.M
                             25
               SERGEANT HIGGINS
               (day 17 p92C)            "Made a request that Gate
                                        A be opened because I
                                        .thought someone might be
                                        killed outside.      That
                                        message was received."
                                        No evidence as to when
                                        this request was made.
               SERGEANT GODDARD
               (day 18 p.86B)           Confirms receiving
                                        Higgins’s message.         Says
                                        he p e r s o n a l l y gave
                                        permission ( !! ) relying
                                        upon the previous
                                        in s t r u c t i o n given by
                                        Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
                                        Duckingfield.        He places
                                        t h e r e q u e s t 3 or 4
                                        minutes after the opening
                                        Of Gate C.           If he is
                                        r i g h t t h i s w i l l be
                                        between 14.56 and 14.57.
      Statement p.6 "By the time Gate B was opened C Gate had been
      closed."
                PC CAMMOCK
                (day 29 p.38D-F          "Made     my  way    to
                                         Superintendent Marshall
                                         who was standing on the
                                         parapet.        Asked
                                         permission to open Gate
                                         A.

      No evidence that this request was made by radio and
      therefore submit not been heard by PC Waugh.


ii.        In any event we submit clearly not Gate A because the
           entry through Gate A was orderly and controlled by a
           serial of police officers directing the fans towards
           the north stand.     In any event the weight of the
           evidence seems to suggest that Gate A was opened
           because Gate C was opened and it was thought that a
           general permission to open gates had been given.

                                  26
iii.        We submit that in all the circumstances this is
            unlikely to have been the urgent and unusual
            circumstances to cause PC Waugh to act as he did.


iv.         In any event there is no evidence of any requests
            having been made over the radio and no evidence that
            such requests were repeated before it was granted.



5*     WAS IT THE PERIMETER FENCE GATE TO PENS 3 AND 4?
a.     We submit this is the most likely explanation for PC Waugh's
        conduct.
b.     The evidence is clear from other sources that by 14.59 the
       disaster had already occurred.
       EVIDENCE:

            (i)    Liverpool Echo Photo document 278.
                   Taken at 14.59
                   Four hallmarks of the crushing clearly present,
                   namely:
            a.     Perimeter gates open;
            b.     Spectators climbing over the top of the perimeter
                   fence;
            c.     Fans climbing up to the seated area of the west
                   stand;
            d.     Press photographer taking close-up pictures of
                   people behind perimeter fence in pen 3.


            (ii)        Further evidence from photograph DB17-15
                        (document 126 and transcript day 19 p.35D-
                        E):-
                        "That is timed at 14.59 and it clearly shows
                        the west end, the Leppings Lane terraces.
                        One can see to the right of the photograph


                                   27
            the back of the goal, the goal netting, and
            one can see the gates in the terraces in the
            perimeter fence open.    I think those gates
            are 3 and 4, and at that time there are a
            considerable number of people already outside
            the perimeter fence. ? ... and your St John1s
            people are already assisting? - answer-
            correct ."
(iii)        Evidence from serial 1 officers on the
             perimeter fence
        PC SMITH
        (day 17 p.114-115)
                                 stationed at Gate 3
                                 ”I could see people were
                                 being pressed up tight
                                 against the fence; that
                                 they had not fallen back
                                 as they would normally
                                 fall back."
                                 "I think some people were
                                 shouting "Open the gate,
                                 w e a r e c r u s h e d " or
                                 something like that."
                       Q:       "Did y o u try to get
                                through on your radio to
                                anyone?"
                       A:       "I tried to shout "Come
                                 and open these gates.
                                 P e o p l e are dying in
                                 here." or something like
                                 that.       Quite honestly
                                 from past experience I
                                 had no doubt that they
                                 would not have received
                                 that at the time due to
                                 the noise of the crowd,
                                 sir. "
                       Q:       "Did you realise by then
                                 that p e o p l e w er e in
                                 trouble?"


                        28
                  A:   "Certainly, sir."

                  Q:   "So did you in fact open
                       the gate?"
                  A:   "We opened        them,    yes
                       sir. "


PC ILLINGWORTH
(day 17 p.l35C)        On duty at Gate 4 after
                       14.50 (day 17 p.l34D)
P.135B-E               "As p e o p l e b e c a m e
                       distressed and I realised
                       they were in pain, I put
                       a radio message over to
                       say that there was a
                       serious situation at the
                       front."

                  Q:   "Apart from seeing people
                       in distress, could you
                       hear whether they were in
                       distress?"
                  A:   "Yes"

                  Q:   "In what way, what were
                       they shouting?"
                  A:   "Words to the effect of
                       "Help, I'm hurt, I'm
                       being crushed.""

                  Q:   "It was obvious to you
                       that people were being
                       crushed I take it?"
                  A:   "Blatantly obvious, yes.
                       PC I l l i n g w o r t h t h e n
                       opened Gate 4."
(iv)       Evidence from the fans
           Numerous fans gave evidence that in the time running up
           to kick-off and at the time of kick-off there were
           screams for help and screams to the police drawing
           attention to the plight of those at the front of pens 3
           and 4.


           We submit that it is unnecessary to recite all the fans
           whose evidence must be very much in the mind of the
           Tribunal. We particularly rely upon the evidence of Mr
           Hicks who was seeking to draw attention of senior
           police officers in the police control box to the
           evident crushing which he could see from his position
           in pens 1 and 2.



6.     CONCLUSION


a      We submit that it is abundantly clear that the tragedy
       commenced some time before 15.00, that the tragedy was
       identified by junior police officers present at the
       perimeter gates at 14.59 and onwards, that that tragedy was
       not identified for whatever reason by senior officers until
       15.05.24 (MAPI) when Superintendent Greenwood went onto the
       pitch.

b      We submit that it is abundantly clear that although it is
       possible that messages in relation to other gates could have
       been picked up by PC Waugh which would have motivated his
       telephone call to SYMAS headquarters, the balance of
       probabilities indicate that it in fact was cries for help
       emanating from the fans crushed behind pens 3 and 4.

c      We reassert this submission in view of the fact that again,
       without request from G/C for them to do so, another officer
       at F/C telephoned SYMAS at 15.06 merely to put them on
       notice.  It is evident that many of the officers at F/C in
       Snig Hill were disturbed by the messages that they were
       receiving by monitoring the VHF radio channel 25 and these
       were by 15.08 totally unconnected with any respect to open
       gates outside by the turnstiles.
                                 30
In our submission these calls for help and calls of concern
must have been coming from officers at the perimeter fence
who were clearly upset and perturbed by the evidence before
their eyes.

It is submitted that this would have been apparent to
officers in the police control box were they prepared to
believe the evidence before their eyes and also to
Superintendent Murray and Superintendent Greenwood when they
went down to the pitch and to investigate why fans were
climbing over the perimeter fence.

Superintendent Greenwood (day 12 p.99E) identified himself
as the inspector in photograph South Yorkshire Police 2
(bundle F) photograph PR1/9A.        At that stage 15.02
Superintendent Greenwood asserted that he was merely
assessing the situation.   He accepted that it was clear if
one looked at those crushed behind the fence that some were
in difficulties and being crushed.        A perusal of the
following photographs: 1/10A shows that far from assessing
the situation Superintendent Greenwood in fact has caught
hold of a fan and is pulling him back towards the fence.

From an early stage shortly after 15.00 the commentators
viewing the pictures being produced by the video (map 9 and
10) o b s e r v e d that the p r o b l e m is being caused by
overcrowding and fans are spilling over onto the pitch.



The call for Operation Support from G/C was clearly in
response to what was then identified as a pitch invasion and
not recognising that in fact a major emergency had occurred.


It is regrettable that no call was made to SYMAS until 15.08
for ambulances because given their response time it is
likely that they would have arrived at the ground in
sufficient numbers to have made a material difference to the
number of deceased than they were otherwise able to.
j   One is not able to say if in fact anybody's life would have
    been saved or, if so, how many but one is able to say that
    undoubtedly had the disaster been recognised by those in
    authority earlier than it was and the appropriate assistance
    been called some 8 minutes earlier than it was then
    undoubtedly the chances of survival for many of the people
    who were pulled out dead would have been enhanced.




                              32
          OUTLINE COMMENTS ON VARIOUS FACTORS RELEVANT TO THE
            MATTERS WITHIN THE INQUIRY *S TERMS OF REFERENCE


PREAMBLE
We expect that most of the matters set out below have been
accepted already by the Tribunal, but we list them to demonstrate
SYMAS' strength of feeling that the disaster should not have
occurred, and could have been avoided.
1.   CHOICE OF GROUND

     A.      Leppings Lane End
             1.1   Inevitably, because of need for segregation,
                   Hillsborough's design was not safe to accommodate
                   one set of supporters if they had to enter the
                   ground at Leppings Lane.
             1.2   There is an obvious bottle neck leading into the
                   outer perimeter gates and there is the added
                   problem of channelling the supporters into the
                   appropriate turnstiles for the north stand, the
                   west stand and the west terracing.
             1.3   It should be noted that the shortest distance
                   across the funnel leading into the outer perimeter
                   gates is only 24 metres.
             1.4   Once the supporters gain access through the outer
                   perimeter gates those heading for turnstiles A-G
                   have to negotiate a minimum bottleneck of 8 metres
                   between the handrail leading down from turnstile G
                   and the edge of turnstile 16.        The maximum
                   distance across turnstiles A-G is only 13 metres.

     B.      Turnstile Flow Rate

             1.1   The L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s were allocated
                   approximately 24,500 tickets for the semi-final,
                   covering the north stand and the west stand and
                   terracing.
           1.2   Paragraph 47 of the Green Guide gives a maximum
                 notional rate per turnstile at which spectators
                 can pass through, not exceeding 750 persons per
                 hour.
           1.3 Based on the figure of 23 turnstiles for 24,500
               spectators, at the rate of 750 per hour, it would
               take almost 1 1/2 hours for 24,500 spectators to
               gain entry into the ground.
           1.4   If one then takes the figure of 7 turnstiles for
                 the 10,100 sp ec t a t o r s for the west stand
                 terracing, based upon the notional rate in
                 paragraph 47, it would almost take 2 hours for the
                 10,100 spectators to gain entry.
           1.5   It should be clearly noted that the above
                 estimates represent the minimum possible time to
                 allow spectators into Hillsborough based upon the
                 Green Guide figures.
           1.6   The inadequacy of the turnstiles to accommodate
                 24.500 spectators appears to have been recognised
                 by the South Yorkshire Police and SWFC.       See
                 Transcript day 11 p38D-G.
           1.7   In our submission it was absurd to believe that
                 24.500 spectators could have been safely allowed
                 entry through Leppings Lane in the time available.


2.   FAILURE TO DELAY KICK-OFF
     2.1   The senior officers inside the police control box
           should have realised by 1430 hours that the crowd of
           supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance could not
           get into the ground by 1500 hours even on the most
           optimistic of flow rates through the turnstiles.
     2.2   It therefore follows that kick-off should have been
           postponed prior to or very shortly after 1430 hours,
           and indeed many people were under the impression that
           kick-off had been delayed.




                                 34
3.   OPENING OF GATE C

     3.1   The decision to open Gate C was inevitable in all
           circumstances, but the failure to prepare and cater for
           the resultant ingress of supporters into the concourse
           behind the west stand and then onto the terracing, was
           a clear and fundamental mistake by the police.


4.   SIGNING AND LAYOUT OF CONCOURSE

     4.1   Once supporters found themselves in the concourse area
           behind the west stand the directional signs onto the
           terracing was so poor that it resulted in the majority
           of supporters quite reasonably deciding that there was
           no way onto the terracing other than through the
           central tunnel.
     4.2   The situation was made worse by the presence of the
           internal wall which although useful for a normal match,
           probably dissuaded many supporters going to their left
           after entering through turnstiles A-G and Gate C.
     4.3 There were clearly enough officers in serial 14 to make
         a line to direct spectators to pens 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7-
         see PC Burton day 17 p21G to p22D.
5.   LAYOUT OF TERRACE

     5.1   The layout of the radial fences, perimeter fence gates
           and barriers was, at the very least, piecemeal,
           haphazard and carried out with little or insufficient
           thought concerning the safety of supporters on the
           terracing.
     5.2   The emphasis in erecting the radial fences, perimeter
           fence gates and barriers was clearly on containment of
           the supporters on the terracing, and for example we
           would point to:
           a.   the disagreements as to the use of the gates in
                the perimeter fences in the event of emergency
                evacuation;



                                35
      b.   Dr Eastwood's assertion (unsupported by other
           members of the Working Party) that breach of
           paragraph 115 of the Green Guide was a deliberate
           policy decision. Please see Dr Eastwood's plan No
           11424-8 which shows that the gaps were in
           existence before he obtained his retainer from the
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, i.e. pre-1978,
           and were made by the removal of existing sections
           with no new uprights being constructed.

SIZE OF GATES IN PERIMETER FENCE

The perimeter gates leading onto the perimeter track are
clearly too narrow for the purposes of emergency evacuation
onto the pitch area.


ESTIMATION OF TERRACE CAPACITY

The capacity of the whole of the west stand terracing, and
in particular pens 3 and 4, has been clearly wrongly
calculated.  Reference should be made to document headed
"Sheffield Wednesday Football Club west terrace - ideal
distribution of persons" for pens 3 and 4.     The Health &
Safety Executive has calculated that the maximum numbers of
spectators for pens 3 and 4 are 822 for pen 3 and 871 for
pen 4. Furthermore, if one takes into account paragraph 216
of the Green Guide, the appropriate capacities of pens 3 and
4 are substantially reduced, to 542 for pen 3 and 605 for
pen 4.


LACK OF ANTICIPATION

8.1   Whatever criticisms can be made of the Liverpool
      supporters, it appears fairly clear that the South
      Yorkshire Police should have anticipated the sort of
      behaviour from the Liverpool fans which they alleged
      took place on 15 April 1989.
8.2   In particular, this is borne out by the evidence
      gathered by the South Yorkshire Police during the
      course of the Inquiry, and served in the last week of
      evidence given to the Inquiry. This documentation
      contains numerous reports of behaviour by Liverpool
      fans during the course of the 1988-89 football season
      which indicates a pattern of behaviour identical to
      that which took place on 15 April.
8.3   The following are examples of such reports:
         i. Humberside Police - Hull City v Liverpool dated
            18 February 1989.
        ii. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
            dated 12 December 1988.
       iii. Metropolitan Police - Arsenal v Liverpool dated
            9 November 1988.
        iv. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
            dated 24 September 1988.
8.4    In addition, during the course of the 1987-88 season,
       there is a report from the Hertfordshire Constabulary
       concerning the Watford v Liverpool game which took
       place on 13 February 1988 where 1,500 Liverpool
       supporters arrived at the ground without tickets and
       were allowed in.




                                      Michael Kallipetis Q.C
                                      2, Crown Office Row
                                      Temple
                                      EC4
                                      6th July 1989




                           37
                                   V
                    FRONT LINE EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
                            INVENTORY LIST
     LIST ITEMS
Oxygen F 3/4 1/2 1/4
Entonox F 3/4 1/2 1/4
Suction Unit
Resuscitator (Robert Shaw/M.man)
Frac Splints
Bag and Mask
Chloride Tablets (6)
02 Masks
Blankets (x 6)
Pillows (x 2)
Maternity Pack
Waterproof Sheets
Burns Sheet
Nursing/Barrier Gown
Green Sheets (3)
Carrying Sheets
Cervical Collar
Bed Pan
Urine Bottle
Vomit Bowl
Bucket and Lid
Air Freshener Spray
First Aid Box



                            38
Carrying Chair x 1
Scoop Stretcher x 1
Stretcher Poles x 2
Rescue Box
Fire Extinguishes (2)
Wheel Brace
Handle
Ferno Ked x 1
Chemical Protective Suit x 2
Details and Number of Crew
                      -   1
                      -   2

Body Bag
2 Pairs of Goggles




                               39
             LIST OF CONTENTS OF THE RESCUE BOX
              CARRIED ON FRONT LINE AMBULANCES

RESCUE BOX


anti-static gloves
crow-bar
bolt-croppers
screw-driver
hammer
all purpose saw
25 ft. rope lashing




                        40
           AMBULANCE AID SATCHEL
              INVENTORY LIST


QUANTITY                       ITEM

3                       7.5cm Roller Bandages
3                       5cm Roller Bandages
6                       Triangular Bandages
1                       15g Cotton Wool Packet
4                       No 1 Wound Dressings
4                       No 2 Wound Dressings
1                       No 3 Wound Dressings
3                       90cm + lm Gauze
1                       Pkt Gauze Swabs
1                       No 1 Guedal Airway
1                       No 2 Guedal Airway
1                       No 3 Guedal Airway
6                       Safety Pins
3                       Blanket Pins
1                        " Zinc Oxide Plaster
1                       Reflective Jacket
1                       Rubber Torch
1                       Brook Airway
1                       Pair of Dressing Scissi
            EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN'S EQUIPMENT
                               INVENTORY

Carrying Case
Laerdal Resuscitator
Laerdal Adult Mask
Laerdal Child Mask
Airway Size 1
Airway Size 2
Airway Size 3
Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batteries
Laryngoscope Blade Size 3
Laryngoscope Blade Size 4
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 6mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 7mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 8mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 9mm
Catheter Mount (anti static)
Catheter Swivel Connector
Adaptors Female
Lubricating Jelly
Syringes 10 ml
Stethoscope
Sphygmomanometer
Needle Box
Scissors/shears
Magill Forceps
Spencer Wells
Aspirator
Laryngoscope Spare Bulb
Tourniquet
Catheter Mount Connector
Vecafix                                    5
Surgical Cloth                             1
Syringe Needles (19g)                      2
Catheter 14g                               2
Catheter 12g                               2
Cannulae 16g                               5
Cannulae 18g                               5
Cannulae 20g                               4
Administration Set                         2
Hartmanns Fluid IV 500 mis                 1
Haemaccel Fluid IV 500 mis                 1
Pre-injection Swabs                        10
Tape Adhesive Hospital 20metres            1
Tape Sleek 2.5 cm                          1
Tape Sleek 5.0 cm                          1
Arm Splint 18" x 4"                        1
Cotton Wool                                1
Gauze (1 metre)                            1
Triangular Bandages                        2
5.0 cm Bandages x 5 metres                 2



                          42
7.5 cm Bandages x 5 metres   2
Gauze Swabs                  2
Extractor Mucous             1
Oxygen Mask                  1
Oxygen Tubing 3 metres       1
Gloves Disposable            2
Antiseptic Solution          2
Waterproof Sheet             1
Micro Pore Tape 2.5 cm       1
Patient Report Form Pad      1
Head Lamp and Battery        1
Security Strap and 2 Keys    1
Sharps Bin 500 ml            1
AJC/SO'C

                                                        10 July 1989
R. M. Whalley Esq.,
Secretary to the Inquiry into
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SW1H 9AT


Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Inquiry
Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS

We refer to our letter of 6th July and to Counsel's closing
statement.

Counsel has asked that the following alterations be made to each
copy of the closing statement:-
Page 19                        The words "P.C. Waugh to SYMAS"
                               should be at the top of page 20.

Page 22 - Paragraph 1 (b)      The word "not" should be inserted
                               between "is" and "consistent". The
                               words "outside Gate C" should be
                               added to the end of the sentence.

Page 30 - Paragraph 6 (c)      "15.08" should be "15.09"           and
                               "respect" should be "request".

Page 36 - Paragraph 5.2 (b)    The second sentence should be
                               "Please see Doctor Eastwood's plan
                               No: 11424-8 which shows that some
                               of the gaps were in existenge
                               before he obtained his retainer
                               from the S h e f field W e d n e s d a y
                               Football Club i.e. pre-1978 and the
                               rest were made by the removal of
                               existing sections with no new
    10 July 1989




                              uprights being constructed”.

We apologise for any Inconvenience this causes.
We have sent a copy of this letter to each of the solicitors for
the other parties.
Yours faithfuly,
                                                                      DI BB L U P T O N
                                                                      BROOMHEAD
                                                                      ------------------S O L I C I T O R             S -----------------

                                                                                                                                                                                   6 B utts C o u rt
                                                                                                                                                                                  Leeds LSI 5JX
    Your Ref.                                                                                                                                                             Telephone 0532 439301
                                                                                                                                                                         Fax 0532 452632/428891
    O u r Ref.                                                                                                                                                                      Telex 557181
                          AJC/SO'C                                                                                                                                            M D X 12.017 Leeds


                                                                                                                                                                               6 July 1989

                          R. M. Whalley Esq.,
                          Secretary to the Inquiry into
                          The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
                          50, Queen Anne's Gate,
                          LONDON,
                          SW1H 9AT


                          Dear Sir,
                          Hillsborough Inquiry
                          Our Clients; Trent RHA/SYMAS
                          We refer to your note of 29th June and enclose ten copies of
                          Counsel's closing statement.  We have sent two copies to the
                          Treasury Solicitor and to each of the solicitors for the other
                          parties.
                          The statement is divided in five sections dealing with the
                          following matters
                           I:           Criticisms of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                        Ambulance Service.

                           II:           Interim Recommendations.

                           Ill: The Police's failure to recognise the disaster. You will
                                recall that when cross examining P.C. Waugh (on the final
                                day of evidence) our Counsel undertook to provide a
                                chronology and ar g u m e n t r e l a t i n g to P.C. W a u g h ' s
                                conversation with the police control at Hillsborough at
                                14.59 in which he asked whether they required ambulances.

                           IV:           Outline Comments on Various Factors Relevant to the Matters
                                         Within the Inquiry's Term of Reference.
                           V:            SYMAS Equipment.


 C S. Barker R .A . Smith S, N , L . G halton B .B .F irth D . P, Read G .D .C .S h a w T .H .R e e d L. N . R oberts J , A. V. Wade (N otary Public) M .P .W .L ee C .D .T rip p e tt C. D. Ibberson M. Jenkins
M. j 1. Winkworth-Smith B. Bentley J, A, B. Buchan Miss J, C. Boler R. M. Sunon J, R. S. Lazenby *J. D, Simon T. B. Knight W. M. Wrigley J. R. H arrap M. E. Cowell P. M. Anson K. McLoughlin
 R. C. Whitlam D. A. Thorpe P. A. Rhodes A. G. Chappell P. D. Barton T. H . Ratdiffe N . P. Dickson N. G. Knowle^ Miss A. S. Duchart K. A. Royle J. M. Rowlands A. D. Darwin T. J. Pope
                                                W, K. P.. Ballmann A. J , Callaghan M. G rabm er P. E. Cranston T. J. Whiteside G. J. Smallman C . Staton
        Associates: N . D. Slater R. W. Boreham Mrs J. S, Street S. D. Robertson M_ S. Jackson M issJ. L. Atkinson A. D. H olt A. M. Kerr D. A. Jameson K. Docherty J. R. H . Sykes P. N . Firth
         Miss A. Goraj N . L. Thompson M rs E. W. Wilkinson Mrs J. Jackson D. A. Smyllie J. S. Crookes C . T. Tulley Mrs S. J. Gas kill A. D . Bennett Miss J. E. Hampson J. Yorke D. J. Gray
                                                                           D . P. Mosley S. P. H oughton (Scotland) H . C. Evans
                                                                         Consultants: E. Q. Bousfield S. L. Batiste MP C . T. Peach

                                                          Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business
                         DIBB      L 'U P T O N
                         BROOMHEAD
Continuation


Date           6 July 1989




          The Interim recommendations have been specifically drafted with a
          view to them being implemented, if the Inquiry agreed with them,
          in time for the commencement of the 1989/90 season.
          Inevitably there is some overlap with Phase Two, but we will
          include these matters again when we come to deal with Phase Two
          of the Inquiry.
          Yours faithfully,
                              INDEX

    SECTION                                         PAGE

              Criticisms of SYMAS                          1    -       6

    II        SYMAS' Interim Recommendations               7 - 11

    III       South Yorkshire Police Failure
              to Recognise the Disaster
              A.   Summary                                 12 - 14
              B.   Key                                     15 - 16
              C.   Chronology                              17       -   21

              D.   Argument                                22 - 32

    IV        Outline Comments on Various Factors
              Relevant to the Matters within the
              Inquiry's Terms of Reference                 33 - 37
              SYMAS's Equipment
              1.   Front Line Emergency Equipment          38 - 39
              2.   Contents of Rescue Box on Front
                    Line Ambulance                         40
              3.   Ambulance Aid Satchel                   41
              4.   Extended Trained Ambulanceman's
                    Equipment                              42 - 43




7
                   CRITICISMS OF SYMAS

Implicit criticisms of SYMAS appeared in quotations
contained in an article which appeared in The Times and The
Independent of 17 April 1989.     They also appeared in other
newspapers.     The remarks were made by two doctors who
attended Hillsborough as Liverpool supporters on 15 April
1989.   During the course of the evidence it became clear
that the first five criticisms by Doctor A related to events
in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand and terrace (day
25 pl21D).




DOCTOR A



1. "At 3.30 pm there were no medical personnel apart from
   one or two St John’s ambulancemen. There was no medical
   equipment and there was only one ambulance."
  FACTS:

  a.    Ambulances arriving at Leppings Lane (see video RJH2)
        1513    S407 arrives (leaves 1523)
        1516     S203 arrives (leaves 1528)
                (by 1530         ~ n from this ambulance is on
                the pitch - video MAPI)
        1521     S208 arrives (leaves 1532)
        1535     R608 arrives

        This doctor cannot have arrived in the concourse
        until about 1535.

  b.    About 40 casualties are taken from the Leppings Lane
        end by SYMAS, of which 5 were removed by 1532.   All
          casualties had been removed from that end of the
          ground by 1606 (SYMAS recording track 19 page 19).
          Therefore about 35 casualties, all of whom survived
          were conveyed by SYMAS vehicles between 1532 and
          1606.



2.   "Lack of triage"
     FACTS:
     a.   SYMAS personnel operated triage:
          -   see               statement, paragraph 7
          -   see Mr Yoxall's evidence - day 23 page 126F
          -   see             1 statement - paragraphs 15 to 18
          -   see             1statement - paragraphs 16 and 21
     b.   Other personnel - police - also:
          - see               ~| evidence - day 17 page 159E-H



3.   "A full casualty team with resuscitation equipment did
     not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm."
     FACTS:
     a.   A full casualty team arrived at the designated
          casualty clearing station (the gymnasium) at the
          Penistone Road end of the ground.      _____________
          statement paragraph 12 shows that the medical team
          left Northern General Hospital at 1544; it would
          therefore have been at the ground by 1550 at the very
          latest.
     b.   A casualty team did not attend at Leppings Lane and
          all casualties had been removed from that end of the
          ground by 1606 (see above).
     c.   A further casualty team arrived from Barnsley
          District General Hospital at the designated casualty
          clearing station but was not required.
     d.   The implication that only the casualty teams would
          have resuscitation equipment is wrong.   All SYMAS
          frontline ambulances carry portable and fixed
          resuscitation equipment which was used at Leppings
                               2
          Lane.   Fire service      also carried resuscitation
          equipment.



4.   "There was no oxygen, airway tubes and drips.
     FACTS:

     a.   No oxygen     -   Wrong =     All SYMAS frontline
                            ambulances carry pneupac minuteman
                            oxygen resuscitators and have a
                            static supply of oxygen on board.
     b.   No airways - Wrong:

                         i. All SYMAS frontline vehicles carry
                            a selection of airways, and a large
                            number were inserted.
                        ii. If the doctor means to refer to the
                            lack of intubation equipment, such
                            equipment is carried by paramedics
                            for use by them as they are trained
                            to use it.     Although there were
                            some doctors present in the crowd
                            who were competent to use such
                            equipment had it been available for
                            general use (apart from that
                            brought by paramedics and the
                            medical team) it is impractical to
                            expect a supply of such equipment,
                            which can only safely be used by
                            those trained to use it, to be
                            available on the offchance that
                            suitably qualified persons may be
                            among spectators. (This doctor
                            admitted that it was some time
                            s i n c e he had c a r r i e d out an
                            intubation himself - see day 25
                            page 124D).

                      iii. A consultant anaesthetist (day 25
                           p27D) agreed that if the tube were
                           wrongly inserted it could kill the
                           patient. The treatment that was
                           being a d m i n i s t e r e d by police
                           officers, fans, St John's and SYMAS
                           ambulancemen, namely CPR, was the
                           correct treatment               in t h e
                           circumstances and undoubtedly did
                                3
                             save lives.
     c.   No drips     -     Wrong:
                           i. Infusion equipment is carried by
                              paramedics, and requires special
                              training, however, there is no
                              evidence that any casualty was
                              prejudiced by the lack of infusion
                              equipment.
                        ii. Medical Team (gymnasium) obviously
                            had I.V. drips because spectator
                            nurse F 3 Eccleston gave evidence
                            that he set up 10 drips ready for
                            doctors (Transcript day 5 pl5D).



5.   "More lives could have been saved if staff and equipment
     had arrived earlier."
     FACTS:
     a.   Before he was reminded that he had made such a
          statement to the press, Dr in chief (day 25 page 115G
          to 116G) accepted that it was pure speculation
          whether or not further lives could have been saved
          (day 25 page 115G to 116D), and on cross examination
          (day 25 page 127C to D) agreed that it was
          "unfortunate" that he had sought out the press to
          make public pronouncements which it was not possible
          for him to make.
     b.   If as SYMAS submit, the crushing started at the very
          latest at 1459, by the time that any medical
          a s s i s t a n c e got to the most severely crushed
          spectators they had been deprived of oxygen for over
          4 minutes and therefore it is unlikely that the
          presence or otherwise of such equipment made any
          practical difference.



DOCTOR P
6.   "Complains about the lack of defibrillators"
     FACTS:

                               4
a.   We believe that the Inquiry accepts that the use of
     defibrillators on the pitch in the circumstances of
     this t r a g e d y would have been professionally
     irresponsible, (day 19 page 31C) (day 24 page 103F)
      (day 25 page 24A and 29A).
b.   In case anybody has any doubts about it we list the
     difficulties:
       i.   If wrongly used it can kill:
            - the patient
            - the operator
            - any third party coming into contact with the
              patient.
      ii.   Before being used national guidelines for
            ambulancemen lay down that an ECG reading for
            diagnosis should be obtained from the machine.
            In order for the reading and diagnosis to be
            accurate the patient and the defibrillator must
            be completely isolated from any movement and
            t h e s u r r o u n d i n g e n v i r o n m e n t m u s t be
            sufficiently stable to permit an accurate
            assessment of the ECG recorded. Spurious
            readings can occur in a crowd.
     iii.   In the circumstances of this tragedy when
            otherwise relatively fit individuals were
            rendered hypoxic (lack of oxygen), the likely
            heart pattern is asystole (continuous line of
            electrical activity with no effective heart
            contractions) and not ventricular fibrillation.
            The purpose of a defibrillator is to jolt a
            fibrillating heart rhythm back into a normal
            pattern.   The standard treatment for asystole
            is CPR. Successful CPR would normally produce
            a regular heart pattern rather than ventricular
            fibrillation.
      iv.   However, given the length of time during which
            most of the patients had been deprived of
            oxygen, even the use of a defibrillator would
            not have made any practical difference (see Dr
            P's statement to the police, page 7 "my
            thoughts that in view of the length of time he
            was pulseless it would probably be kinder if he
            died.   I am sure he must have been severely
            brain damaged by that time" and at the bottom
            of the page "I looked desperately for somebody
            not dead but seriously ill who needed help. I
            could not find anybody in that category in the
                              5
              goal area.   They were either all dead or okay
              with nothing in between.")
Ambulance Equipment
1. A list of equipment carried by all SYMAS frontline
   ambulances, the contents of a rescue box carried on a
    frontline ambulance, the contents of an ambulanceman's
   satchel and the equipment carried by an extended trained
   ambulanceman are contained in Section V.
2. This equipment is intended for use by SYMAS personnel and
   not by third parties.
3. Much of the equipment has to be kept with the ambulance
    for use on the journey to hospital.
4. The primary purpose of the ambulance is to give immediate
    treatment to casualties and convey them to hospital.
5. On 15 April 1989 many SYMAS ambulancemen treated
   casualties with CPR and resuscitation, as well as
   conveying 172 injured to hospital. Any criticism of lack
   of equipment on SYMAS vehicles is ill-informed.
                                  II

                 SYMAS' INTERIM       RECOMMENDATIONS


1•   Ambulance Service Attendance

     At any Specified Activity where the attendance is expected
     to exceed 25,000 and/or the past history and/or other
     circumstances indicate that ambulance service presence is
     desirable (a "critical match"),       the holder of the safety
     certificate should invite the statutory ambulance authority
     to attend with such personnel, vehicles and equipment as
     shall be agreed between them but in any event not less than
     an officer with one vehicle and crew,          the appropriate
     payment being made by the holder of the safety certificate.
     This is in addition to the present attendance of St John
     Ambulance Brigade or the British Red Cross.


2.   First Aid Room


     Each club being the holder of a safety certificate, should
     maintain a first aid room, equipped to a basic standard, as
     specified by the licensing authority after consultation with
     the appropriate ambulance authority.




                                  7
Doctor


The Football League, Football Association and the relevant
licensing authority should require clubs holding safety
certificates and intending to stage a critical match to
arrange that the doctor in attendance:


a.   is trained and competent in advanced first aid to a
     standard equivalent to a NHS TA Paramedic;


b.   is available to treat any injured spectators and to
     attend the first aid room, when called upon to do so.




Communication


There shall be an agreed and common method of communication
between all the emergency services, if necessary with the
assistance of a dedicated radio and/or telephone direct link
to the ground and the respective headquarters.




Liaison


Before each critical match the liaison officers from the
police and ambulance service should make contact and arrange
to be in direct contact with each other during the match.
The police liaison officer should be in direct contact with
police control.


Emergency Plan


For all designated grounds there should be a joint and
common emergency plan drawn up by the relevant police
authority, fire service, statutory ambulance authority and
the holder of the safety certificate.            The emergency plan
should detail:


a.   The   relevant    function of each service during an
     emergency.


b.   The liaison officer from each service, preferably by
     name,   their    respective    s t a tion    and   particular
     responsibility.


c.   The agreed rendezvous points for each service and the
     (named) police officer who is responsible for collating
     and issuing information to,         and coordinating the
     response of, the relevant services.


d.   Emergency access and egress.
e.   Casualty clearing point.


f.   Preferred routes to and from hospitals, to be kept clear
     by the police during an emergency.




Licensing Authority


The licensing authority should satisfy itself before issuing
the safety certificate that a joint and common emergency
plan (as described in paragraph 6 above) is in existence for
the designated ground.




Advice From Statutory Ambulance Authority


The statutory ambulance authority should be asked to advise
the issuing authority for each safety certificate on the
question of:


a.   access and egress for ambulances


b.   medical equipment


c.   attendance of ambulance personnel and vehicles at
     critical matches
         and should be consulted before there is any variation in
         the terms of the safety certificate as regards items a,
        b and c above.




9.   Amendment to 1975 Act


     SSGA 1975 be amended     so as to require the licensing
     authority to deal with applications for safety certificates
     within six months failing which it shall be deemed to have
     been refused.




                               11
                                     Ill

     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - FAILURE TO RECOGNISE THE DISASTER


A.    SUMMARY


1.    SYMAS' submission is that South Yorkshire Police were in a
      position to identify the existence of a disaster by 1459
      hours     at the very latest.        In fact,   as the attached
      chronology shows, they failed to do so before 1505 hours and
      failed to call SYMAS until 1508 hours.




2.    In view of the unchallenged medical evidence it is SYMAS'
      submission that those 9 minutes were critical, and of all
      the claims that lives could have been saved, this is the
      only one with any merit.




3.    SYMAS' submission is that there is evidence to indicate that
      supporters were being crushed to death by 1459 hours and
      that    this   was   evident   to anyone whose mind was not
      conditioned by the need to contain supporters within the
      central pens.




                                     12
4.   It is SYMAS'    submission that the persons who were in a
     position to, and should have recognised the plight of the
     persons in pens 3 and 4, are the police officers in the
     control box, and those stationed along the perimeter track
     in front of pens 3 and 4.




5.   Evidence


     a.   Photographs South Yorkshire Composite Album 2.


     b.   Photograph produced by leading Counsel for South
          Yorkshire Police on day 19 (transcript          19 p35D).
          DB17/15.


     c.   Photographs taken by the Liverpool Echo and produced to
          the Inquiry by Counsel for the Football Supporters
          Association. Document 278.


     d.   Transcripts of messages received and despatched by
          Force Control at Snig Hill.


     e.   Evidence of witnesses - both fans and police.




                                 13
6.   In order to follow the above submissions the following
     chronology which Counsel undertook to supply to the Inquiry
     will be of use.




                               14
B.   KEY


1.   VIDEOS:


     There are four videos to which reference is made, namely:
     RJH2           - This is the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                      film taken from the camera which has a fixed
                      view onto the back of the courtyard behind
                      turnstiles A-G.
     MAPI & MAP9 - These are tapes of videos made by BBC Outside
                   Broadcast Unit one using an operator set
                   database and the other using a computer set
                   database. For the purposes of this schedule
                   no distinction is drawn.
     TB2            - This is the film made by South Yorkshire
                      Police on the CCTV system using operator set
                      database.



2.   TRANSCRIPTS


     SYMAS 1    =   Track 9              DOCUMENT 128A and 128B
                                         These are a
                                         transcription of tapes
     SYMAS 2    =   Tracks 10 & 11       made at SYMAS HQ of calls
                                         received from Force
                                         Control SNIG HILL.
     SNIG   I   =   SA/1. KWP 30/15/17   This is a transcription
     Part   1        Document 34         of tapes made at SNIG HILL
                                         Force Control (F/C) con­
                                         taining messages received
                                         from SWFC Police Ground
                                         Control (G/C) and messages
                                         transmitted by F/C to
                                         other police units

                                  15
     SNIG   I     =       SA/2 KWP 30/15/18    This is a continuation of
     Part   2                                  the transcript of SNIG 1

     SNIG   II    -        SA/6 KWP 30/9/17    This is a transcript of
                          Document 129         a separate tape made at
                                               F/C containing messages
                                               from F/C to the Fire
                                               Service and SYMAS

     SNIG   III       = F1A 1230               This is the Extended
                       Document 73             Incident Log compiled
                                               F/C. For the purposes of
                                               this chronology this tape
                                               is not relevant.

     SNIG   IV        =    KWP 30/14/17        This is a further
                          Document 254         transcript of SNIG 1
                                               containing the background
                                               messages on the tapes
                                               representing inter alia
                                               traffic picked up from
                                               VHF Channel 25 which was
                                               being monitored by F/C.
                                               The times on this tape
                                               are identical to that on
                                               SNIG 1.


3.   NOTE


     There is a discrepancy between the times recorded on SYMAS
     computer transcript and SNIG HILL transcript. They are only
     a matter of seconds in most cases and for the purposes of
     this chronology the times have all been taken where two are
     available from the SNIG HILL transcript.       In such cases
     where there is no SNIG HILL transcript and the time
     sequence, as recorded on the SYMAS transcript, is not in
     line, a figure in brackets represents the best estimate if
     the SNIG HILL time is applied to the SYMAS transcript.




                                          16
C.     CHRONOLOGY


TIME          SOURCE           EVENT
14.48.04      Video RJH2       GATE C opened: Surge of about 150
                               people per HSE Report p.7.


14.48.31      Video RJH2       GATE C closed.


14.51.30      SNIG IV p.l      "Speech heard in background"
                               "Letting anybody through." "It's
                               bloody chaos at Leppings Lane
                               because thousands can't get in,
                               they have just broken gates down
                               and Superintendent Marshall's
                               screaming for them to open the
                               inner gates and to let people in
                               and Murray's saying in control,
                               we've got to monitor tickets, if we
                               get Liverpool mixed up with Notts
                               Forest they ' r e going to have
                               trouble even if we get a serious
                               problem."


14.52.06      Video RJH2       GATE C opened for second time.
                               Entry of about 2,000 people per HSE
                               Report p.7.


14.53         SNIG I Part 1    F/C giving out messages to other
                               police v e h i c l e s c o n c e r n i n g a
                               missing policeman.


14.53 to      SNIG II pp.2-6   Chat and banter between F/C (PC
14.58                           Rook) and other forces about not
                               accepting any loads due to the
                               football match.
                               SYMAS submit that listening to the
                               tape gives no indication of any
                               crisis or concern in F/C.
                                 17
14.57      SNIG I Part 1     Superintendent Brougham radios
           P.7               in that he attended Leppings Lane
                             end with a PA but "they've already
                             got a PA in use there so we are now
                             resuming back to driving school" .
                             Again listening to the tape no
                             suggestion of any panic or concern
                             in F/C.


14.57.35   RJH2 & TB2        GATE C closed.   Area behind GATE C
                             is clear.


14.58      SNIG I   Part 1
           p.7               Reports from traffic control that
                             city centre clear of traffic.

14.59      SNIG I Part 1
           p. 8              Telephone call to Ground Control "I
                             don't know whether we need any yet"
                             "No I'm ringing Ground Control".
                             PC Waugh rings G/C (PC Ryan) "Yes
                             i t ' s o p s . Do y o u w a n t any
                             ambulances. We are trying to
                             monitor to you but you know it's
                             ..." Ryan: "It’s chaos at the
                             moment, we've got no reports of
                             injuries but we, if you can monitor
                             the situation if you can just keep
                             standing by."


14.59.12   RJH2              GATE C opened third time.   Steady
                             stream being monitored by mounted
                             police.     Fans having to show
                             tickets (see evidence of Macrell
                             transcript day 30 p.99E-G).


15.02      SNIG IV p.8       "Background speech" "Superintendent
                             Marshall are you calling me, over"
                             "Can we close the gates again?"
                             "Yes, they can be closed, God
                             bless?"

                              18
15.04      SNIG I Part 1
           p.9               G/C calls for dog handlers.


15.04 to   SNIG I Part 1
           pp.9 & 10         F/C summons dog handlers to GATE 0.
15.06


15.06.10   SNIG I   Part 1
           p. 10             G/C calls Operation Support.


15.06.30   SNIG I   Part 1
           p.10              F/C sends more dog handlers.


15.07.01   SNIG II p.8       F/C puts SYMAS on notice that
           SYMAS 1 p.l       "ambulances might be required".
                             Conversation between PC Rook and
                             Superintendent Clarke.


15.07.50   SNIG I   Part 1
           p. 11             G/C - F/C: "Fleet of ambulances to
                             Hillsborough."


15.08      SNIG II p.9       G/C - SYMAS: (continuation of the
           SYMAS 1 p.3       same phone call as at 15.07.01)
                             "Fleet     of  ambulances       to
                             Hillsborough".


15.08.50   SNIG I   Part 1
           p. 12             G/C (Ryan) to F/C: "Ambulances to
                             Leppings Lane end please, Leppings
                             Lane." "Roger, ambulances to
                             Leppings Lane end."
                             PC Waugh to SYMAS



                              19
           SYMAS 1 p.4
15.09      per SNIG HILL     "Ambulances to Leppings Lane end
           times             a big fleet immediately, as many as
                             you've got please."
15.09.40   SNIG I   Part 1
           p.13              F/C to G/C: "Is ACC with you?"
                             "Please confirm Operation Support"
                             ACC gives confirmation.


15.10.55   SNIG I Part 1
           p.10              F/C (Rook) to SYMAS: "Just to let
           SYMAS 2 p.l       you know we have called Operation
                             Support.        There are h undreds
                             i n j u r e d t r a m p l e d underfoot,
                             everything." SYMAS tells Rook that
                             they are responding.


15.20.10    SNIG I Part 2
           p.l               G/C to F/C: "Can you confirm we
                             have more ambulances on route-
                             only have 3 at this location at
                             present."
15.23.50    SNIG I Part 2
           p.3               F/C to G/C: "Our last instructions
                             were for ambulances to Leppings
                             Lane. Is there any change? Over"


15.24.30   SNIG I   Part 2
           p.4               F/C to G/C: "We would like some
                             ambulances also to GATE 0. Things
                             are getting blocked up at the
                             Leppings Lane, some ambulances to
                             GATE 0 please."


15.24.50   SNIG I   Part 2
           p.4               F/C to G/C: "Where's GATE 0?"!!




                              20
SNIG I   Part 2
P-7               G/C to F/C: "Could you ask for a
                  radio message Hallam to request the
                  crowd application - yes stand by
                  yes. Requesting for doctors to
                  attend at the stadium, doctors at
                  the stadium."


SNIG I   Part 2
P.7               F/C to G/C: "Roger, requesting
                  Radio Hallam for doctors to attend
                  at the stadium, over."
           D.   ARGUMENT
      ::
 ■a;-
           1.   SUMMARY

           a)   SYMAS submit that the telephone call at 14.59 from Snig Hill
                to Ground Control by PC Waugh was not, as claimed by PC
                Waugh, prompted by overhearing the conversation between
                Superintendent Marshall and Ground Control.


           b)   It is SYMAS' submission that the length of time that elapsed
                between the end of the communication from Superintendent
                Marshall and the making of that call (some 8 minutes) is
                consistent with an urgent call being made as a result of
                overhearing scenes of desperation and crowd distress
                indicating a need for ambulances.


 ;.;V '    c)   We propose to deal with each gate in turn in support of our
                contention that in fact it must have been the cries of
                distress from supporters within the perimeter fence and the
                request by officers stationed at the perimeter gates which
                prompted the call by PC Waugh.



           2.   WAS IT GATE C?

           a)   When was Gate C Opened?
                Gate C was opened for certain on three occasions.
                     Opened                        Closed
                     14.48.04                      14.48.31
                     14.52.06                      14.57.35
                     14.59.12                      15.02

f':
                                          22
b)     Could P.C. Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate C?


            Waugh alleges that it was Gate C in his statement and
            in his evidence to the Tribunal.
ii.         However, his statement was not made until 27 June 1989,
            after the existence of that conversation had been
            discovered by Counsel for SYMAS.
iii.        In chief (day 31 p.lllB) PC Waugh said that he had
            telephoned G/C "immediately after" the repeated
            requests for the gate to be opened.
iv.         In cross examination (day 31 p.H4D) PC Waugh confirmed
            that he had made the telephone call "within seconds" of
            hearing the repeated requests to open the gates.

v.          There is no evidence from Marshall that he asked Gate C
            to be opened on the third occasion.    In any event the
            evidence is that the third opening of Gate C was a
            controlled operation not caused by a crush outside.
            See:
                 - Bain: statement p.4 at the bottom of the page.
                 - Mr Macrell: transcript day 30 p.99E-F
                 - RJH2: supporters still entering at a steady
                 stream               (14.59.12).

vi.         The 8 minute time lapse between "Superintendent
            Marshall's screaming for the gate to be opened"
            (14.51.40) and the telephone call made by PC Waugh
            (14.59.30) is not consistent with PC Waugh's making the
            call "immediately after" or "within seconds of" hearing
            the repeated requests. No panic or dangerous crushing
            evident from the evidence on the video (RJH2) prior to
            Gate C being opened for the third time.

vii.        No evidence as to precisely when Gate C was opened for
            the third time and no evidence that the third opening
            was occasioned by any repeated requests from an officer
            for it to be done.
viii.       SYMAS submit therefore that it is unlikely that it was
            the request to open Gate C which occasioned PC Waugh to
            make the telephone call at 14.59.


                                  23
3.          WAS IT GATE B?


a)          When was Gate B Opened


i   .            Gate B was under the control of serial 15 and Sergeant
                 Burns.
ii      .        Stewards            and Ridge were also present at Gate B.
iii.             The evidence was as follows:

                              (Statement):        "Gate B not opened before
                                                  kick-off."    If this is
                                                  correct Gate B was not
                                                  opened before 14.59.30.
                      RIDGE (day 21 p.!28A)       "Police ordered me to
                                                  open the gate at 14.55, I
                                                  said "No way"".
                      PC AITKIN
                      (Statement p .4):          "Gate B opened.      200
                                                 supporters came through,
                                                 then w±±h PC Ford and
                                                 ________ we closed the
                                                 gate.    I looked at my
                                                 watch it was 15.02."
                      (day 17 p.61H
                      -p.62A):                    PC Aitkin confirms Ridge
                                                  (... as to time) but PC
                                                  referred to says Gate C
                                                  already opened.


b)          Could PC Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate B?


i   .            There is limited evidence as to exactly how Gate B came
                 to be opened.   The main evidence comes from Sergeant
                 Burns.

                                          24
           SERGEANT BURNS            "I pleaded with Inspector
           (day 17 p.3u^)             Bennett to open Gates
                                     (B) and stop the crushing
                                     outside."
But:
           a.     No mention of possible fatalities;
           b.     No mention of request being made by radio;
           c.     In any event Sergeant Burns's radio was not
                 working (see day 17 p.33G) "Radio dead since
                 14.30. Not working until I heard the call for
                 pitch invasion."


           INSPECTOR BENNETT (day 15 p.66E-G)

           a.    Not make any request to F/C to open Gate A.
           b.    Not aware of any such request to F/C.     Did
                 not notice how or why Gate B was opened.
           In all the circumstances, and in view of the
           evidence that has been given, we submit it is
           evident that conversations relating to the Gate B
           to be opened could not have been overheard by PC
           Waugh.
           Fans not shouting and screaming. Opening the gate
           probably surprised them because it was towards
           their side per Aitkin (day 17 p.62F-G).


WAS IT GATE A?

When was Gate A Opened?


       According to leading Counsel for the Inquiry Gate A was
       opened at 14.58
            INSPECTOR SYKES
            Statement p.7            "I have no actual time of
                                     the next event, but would
                                     estimate it to be at 2.50
                                     and I then saw Gate A
                                     open wide."
                              25
               SERGEANT HIGGINS
               (day 17 p92C)            "Made a request that Gate
                                        A be opened because I
                                        thought someone might be
                                        killed outside.      That
                                        message was received."
                                        No evidence as to when
                                        this request was made.
               SERGEANT GODDARD
               (day 18 p.86B)           Confirms receiving
                                        Higgins's message.          Says
                                        he p e r s o n a l l y g a v e
                                        permission (!!) relying
                                        upon the previous
                                        i n s t r u c t i o n giv en by
                                        Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
                                        Duckingfield.         He places
                                        t h e r e q u e s t 3 or 4
                                        minutes after the opening
                                        of Gate C.            If he is
                                        r i g h t t h i s w i l l be
                                        between 14.56 and 14.57.
      Statement p.6 "By the time Gate B was opened C Gate had been
      closed."
                PC CAMMOCK
                (day 29 p.38D-F          "Made     my  way    to
                                         Superintendent Marshall
                                         who was standing on the
                                         parapet.        Asked
                                         permission to open Gate
                                         A.

      No evidence that this request was made by radio and
      therefore submit not been heard by PC Waugh.


ii.        In any event we submit clearly not Gate A because the
           entry through Gate A was orderly and controlled by a
           serial of police officers directing the fans towards
           the north stand.     In any event the weight of the
           evidence seems to suggest that Gate A was opened
           because Gate C was opened and it was thought that a
           general permission to open gates had been given.
iii.        We submit that in all the circumstances this is
            unlikely to have been the urgent and unusual
            circumstances to cause PC Waugh to act as he did.


iv.         In any event there is no evidence of any requests
            having been made over the radio and no evidence that
            such requests were repeated before it was granted.



5.     WAS IT THE PERIMETER FENCE GATE TO PENS 3 AND 4?
a.     We submit this is the most likely explanation for PC Waugh's
        conduct.
b.     The evidence is clear from other sources that by 14.59 the
       disaster had already occurred.
       EVIDENCE:

            (i)    Liverpool Echo Photo document 278.
                   Taken at 14.59
                   Four hallmarks of the crushing clearly present,
                   namely:
            a.     Perimeter gates open;
            b.     Spectators climbing over the top of the perimeter
                   fence;
            c.     Fans climbing up to the seated area of the west
                   stand;
            d.     Press photographer taking close-up pictures of
                   people behind perimeter fence in pen 3.


            (ii)        Further evidence from photograph DB17-15
                        (document 126 and transcript day 19 p.35D-
                        E ): -

                        "That is timed at 14.59 and it clearly shows
                        the west end, the Leppings Lane terraces.
                        One can see to the right of the photograph


                                   27
             the back of the goal, the goal netting, and
             one can see the gates in the terraces in the
             perimeter fence open.    I think those gates
             are 3 and 4, and at that time there are a
             considerable number of people already outside
             the perimeter fence. ? ... and your St John's
             people are already assisting? - answer-
             correct ."
(iii)        Evidence from serial 1 officers on the
             perimeter fence
        PC SMITH
        (day 17 p.114-115)
                                 stationed at Gate 3
                                 "I could see people were
                                 being pressed up tight
                                 against the fence; that
                                 they had not fallen back
                                 as they would normally
                                 fall back."
                                 "I think some people were
                                 shouting "Open the gate,
                                 we a r e c r u s h e d " or
                                 something like that."
                       Q:       "Did yo u try to get
                                through on your radio to
                                anyone?"
                       A:       "I tried to shout "Come
                                 and open these gates.
                                 P e o p l e are dying in
                                 here." or something like
                                 that.       Quite honestly
                                 from past experience I
                                 had no doubt that they
                                would not have received
                                 that at the time due to
                                 the noise of the crowd,
                                 sir. "
                       Q:        "Did you realise by then
                                 that p e o p l e w e r e in
                                 trouble?"


                        28
                  A:    "Certainly, sir."
                  Q:    "So did you in fact open
                        the gate?"
                  A:    "We opened        them,     yes
                        sir. "


PC ILLINGWORTH
(day 17 p.l35C)         On duty at Gate 4 after
                        14.50 (day 17 p.l34D)
P.135B-E                "As p e o p l e  became
                        distressed and I realised
                        they were in pain, I put
                        a radio message over to
                        say that there was a
                        serious situation at the
                        front."
                  Q:    "Apart from seeing people
                        in distress, could you
                        hear whether they were in
                        distress?"
                  A:    "Yes"

                  Q:    "In what way, what were
                        they shouting?"
                  A:    "Words to the effect of
                        "Help, I'm hurt, I'm
                        being crushed.""

                  Q:    "It was obvious to you
                        that people were being
                        crushed I take it?"
                  A:    "Blatantly obvious, yes.
                        PC I l l i n g w o r t h t h e n
                        opened Gate 4."




                   29
(iv)        Evidence from the fans
            Numerous fans gave evidence that in the time running up
            to kick-off and at the time of kick-off there were
            screams for help and screams to the police drawing
            attention to the plight of those at the front of pens 3
            and 4.


           We submit that it is unnecessary to recite all the fans
           whose evidence must be very much in the mind of the
           Tribunal. We particularly rely upon the evidence of Mr
           Hicks who was seeking to draw attention of senior
           police officers in the police control box to the
           evident crushing which he could see from his position
           in pens 1 and 2.



6.     CONCLUSION


a      We submit that it is abundantly clear that the tragedy
       commenced some time before 15.00, that the tragedy was
       identified by junior police officers present at the
       perimeter gates at 14.59 and onwards, that that tragedy was
       not identified for whatever reason by senior officers until
       15.05.24 (MAPI) when Superintendent Greenwood went onto the
       pitch.

b      We submit that it is abundantly clear that although it is
       possible that messages in relation to other gates could have
       been picked up by PC Waugh which would have motivated his
       telephone call to SYMAS headquarters, the balance of
       probabilities indicate that it in fact was cries for help
       emanating from the fans crushed behind pens 3 and 4.

c      We reassert this submission in view of the fact that again,
       without request from G/C for them to do so, another officer
       at F/C telephoned SYMAS at 15.06 merely to put them on
       notice.  It is evident that many of the officers at F/C in
       Snig Hill were disturbed by the messages that they were
       receiving by monitoring the VHF radio channel 25 and these
       were by 15.08 totally unconnected with any respect to open
       gates outside by the turnstiles.
                                 30
In our submission these calls for help and calls of concern
must have been coming from officers at the perimeter fence
who were clearly upset and perturbed by the evidence before
their eyes.

It is submitted that this would have been apparent to
officers in the police control box were they prepared to
believe the evidence before their eyes and also to
Superintendent Murray and Superintendent Greenwood when they
went down to the pitch and to investigate why fans were
climbing over the perimeter fence.

Superintendent Greenwood (day 12 p.99E) identified himself
as the inspector in photograph South Yorkshire Police 2
(bundle F) photograph PR1/9A.        At that stage 15.02
Superintendent Greenwood asserted that he was merely
assessing the situation.   He accepted that it was clear if
one looked at those crushed behind the fence that some were
in difficulties and being crushed.        A perusal of the
following photographs: 1/10A shows that far from assessing
the situation Superintendent Greenwood in fact has caught
hold of a fan and is pulling him back towards the fence.

From an early stage shortly after 15.00 the commentators
viewing the pictures being produced by the video (map 9 and
10) o b s e r v e d that the p r o b l e m is being caused by
overcrowding and fans are spilling over onto the pitch.



The call for Operation Support from G/C was clearly in
response to what was then identified as a pitch invasion and
not recognising that in fact a major emergency had occurred.


It is regrettable that no call was made to SYMAS until 15.08
for ambulances because given their response time it is
likely that they would have arrived at the ground in
sufficient numbers to have made a material difference to the
number of deceased than they were otherwise able to.
j   One is not able to say if in fact anybody's life would have
    been saved or, if so, how many but one is able to say that
    undoubtedly had the disaster been recognised by those in
    authority earlier than it was and the appropriate assistance
    been called some 8 minutes earlier than it was then
    undoubtedly the chances of survival for many of the people
    who were pulled out dead would have been enhanced.




                              32
                                      IV

          OUTLINE COMMENTS ON VARIOUS FACTORS RELEVANT TO THE
            MATTERS WITHIN THE INQUIRY'S TERMS OF REFERENCE


PREAMBLE
We expect that most of the matters set out below have been
accepted already by the Tribunal, but we list them to demonstrate
SYMAS ' strength of feeling that the disaster should not have
occurred, and could have been avoided.
1.   CHOICE OF GROUND

     A.      Leppings Lane End
             1.1   Inevitably, because of need for segregation,
                   Hillsborough's design was not safe to accommodate
                   one set of supporters if they had to enter the
                   ground at Leppings Lane.
             1.2   There is an obvious bottle neck leading into the
                   outer perimeter gates and there is the added
                   problem of channelling the supporters into the
                   appropriate turnstiles for the north stand, the
                   west stand and the west terracing.
             1.3   It should be noted that the shortest distance
                   across the funnel leading into the outer perimeter
                   gates is only 24 metres.
             1.4   Once the supporters gain access through the outer
                   perimeter gates those heading for turnstiles A-G
                   have to negotiate a minimum bottleneck of 8 metres
                   between the handrail leading down from turnstile G
                   and the edge of turnstile 16.        The maximum
                   distance across turnstiles A-G is only 13 metres.

     B.      Turnstile Flow Rate

             1.1   T h e L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s were allocated
                   approximately 24,500 tickets for the semi-final,
                   covering the north stand and the west stand and
                   terracing.

                                      33
           1.2   Paragraph 47 of the Green Guide gives a maximum
                 notional rate per turnstile at which spectators
                 can pass through, not exceeding 750 persons per
                 hour.
           1.3   Based on the figure of 23 turnstiles for 24,500
                 spectators, at the rate of 750 per hour, it would
                 take almost 1 1/2 hours for 24,500 spectators to
                 gain entry into the ground.
           1.4   If one then takes the figure of 7 turnstiles for
                 the 10,100 s p e c t a t o r s for the west stand
                 terracing, based upon the notional rate in
                 paragraph 47, it would almost take 2 hours for the
                 10,100 spectators to gain entry.
           1.5   It should be clearly noted that the above
                 estimates represent the minimum possible time to
                 allow spectators into Hillsborough based upon the
                 Green Guide figures.
           1.6   The inadequacy of the turnstiles to accommodate
                 24.500 spectators appears to have been recognised
                 by the South Yorkshire Police and SWFC.       See
                 Transcript day 11 p38D-G.
           1.7   In our submission it was absurd to believe that
                 24.500 spectators could have been safely allowed
                 entry through Leppings Lane in the time available.


2.   FAILURE TO DELAY KICK-OFF
     2.1   The senior officers inside the police control box
           should have realised by 1430 hours that the crowd of
           supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance could not
           get into the ground by 1500 hours even on the most
           optimistic of flow rates through the turnstiles.
     2.2   It therefore follows that kick-off should have been
           postponed prior to or very shortly after 1430 hours,
           and indeed many people were under the impression that
           kick-off had been delayed.




                                 34
3.   OPENING OF GATE C

     3.1   The decision to open Gate C was inevitable in all
           circumstances, but the failure to prepare and cater for
           the resultant ingress of supporters into the concourse
           behind the west stand and then onto the terracing, was
           a clear and fundamental mistake by the police.


4.   SIGNING AND LAYOUT OF CONCOURSE

     4.1   Once supporters found themselves in the concourse area
           behind the west stand the directional signs onto the
           terracing was so poor that it resulted in the majority
           of supporters quite reasonably deciding that there was
           no way onto the terracing other than through the
           central tunnel.
     4.2   The situation was made worse by the presence of the
           internal wall which although useful for a normal match,
           probably dissuaded many supporters going to their left
           after entering through turnstiles A-G and Gate C.
     4.3 There were clearly enough officers in serial 14 to make
         a line to direct spectators to pens 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7-
         see PC Burton day 17 p21G to p22D.
5.   LAYOUT OF TERRACE

     5.1   The layout of the radial fences, perimeter fence gates
           and barriers was, at the very least, piecemeal,
           haphazard and carried out with little or insufficient
           thought concerning the safety of supporters on the
           terracing.
     5.2 The emphasis in erecting the radial fences, perimeter
         fence gates and barriers was clearly on containment of
         the supporters on the terracing, and for example we
         would point to:
           a.   the disagreements as to the use of the gates in
                the perimeter fences in the event of emergency
                evacuation;



                                35
           b.   Dr Eastwood's assertion (unsupported by other
                members of the Working Party) that breach of
                paragraph 115 of the Green Guide was a deliberate
                policy decision. Please see Dr Eastwood's plan No
                11424-8 which shows that the gaps were in
                existence before he obtained his retainer from the
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, i.e. pre-1978,
                and were made by the removal of existing sections
                with no new uprights being constructed.

6.   SIZE OF GATES IN PERIMETER FENCE

     The perimeter gates leading onto the perimeter track are
     clearly too narrow for the purposes of emergency evacuation
     onto the pitch area.


7.   ESTIMATION OF TERRACE CAPACITY

     The capacity of the whole of the west stand terracing, and
     in particular pens 3 and 4, has been clearly wrongly
     calculated.   Reference should be made to document headed
     "Sheffield Wednesday Football Club west terrace - ideal
     distribution of persons" for pens 3 and 4.     The Health &
     Safety Executive has calculated that the maximum numbers of
     spectators for pens 3 and 4 are 822 for pen 3 and 871 for
     pen 4. Furthermore, if one takes into account paragraph 216
     of the Green Guide, the appropriate capacities of pens 3 and
     4 are substantially reduced, to 542 for pen 3 and 605 for
     pen 4.


8.   LACK OF ANTICIPATION

     8.1   Whatever criticisms can be made of the Liverpool
           supporters, it appears fairly clear that the South
           Yorkshire Police should have anticipated the sort of
           behaviour from the Liverpool fans which they alleged
           took place on 15 April 1989.
     8.2   In particular, this is borne out by the evidence
           gathered by the South Yorkshire Police during the
           course of the Inquiry, and served in the last week of
           evidence given to the Inquiry. This documentation

                                36
      contains numerous reports of behaviour by Liverpool
      fans during the course of the 1988-89 football season
      which indicates a pattern of behaviour identical to
      that which took place on 15 April.
8.3   The following are examples of such reports:
         i. Humberside Police - Hull City v Liverpool dated
            18 February 1989.
        ii. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
            dated 12 December 1988.
       iii. Metropolitan Police - Arsenal v Liverpool dated
            9 November 1988.
        iv. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
            dated 24 September 1988.
8.4    In addition, during the course of the 1987-88 season,
       there is a report from the Hertfordshire Constabulary
       concerning the Watford v Liverpool game which took
       place on 13 February 1988 where 1,500 Liverpool
       supporters arrived at the ground without tickets and
       were allowed in.




                                      Michael Kallipetis Q.C
                                      2, Crown Office Row
                                      Temple
                                      EC4
                                      6th July 1989
                                  V
                    FRONT LINE EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
                            INVENTORY LIST
     LIST ITEMS
Oxygen F 3/4 1/2 1/4
Entonox F 3/4 1/2 1/4
Suction Unit
Resuscitator (Robert Shaw/M.man)
Frac Splints
Bag and Mask
Chloride Tablets (6)
02 Masks
Blankets (x 6)
Pillows (x 2)
Maternity Pack
Waterproof Sheets
Burns Sheet
Nursing/Barrier Gown
Green Sheets (3)
Carrying Sheets
Cervical Collar
Bed Pan
Urine Bottle
Vomit Bowl
Bucket and Lid
Air Freshener Spray
First Aid Box



                            38
Carrying Chair x 1
Scoop Stretcher x 1
Stretcher Poles x 2
Rescue Box
Fire Extinguishes (2)
Wheel Brace
Handle
Ferno Ked x 1
Chemical Protective Suit x 2
Details and Number of Crew
                      - 1
                      -   2
Body Bag
2 Pairs of Goggles




                               39
             LIST OF CONTENTS OF THE RESCUE BOX
              CARRIED ON FRONT LINE AMBULANCES

RESCUE BOX


anti-static gloves
crow-bar
bolt-croppers
screw-driver
hammer
all purpose saw
25 ft. rope lashing
           AMBULANCE AID SATCHEL
              INVENTORY LIST


QUANTITY                       ITEM

3                       7.5cm Roller Bandages
3                      5cm Roller     Bandages
6                      Triangular Bandages
1                      15g Cotton Wool Packet
4                      No   1 Wound Dressings
4                      No   2 Wound Dressings
1                      No   3 Wound Dressings
3                      90cm + lm Gauze
1                      Pkt Gauze Swabs
1                      No   1 Guedal Airway
1                      No   2 Guedal Airway
1                      No   3 Guedal Airway
6                      Safety Pins
3                      Blanket Pins
1                        " Zinc Oxide Plaster
1                      Reflective Jacket
1                      Rubber Torch
1                      Brook Airway
1                      Pair of Dressing Scissors 5"




              41
            EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN ’S EQUIPMENT
                            INVENTORY

Carrying Case
Laerdal Resuscitator
Laerdal Adult Mask
Laerdal Child Mask
Airway Size 1
Airway Size 2
Airway Size 3
Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batteries
Laryngoscope Blade Size 3
Laryngoscope Blade Size 4
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 6mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 7mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 8mm
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 9mm
Catheter Mount (anti static)
Catheter Swivel Connector
Adaptors Female
Lubricating Jelly
Syringes 10 ml
Stethoscope
Sphygmomanometer
Needle Box
Scissors/shears
Magill Forceps
Spencer Wells
Aspirator
Laryngoscope Spare Bulb
Tourniquet
Catheter Mount Connector
Vecafix
Surgical Cloth
Syringe Needles (19g)
Catheter 14g
Catheter 12g
Cannulae 16g
Cannulae 18g
Cannulae 20g
Administration Set
Hartmanns Fluid IV 500 mis
Haemaccel Fluid IV 500 mis
Pre-injection Swabs
Tape Adhesive Hospital 20 metres
Tape Sleek 2.5 cm
Tape Sleek 5.0 cm
Arm Splint 18" x 4"
Cotton Wool
Gauze (1 metre)
Triangular Bandages
5.0 cm Bandages x 5 metres



                           42
7.5 cm Bandages x 5 metres        2
Gauze Swabs                       2
Extractor Mucous                  1
Oxygen Mask                       1
Oxygen Tubing 3 metres            1
Gloves Disposable                 2
Antiseptic Solution               2
Waterproof Sheet                  1
Micro Pore Tape 2.5 cm            1
Patient Report Form Pad           1
Head Lamp and Battery             1
Security Strap and 2 Keys         1
Sharps Bin 500 ml                 1




                             43
GT7 V 7




          k (X-c->u*-o
                        /Zv«C

a jv           f c s S ' y t - lsi\s

         (A £ * J l   <* f**~
                    /^v>—^ t^ -^ l

           M                 /t
lj?^~~                -SKi —f* •?
         / *"""^3»SW».*j- iryt<L^n v,  ,




H2»o
 *.           <*M-£dUr-   '{^ U C
                                k~cJ

X. 1
J». ^5>4.W

>*
 fc,, ^**#*3 ^ *



        ^ ? "'-rvt* b         -j

<? A - ^ L > %          i<V7^ &>,,
Posi   IJA_
»

       tv/      -            £ ^ ^   4,
        P     a»*. ^ ov-i*
                       *D       __i.
      I^ gv^-.'^’ ip^s> "tVa,
    CuJh>\>.-e. -<7-^'w-vaVo^—» -tu.
                    cW4-«^, J yiwc




            ~P»4- &      '"S

                      <JfC^a



                 v" W                     J


       ,J <?1V^<— aa^9C—c/    b iC * z^
   <P       +    o
'• Q t e + y v b e *
                     l   .   S


                     3                G JU &




        ^            <= M u C
             (&£)    ^ W» v^»                   <l^»—^
                    i*                           ^-«
    6                    ^       3   - t& s * - “
                 *^ <Af<^*^

                                         iS ’. o ' i ,
            (&      6p                      k**«-

                         ^           t
JT* -*


    ^F               "TiSi.^-cyi'T^
                      (,-r^> ■%


 U*                  7
            **» <^to<S %^— >?

(4f^ 6*^      / C -t~*+~f-r 9+V?,
    t~^n»y
         l***
         ^«y«*     •*«#■*«— Ut*U4r
                         w-t 'ia^r{,
    cXmcI/1        *fWc/ T

f y C J * + ,$ &
\)«» w-                     g h ,-*


        t^X-Sb"        -t


                            <*as



  't-X Jr-P .ui. <1k>


        C^e.                t5 £.

   ^<C s     I'I l-yvy^K*

 £'J   $~~    f t * * - ty -J s ^
         -»vi ^J**>

   /*/f "& W«ttf e _ ;
  f (/*>■;             'C
               *2-tAlg *\®
         «--
           vjSf&n» ,
'd-          't"0cU»—   P   .

I7 -
   -"{cvsjA- /lj.M




                                * , : * « «   ’ -     .



                                  ,f•■I(»*«■,'“,■ij
                                                                  ,*•
                                                                  ff!> i
                                        »{«
                                          *>*’ ,.. **.,|»
                                                       >«'
                                             ?'*#'! ?i
                                         •**<'         ff.
                                                     i' l h i '       .„

                                              .     (t|.n»!I
                                                    «;£*♦;• r- ‘ ''
        AMBULANCE AID SATCHEL



             inventory list



                                  ITEM




3                       7.5cm Roller Bandages

                        5cm Roller Bandages

e                       Triangular Bandages
i                       15g Cotton Wool Packet

4                       No. 1 Wound Pressings
4                       No. 2 Wound Dressings

1                       No. I V/frund Dressings

3                       90cm + 1m Gau&e

1                       Pkt Gauze Swabs

1                       No. 1 Guedal Airway

1                       No. 2 Guedal Airway

i                       No. ^ Guedal Airway

6                       Safety Pins

3                       Blankfflt Pins

1                       i" Zinc Oxide Piaster

i                       Reflective Jacket

    1                   Rubber Torch

i                       Brook Airway

1                       Pair Of Dressing Scissors 5"
                FRONT U N E EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT - INVENTORY LIST           \
                                                                               \




             CosameeAe^                                      T1*^* ”*          ',
                                                                                1
LIST ITEMS                              r* H L                          -S*T- -gPH

Oxygen     F. V * 1/2 1/4

Entonox F, I f k I f i I'M   ........
                                                   ■
Suction Unit
                                                   ■
K«9tt«it*t6v (Robert Shav/M.man?
                                                         ■


Frac Splints

Bag and Mask

Chloride Tablets C6)

02 naaks

Blankets (x 6}

Pillows (x 2)

 Maternity Pack

Waterproof Sheets

 Burns Sheet

 Hutting/Barrier Gown

 Green Sheets (3?

 Carrying Sheets

 Cervical Collar

 Bed Pan

 Urine Bottle                                                                      !
 Vomit Bowl

 Bucket and Lid

 Air Freshener Spray
                                                   1
 First Aid Box

 Carrying Chair x 1

 Scoop Stretcher x 1
Stretcher Poles x 2

Rescue Box                     •
Fire Extinguishers (£)

Wheel Brace

Handle

Ferno Keel x 1

Chemical Protective Suit X i

Detail* *ttd liumber o£ Crew
                        - 1
                        - 2

Body Bag

2 Pair* ol Goggle*
  V* * ■*>    XX'



                                                                                            0


                          dpDM "IQK K atM ^IBSyitOPOLlIAli-AMBIILAaMgi S1CTTCE



                                      JES£££l5£lJE£SiS^^^2^^ffi^WSJa^
                                                   IHVEHTOBY


Carrying Cose ..................... 1                 Syringe Needles (19g)            ..... 2
t^erdal ?ttu$rtr*fnr , t , 11. , , . . . . . . 1      CATfitter 1i{      ........            ?.
La#rJiI Adv^i-rM«*»k   .......... X                   CAMwt££r iSt                ....       Z
Laerdal Child Mask .*........... .. 1                 Cannulas l $ g ........ *.......... 5
Airway size X ......                          I       Cannulae I8g                           5
■ v « y Size 2 .............          1               Cannulas 20g ....                      4
Airway Size 3     ....                1               Administration Set ..............      2
Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batteries .... I                  Hartmann* Fluid IV 500 ml*        .... 1
Laryngoscope Blade Si** 3 ......... 1                 Haemaecttl fluid XV 500 mis ........ 1
Laryngoscope Blade Sise k ...... .. 1                 Pre-injection Swabs ...**•«***•.... 10
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 6mm       1               Tape Adhesive Hospital 20 metres .. 1
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 7mm ,** I                 Tape Sleek 2,5 c m            ....      1
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) Sum       1               Tape Sleek 5*0 c m ......              1
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 9mm ... I                 Atm Splint 18” x A”             ...... 1
Catheter Mount (anti *tatic) ...... 1                 Cotton Wool ....................... 1
Catheter Swivel Connector ......... 1                 Gauze (1 metre)       .....             1
Adaptor* Female....... »........ 1                    Triangular Bandages      ....... ...» 2
Lubricating Jelly ................ 1                  5.0 cm Bandages x 5       metres ........2
Syringes 10 ml                        2               7.5 cm Bandage* x 5      metres         2
Stethoscope      ..... .............. 1               O&uge Swabs ....................... 2
Sphygmomanometer ................ 1                   Extractor Mucous .................. i
Needle B O X ......... ..♦.»»....... 1                Oxygen Mask        .................. 1
Scissors/shears ................ .* 1                 Oxygen Tubing 3 metres                  1
Magill Forceps         *............ 1                Cloves Disposable                       2
   ancer Wells ................ «... 1                Antiseptic Solution ............... 2

t  pirator     .............
Laryngoscope Spare Bulb .*....... 1
                                    • 1

Tourniquet .......... ............. 1
                                                      Waterproof Sheet *.....
                                                      Micro Pore Tape 2.5 c m
                                                      Patient Report Form Fad .»...»*»*.» 1
                                                                                              1
                                                                                              1

Catheter Mount Connector .......... 1                 Head Lamp and Battery......             1
Vecafix                               5                Security Strap and 2 k e y s           I
 Surgical C    l   o   t  h   .   ... 1               Sharp* Bin 500 ml                       1
 LIST OF CONTENTS OF THE RESCUE BOX CARRIED ON FRONT LINE AMBULANCES



 Rescue Box
 anti-static gloves
 crow-bar
 bolt-croppers
 screw-driver
 hammer

 all-purpose saw
(^ 5 ft. rope lashing
%r   TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
     MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PROCEDURES

     SITE MEDICAL OFFICER


     Introduction

     1.   HC(77)1: Advises Health Authorities on health service arrangements for
          dealing with Major Accidents, it identifies the role of the Regional
          Health Authority (RHA) which is to:-

          1.1       Ensure that plans are prepared by the District Health
                    Authorities and Ambulance Services throughout the Region to
                     deal with 'Major Accidents'.

          1.2       Co-ordinate and advise on such plans and generally monitor
                     standards of service.

          1.3       Consult with appropriate bodies to prepare and keep up to date
                     a list of hospitals with 24 hour Accident and Emergency
                     departments.

     TRHA Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures


     2.   In April 1986 the Trent Regional Health Authority (TRHA) gave its
          approval to the issue of Regional Guidelines on Major Accident
          Procedures, the contents of which had been prepared by the Regional
          Emsrgency Planning Officer and agreed in consultation with the Regional
          Medical Canmittee - Sub Canmittee in Accident and Emergency Medicine,
          Chief Ambulance Officers, Chief Constables, Chief Fire Officers and
          others in the Region. The main aims of this document are to:

          2.1       Ensure that the role of the NHS (and others) is clearly
                    understood and that caiman (agreed) terminology is adopted to

••
                    prevent confusion and misunderstanding between the Emergency
                     Services, Ambulance Service, Hospitals and others who may
                    become involved.

          2.2       Provide a firm basis for co-operation and liaison between the
                    NHS, Emergency Services and others.

          2.3       Assist plan writers by providing a camon TRHA information
                    manual.

     3.   S u b s e q u e n t l y Hospital and Ambulance plans were produced with regard to
          these objectives.

     PRINCIPLES

     4.   A Major Accident is a complex problem and planning requires:

          4.1       A simple approach (not a solution).

          4.2       Ongoing reviews,.particularly after an incident to assess the
                     lessons learnt.



                                            1
           4.3     Co-operation between the emergency services (Police, Fire and
                   Ambulance) and hospitals.

     Monitoring and Review

     5.    In August 1988 the Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer initiated
           a 'monitoring and review' exercise of all Major Incident and response
           procedures designed to ensure that hospital and ambulance plans were
           monitored, practiced and updated regularly and this was largely
           completed by December 1988. It is intended that 'monitoring and
           review' should be an annual event.

     DESIGNATED HOSPITALS

     6.    The Regional Health Authority is responsible for preparing a list of
           hospitals with accident and emergency departments Which are suitable
           for designation to receive casualties on a 24 hour basis and their
           capacity to deal with casualties in relation to the nature of their
           predominant injury. Copies of this list (Annex 'A' of Regional
           Guidelines) are made available to Ambulance Controls, Hospitals and
           Police and Fire Services in the Region. This includes the availability
           of a hospital based Flying Squad.

     MAJOR ACCIDENT SITE PROCEDURES

     SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/FLYING SQUAD       (Ref:   TRHA Guidelines - see also
     Appendix 'C' of HC(77)1 attached.

     7.    Provision. If requested by the Ambulance Service a Hospital Flying
           Squad would be dispatched to the scene. The senior person on the
           medical team will evaluate the situation and this will include a
           request for a Site Medical Officer if required, otherwise the Senior
           Medical member of the Flying Squad should act as the Site Medical
           Officer.

     8.    Site Contacts and Location. On arrival at the site the Site Medical
           Officer must contact the Ambulance Liaison Officer and will normally


••
           locate himself at the Ambulance Medical Catmunications Point.

     9.    Responsibilities. The Site Medeical Officer is responsible for:

           9.1     Formulating a casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with
                   the Ambulance Incident Officer.

           9.2     Arranging for the attendance of further medical and nursing
                   teams if required eg to deal with trapped casualties.

     10.   In practice there is much debate about the use and role of a Site
           Medical Officer. Many Accident and Emergency Departments prefer the
           policy of "Scoop and Run" in order to bring the casualty to the
           hospital with the minimum of delay in order to take advantage of the
           concentrated skill and high technology available. Professor Angus
           Wallace of University Hospital, CMC is on record as saying that, in his
           opinion, this procedure of 'scoop and run" adopted during the initial
           stages of the Ml Kegworth air crash saved lives.

     11.   Many consultants disagree with the principle of a Site Medical Officer
           on the basis that it depletes the hospital staff at a time of crisis,
           therefore the considerations are proximity of the incident to the



                                         2
           receiving hospitals, and the overriding need for medical assistance at
           the site (eg trapped casualties).

     12.   The procedure to activate the Flying Squad/Site Medical Officer is as
           follows:

           12.1    Request from Ambulance personnel on site (via Ambulance
                   Control)

           12.1    Control requests appropriate hospital for "Team" to be got
                   ready

           12.3   Ambulance Service provides transport

     13.   The nationally agreed policy of "extended trained" ambulance personnel
           currently being introduced (up to 6 months training required) will mean
           that in the medium tern the need to call, out a hospital based Flying
           Squad may reduce since the aim is to reach a position where there is at
           least one of these individuals on each front line A & E Ambulance
           vehicle who have two person crews. Their training encompasses:

           13.1   Infusion (setting up of drips)

           13.2   Intubation (introduction of special airway and use of oxygen)

           13.3   Defibrillation (use of electrical apparatus to correct heart
                   rhythm)

     14.   However, in general, the use of a Site Medical Officer, who can be a
           senior doctor of any specialty, is recommended in order to:

           14.1   Formulate the casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with
                  the Ambulance Incident Officer;

           14.2   Arrange for the attendance of further medical and nursing teams
                  if required eg to deal with trapped casualties, amputations
                  etc ;


••         14.3

           14.4
                  Provide medical advice to the Police and Fire Services;

                  Establish and maintain direct contact between the site of the
                  incident and the hospital Accident and Emergency department in
                  order to:

                   14.4.1 Regularly update the hospital on numbers and types of
                          casualties they can expect.

                   14.4.2 Request further staff support and equipment to the
                          scene.

                   14.4.3 Monitor the status of the hospital to continue to
                          receive casualties.

     15.   The Royal Hallamshire Hospital Major Disaster Plan states:

           SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAM

           A medical and nursing team or Site Medical Officer will not be
           automatically dispatched to the site of a major accident. However,
           should medical and nursing assistance be required by the Ambulance


                                        3
           Service in the light of the particular circumstances the Medical
           Controllers at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General
           Hospital will make appropriate arrangements in the light of the
           particular needs and staffing resources. The mobile team will normally
           be sent from the hospital not accepting the initial casualties and any
           further teams required will be sent on a rotational basis. The
           Ambulance Service provides a vehicle with certain basic supplies for
           transporting a medical and nursing team and further specialised
           equipment, supplies and protective clothing are held in readiness at
           both hospitals. On arrival at the site the senior person on the
           medical team will evaluate the situation and act as Site Medical
           Officer. He must contact the Ambulance Incident Officer and will
           normally locate himself at the Ambulance Service Ccsrnmunications Point.

     16.   On balance we would recommend, except in the most exceptional
           circumstances, the setting up of a triage point and Casualty Clearing
           Station under the control of a Site Medical Officer.




••




                                        4
                                                                                                      APPENDIX C


                                    H O SPITAL O P E R A TIO N A L A RR AN G EM ENTS


IN F O R M A T IO N ABO UT THE MAJOR A C C ID EN T PLAN

1.     A hospital will function well in a major emergency only if responsibilities are clearly defined and
everybody has a thorough understanding of their own individual duties and how in general terms the total plan
is intended to work. To help achieve this consideration should be given to issuing key personnel with action
cards detailing their role and conducting exercises at intervals (see paragraph 10 of the circular).

A L E R T IN G PROCEDURES

2.     The ambulance service is responsible for alerting the designated and supporting hospitals and advising
whether or not a mobile medical and nursing team should be despatched immediately. However the hospital
major accident procedure should be initiated on reliable information received from any source, although in
these circumstances it is advisable not to despatch the mobile team until confirmation is received from the
ambulance service or Site Medical Officer that it is required. As notice o f a major accident will normally be
received by telephone at the main hospital switchboard, hospital telephone operators have a vital role in
activating the hospital plan by alerting key personnel and departments. Standard procedures for operators
should therefore contain the telephone numbers o f hospital staff involved including home telephone numbers,
in order of priority, and details of how to contact staff not available by telephone. Arrangements should be
made to make additional and relief telephone operators available, and care should be taken to keep outgoing
calls to the minimum. Full use should be made of any direct lines and public telephones in the hospital which
bypass the hospital switchboard and any prior plans agreed with the Post Office for the installation of extra
telephones should be implemented. A ll operators should be briefed frequently on their responsibilities in the
event o f an emergency and should check the agreed ‘call out' procedures at regular intervals.

T H E S IT E M E D IC A L O F F IC E R

3.     As part of the hospital major accident procedure the Site Medical Officer will immediately proceed to
the scene, where he will have overall responsibility for all medical activity, liaising closely with the ambulance
and other emergency services. Designation o f the Site Medical Officer will need to take account o f the
likelihood that he will have a clinical role in the initial stages. By prior agreement he should be supplied by a
listed hospital or the health authority. The Site Medical Officer should not be a member of a mobile medical
and nursing team.

4.    It is essential fo r the Site Medical O fficer to be readily identifiable as soon as he arrives at the scene of
the accident and as he may be called o u t from his h one it may be necessary for him to carry his means of
identification and protective clothing w ith him at off-duty times. Consideration should also be given to the
possible need to provide transport fo r him to the site.

5.     His first duty on arrival w ill be to establish the current situation in consultation w ith the various
Incident Officers o f the emergency services and set up his headquarters at the Ambulance and Medical Control
Point. If he considers that a medical and nursing team is required and one has not been summoned already, he
should initiate the necessary action. If further teams are required either to augment, or if activity is prolonged,
to relieve the first team he should make the necessary changes in consultation with the Chief Site Nurse (see
para 7 ). Casualty Clearing Stations should be established as necessary and the priority of evacuation of
casualties should be assessed. Close contact should be maintained w ith the designated and supporting hospitals
via the ambulance radio link.

6.     As far as possible the Site Medical Officer, or a doctor on site appointed by him, should confirm death
before any body is removed from the scene by the police, acting under the instructions o f the coroner, or
under their authority, by the ambulance service. It should not be necessary to take bodies to hospital for
certification, or re-certification, o f death. Finally it is the Site Medical Officer's duty to give the stand down to
the mobile medical and nursing team(s) and to the designated and supporting hospitals. He should ensure that
the District Community Physician (or Area Medical Officer in a single district area) knows that this has been
done and is fu lly aware o f the state o f affairs at the site.
C H IE F S IT E N U R S E

7.     Where two or more mobile medical and nursing teams are required at the site of a major accident, or
where circumstances create a need fo r her presence, a previously nominated senior nurse who is familiar with
the major accident plan, should be supplied by a listed hospital to act as Chief Site Nurse. She should have
protective clothing (including headwear) which will ensure that she can be easily recognised. On arrival at the
site she should

       i.     liaise with the Site Medical Officer and assume overall nursing responsibility

       ii.    assess the situation from the nursing stand-point

       iii.   control the activities, replacement and reinforcement of nurses working on site

       iv.    assist the Site Medical Officer in his duties as necessary.

M O BILE M E D IC A L A N D N U R SIN G TEAMS

SU M M O N IN G

8.    The first mobile medical and nursing team will usually have been summoned by the ambulance service in
accordance with the locally agreed plan. No additional team should be despatched unless requested by the Site
Medical Officer. Where additional teams are so summoned the Chief Site Nurse should go to the site.

9.     Each listed hospital should arrange fo r a mobile medical and nursing team to be despatched on request,
and have readily available fo r their use warm waterproof protective clothing (including suitable headwear) in
which they w ill be easily recognisable and medical supplies packed in light, strong and reasonably sized
carrying boxes or holdalls. Account should be taken of what is carried by ambulances to avoid duplication of
items and wherever possible equipment should be compatible eg adaptors and connectors should match.
Arrangements should be made for periodic checking o f equipment and the replacement o f perishable supplies.

TR A N S P O R T

10.   Prior arrangements should exist for the transport o f mobile medical and nursing teams. This task may be
allocated to the ambulance service.

T H E D U T IE S OF T H E C O N S U L T A N T IN CHA RG E OF MAJOR A C C ID EN T PROCEDURE

11. The Consultant in charge o f Major Accident Procedure (usually the Consultant in charge of the A & E
Department) w ill, with appropriate colleagues be concerned in the formulation and updating o f the hospital
plan. If the hospital becomes a designated or supporting hospital, he will be responsible for implementing the
medical arrangements. He should despatch a mobile medical and nursing team (either from his own or another
hospital) if asked to do so by the Ambulance Service, Site Medical Officer or other authorised body. He should
maintain dose contact at all times with the Casualty Assessment Officer and in consultation with the Site
Medical Officer should decide at what stage supporting hospitals should be nominated to receive casualties.

C A S U A L T Y ASSESSMENT O F F IC E R (OR T R IA G E O F F IC E R )

12.    A senior member o f the medical staff o f a designated hospital with considerable experience o f accident
and emergency work should be appointed to be responsible with a senior nurse for assessing all casualties on
arrival at the hospital and fo r deciding their priority o f treatment and appropriate transfer.

T H E D IV IS IO N A L N U R S IN G O F F IC E R (N U R S IN G SER VIC ES G E N ER A L)

13. The Divisional Nursing Officer (Nursing Services General) is responsible to the District Nursing Officer
for ensuring

      i.     that nursing staff understand the major accident plan and the detailed arrangements for their part
      w ithin the whole team

      ii.  that appropriately trained and experienced nursing staff are available to act as members o f a
      mobile medical and nursing team and are fu lly conversant with resuscitation techniques

      iii.    the nomination o f Chief Site Nurses

      iv.  that a list o f nurses (w ith telephone numbers) liable to be called to the hospital in the event o f a
      major accident is maintained and regularly up-cated
                     that nuism g htaff p a rtic ip a te in train ing programmes and exercises

              vi.   that appropriate relief arrangements are made for nursing staff selected to deal w ith emergencies
              both at the designated hospital and at the site.

        SECTOR A D M IN IS T R A T O R

        14.    The Sector Administrator is responsible for ensuring that the resources of the hospital are fully
       mobilized; that a hospital information centre is set up (para 18) and that essential information about casualties
       in the hospital, including condition, is collated and passed to the hospital information centre and to the central
       casualty bureau (para 17). He is also responsible for seeing that there are sufficient clerks (sometimes members
       of the voluntary services may have to be used) to record details of condition of casualties, bed state and
       theatre availability and that porters or volunteers are available to help unload and re-equip ambulances to
       facilitate a quick turn round. He is responsible for alerting the hospital chaplains and the linked social services
       department as appropriate (see para 12 of the circular). He should review all aspects of the hospital plan
       regularly in conjunction with the Consultant in charge of Major Accident Procedure, the Divisional Nursing
       Officer (Nursing Services General), the Medical Records Officer and other heads of departments.

        15.   In the event of a major accident involving an international airliner the possibility of enquiries from
       relatives and legal representatives of casualties whose knowledge of English may well be imperfect, as well as
       from consular and diplomatic representatives, should not be overlooked. In these circumstances
       communication with casualties may also prove more than usually d ifficu lt and the sector administrator may
       therefore wish to maintain a list of staff with a knowledge of one or more foreign languages.

       PUBLIC R E L A TIO N S

       16.    The police appoint a Press Liaison Officer to handle press and television enquiries in the immediate
       aftermath of a major accident. Nevertheless the clamour for information from relatives, press, television and
       radio may be the biggest single administrative problem of a major accident for a hospital. Arrangements for
       coping with the demand must be carefully planned to ensure that information is given as effectively as possible
       while avoiding serious interference with the hospital's primary task of caring for casualties. The pressure of
       enquiries is likely to be particularly heavy in the first 24 to 48 hours so it is suggested that full use should be
       made of the Regional Public Relations Officer and his staff to help in handling news media queries, press
       releases etc. T V interviews on the general medical condition of patients are normally best assigned to a
       consultant.

       C E N T R A L C A S U A L TY B UR EA U

       17.    A central casualty bureau will normally be set up and manned by the police away from the hospital to
       handle all general enquiries about casualties, including those dealt with at the site without referral to hospital,
       from the press or public. The telephone number(s) of the bureau, which will have been agreed in advance with
       the Post Office, will be made known immediately to the public via local and national television and radio. The
       hospital switchboard should transfer all initial enquiries about casualties to the bureau. The use of the central
       casualty bureau will be particularly helpful when casualties are sent to more than one hospital and/or have
       been transferred from the designated hospital. Close liaison between the bureau and the hospitals involved is
       vital to ensure that a simple up-to-date list of casualties is maintained. Arrangements for this service should be
r^..   agreed w ith the police at the planning stage.

       H O S P ITA L IN F O R M A T IO N C EN TRE

       18.    In addition to the central casualty bureau manned by the police it will be necessary to provide an
       inform ation centre at the hospital receiving casualties from a major accident where people can come to make
       enquiries about the condition of patients. It is essential to set aside a clearly signed area where relatives and
       friends can congregate and where catering facilities are available, away from the reception and clinical areas.
       Representatives of the news media are likely to attend the hospital and separate provision will need to be made
       for them.




                                                                  (in)
         CENTRE        BT                                  CENT
                                                                    \
                                                                  •W^ak

                                             ht
                                             0930


                                             THUR
         & >




         f             C f                        6    v

                              v«Ci       V   toC^^besS



         - " T -                     ^       €    u   ^?Vu 5 ^




             -

                   ^ . C > w \ t<L£.
 l < -         :



\> c c



  S. 4-
I




                                                '“VO*? 't-.vi',
    c o   «   ;   ^   c   t c ^

                                       a




                                           >V



                                  f\
                        »   Criticisms of SYMAS—

A.    Implicit^of SYMAS appeared in quotations contained in an
      article which appeared in The Times and The Independent of
      17 April 1989. They also appeared in other newspapers. The
      remarks were made by two doctors who attended Hillsborough
      as Liverpool supporters on 15 April 1989. During the course
      of the evidence it became clear that the first five
      criticisms by Doctor A related to events in the area behind
      the Leppings Lane stand and terrace (day 25 pl21D).
      DOCTOR A
      1. "At 3.30 pm there were no medical personnel apart from
         one or two St John's ambulancemen. There was no medical
         equipment and there was only one ambulance."
          FACTS:
          a.   Ambulances arriving at Leppings Lane (see video RJH2)
               1513      S407 arrives (leaves 1523)
               1516      S203 arrives (leaves 1528)
                         (by 1530            from this ambulance is on
                         the pitch - video MAPI)
               1521      S208 arrives (leaves 1532)
               1535      R608 arrives
               This doctor cannot have arrived in the concourse
               until about 1535.
          b.   About 40 casualties are taken from the Leppings Lane
               end by SYMAS, of which 5 were removed by 1532.   All
               casualties had been removed from that end of the
               ground by 1606 (SYMAS recording track 19 page 19).
               Therefore about 35 casualties, all of whom survived
               were conveyed by SYMAS vehicles between 1532 and
               1606.
     2.   "Lack of triage"
          FACTS:
          a.   SYMAS personnel operated triage:
               -   see               statement, paragraph 7
               -   see Mr Yoxall1s evidence - day 23 page 126F
               -   see              1statement - paragraphs 15 to 18
               -   see              statement - paragraphs 16 and 21


                                     1
b.   Other personnel - police - also:
     - see                 s evidence - day 17 page 159E-H
"A full casualty team with resuscitation equipment did
not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm."
FACTS:
a.   A full casualty team arrived at the designated
     casualty clearing station (the gymnasium) at the
     Penistone Road end of the ground.      _____________
     statement paragraph 12 shows that the medical team
     left Northern General Hospital at 1544; it would
     therefore have been at the ground by 1550 at the very
     latest.
b.   A casualty team did not attend at Leppings Lane and
     all casualties had been removed from that end of the
     ground by 1606 (see above).
c.   A further casualty team arrived from Barnsley
     District General Hospital at the designated casualty
     clearing station but was not required.
d.   The implication that only the casualty teams would
     have resuscitation equipment is wrong.   All SYMAS
     frontline ambulances carry portable and fixed
     resuscitation equipment which was used at Leppings
     Lane.    Fire service also carried resuscitation
     equipment.
"There was no oxygen, airway tubes and drips.
FACTS:
a.   No oxygen     -   W r o n g , all S Y M A S   tit 1 ine
                       ambulances carry pneupac J?*Jyox$gen
                       resuscitators and have a ^W*»supply
                       of oxygen on board.
b.   No airways - Wrong:
                    i. All SYMAS frontline vehicles carry
                       a selection of airways, and a large
                       number were inserted.
                   ii. If the doctor means to refer to the
                       lack of intubation equipment, such
                       equipment is carried by paramedics
                       for use by them as they are trained
                       to use it.     Although there were
                       some doctors present in the crowd
                       who were competent to use such
                       equipment had it been available for
                       general use (apart from that
                       brought by paramedics and the
                       medical team) it is impractical to
                       expect a supply of such equipment^
                       which can only safely be used by
                       those trained to use it# to be
                       available on the offchance that
                       suitably qualified persons may be
                       among spectators. (This doctor
                       admitted that it was some time
                       s i n c e he had carr i e d out an
                       intubation himself - see day 25
                       page 124D).
                  iii. A consultant anaesthetist (day 25
                       p27D) agreed that if the tube were
                       wrongly inserted it could kill the
                       patient. The treatment that was
                       being a d m i n i s t e r e d by police
                       officers, fans, St John's and SYMAS
                       ambulancemen, namely CPR, was the
                       correct treatment               in t h e
                       circumstances and undoubtedly did
                       save lives.
c.   No drips      -   Wrong:
                    i. Infusion equipment is carried by
                       paramedics, and requires special
                       training, however, there is no
                       evidence that any casualty was
                       prejudiced by the lack of infusion
                       equipment.
                   ii. Medical Team (gymnasium) obviously
                       had I .V . drips because spectator
                       nurse F J Eccleston gave evidence
                       that he set up 10 drips ready for
                       doctors (Transcript day 5 pl5D).
"More lives could have been saved if staff and equipment
had arrived earlier."
FACTS:
a.   Before he was reminded that he had made such a
     statement to the press, Dr in chief (day 25 page 115G
     to 116G) accepted that it was       pure speculation
          whether or not further lives could have been saved
          (day 25 page 115G to 116D), and on cross examination
          (day 25 page 127C to D) agreed that it was
          "unfortunate" that he had sought out the press to
          make public pronouncements which it was not possible
          for him to make.
     b.   If as SYMAS submit, the crushing started at the very
          latest at 1459, by the time that any medical
          a s s i s t a n c e got to the most severely crushed
          spectators they had been deprived of oxygen for over
          4 minutes and therefore it is unlikely that the
          presence or otherwise of such equipment made any
          practical difference.
DOCTOR P
6.   "Complains about the lack of defibrillators"
     FACTS:
     a.   We believe that the Inquiry accepts that the use of
          defibrillators on the pitch in the circumstances of
          this tragedy would have been professionally
          irresponsible, (day 19 page 31C) (day 24 page 103F)
           (day 25 page 24A and 29A).
     b.   In case anybody has any doubts about it we list the
          difficulties:
            i.   If wrongly used it can kill:
                 - the patient
                 - the operator
                 - any third party coming into contact with the
                   patient.
           ii.   Before being used national guidelines for
                 ambulancemen lay down that an ECG reading for
                 diagnosis should be obtained from the machine.
                 In order for the reading and diagnosis to be
                 accurate the patient and the defibrillator must
                 be completely isolated from any movement and
                 the s u r r o u n d i n g e n v i r o n m e n t m u s t be
                 sufficiently stable to permit an accurate
                 assessment of the ECG recorded. Spurious
                 readings can occur in a crowd.
          iii.   In the circumstances of this tragedy when
                 otherwise relatively fit individuals were
                 rendered hypoxic (lack of oxygen), the likely
                 heart pattern is asystole (continuous line of
                      electrical activity with na effective heart
                      contractions) and not ventricular fibrillation.
                      The purpose of a defibrillator is to jolt a
                      fibrillating heart rhythm back into a normal
                      pattern.   The standard treatment for asystole
                      is CPR. Successful CPR would normally produce
                      a regular heart pattern rather than ventricular
                      fibrillation.
                iv.   However, given the length of time during which
                      most of the patients had been deprived of
                      oxygen, even the use of a defibrillator would
                      not have made any practical difference (see Dr
                      P's statement to the police, page 7 "my
                      thoughts that in view of the length of time he
                      was pulseless it would probably be kinder if he
                      died.   I am sure he must have been severely
                      brain damaged by that time" and at the bottom
                      of the page "I looked desperately for somebody
                      not dead but seriously ill who needed help. I
                      could not find anybody in that category in the
                      goal area.   They were either all dead or okay
                      with nothing in between.")
B.   Ambulance Equipment
     1.    A list of equipment carried by all SYMAS frontline
           ambulances is appended hereto.
     12.   This equipment is intended for use by SYMAS personnel and
           not by third parties.
     3.    Much of the equipment has to be kept with the ambulance
           for use on the journey to hospital.
     4.    The primary purpose of the ambulance is to give immediate
           treatment to casualties and convey them to hospital.
     5.    On 15 April 1989 many SYMAS ambulancemen treated
           casualties with CPR and resuscitation, as well as
           conveying 172 injured to hospital. Any criticism of lack
           of equipment on SYMAS vehicles is ill-informed.




                                   5
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - FAILURE TO RECOGNISE THE DISASTER


 SYMAS' submission is that South Yorkshire Police were in a
 position to identify the existence of a disaster by 1459
 hours at the very latest.        In fact, as the attached
 chronology shows, they failed to do so before 1505 hours and
 failed to call SYMAS until 1508 hours.

 In view of the unchallenged medical evidence it is SYMAS'
 submission that those 9 minutes were critical, and of all
 the claims that lives could have been saved, this is the
 only one with any merit.

 SYMAS' submission is that there is evidence to indicate that
 supporters were being crushed to death by 1459 hours and
 that this was evident to anyone whose mind was/conditioned
 by the need to contain supporters within the central pens.

 It is SYMAS' submission that the persons who were in a
 position to, and should have recognised the plight of the
 persons in pens 3 and 4, are the police officers in the
 control box, and those stationed along the perimeter track
 in front of pens 3 and 4.

 Evidence
 a.   Photographs South
 b.   Photograph produced by leading Counsel for So          h
      Yorkshire Police on day 19 (transcript 19 p35D). j/fl r
 c.   Photographs taken by the Liverpool Echo and produced to
      the Inquiry by Counsel for the Football Supporters
      Association. j0c 2^8.
 d.   Transcripts of messages received and despatched by
      Force Control at Snig Hill.
 e.   Evidence of witnesses - both fans and police.

 We shall deal with each of the above in turn but propose
 initially to draw the Tribunal's attention to the following
 chronology compiled from various sources.
       Schedules of Times Taken from Videos and Transcripts

KEY
      VIDEOS:
      There are four videos to which reference is made, namely:
      RJH2             This is the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                       film taken from the camera which has a fixed
                       view onto the back of the courtyard behind
                       turnstiles A-G.
      MAPI & MAP9 -    These are tapes of videos made by BBC Outside
                       Broadcast Unit one using an operator set
                       database and the other using a computer set
                       database. For the purposes of this schedule
                       no distinction is drawn.
      TB2              This is the film made by South Yorkshire
                       Police on the CCTV system using operator set
                       database.
B.    TRANSCRIPTS
      SYMAS 1    =   Track 9        )    DOCUMENT 128. These are a
                                    )    transcription of tapes made
      SYMAS 2        Tracks 10 & 11 )    at SYMAS HQ of calls received
                                    )    from Force Control SNIG HILL.
      SNIG   1       SA/1. KWP 30/15/17     This is a transcription
                     Document 34            of tapes made at SNIG HILL
                                            Force Control (F/C) con­
                                            taining messages received
                                            from SWFC Police Ground
                                            Control (G/C) and messages
                                            transmitted by F/C to
                                            other police units
      SNIG   2   -   SA/2 KWP 30/15/18      This is a continuation of
                                            the transcript of SNIG 1
      SNIG   3       SA/6 KWP 30/9/17       This is a transcript of
                     Document 129           a separate tape made at
                                            F/C containing messages
                                            from F/C to the Fire
                                            Service and SYMAS
      SNIG   4   =   F1A 1230               This is the Extended
                     Document 73            Incident Log compiled
                                            F/C. For the purposes of
                                            this chronology this tape
                                            is not relevant.
      SNIG   5   -   KWP 30/14/17          ) This is a further
                  Document 254        transcript of SNIG 1
                                      containing the background
                                      messages on the tapes
                                      representing inter alia
                                      traffic picked up from
                                      VHF Channel 25 which was
                                      being monitored by F/C.
                                      The times on this tape
                                      are identical to that on
Ot C0                                 sniqt ;.

NOTE
There is a discrepancy between the times recorded on SYMAS
computer transcript and SNIG HILL transcript.    They are only a
matter of seconds in most cases and for the purposes of this
chronology the times have all been taken where two are available
from the SNIG HILL transcript.   In such cases where there is no
SNIG HILL transcript and the time sequence, as recorded on the
SYMAS transcript, is not in line, a figure in brackets represents
the best estimate if the SNIG HILL time is applied to the SYMAS
transcript.
TIME            SOURCE                    EVENT
14.48.04        Video RJH2                GATE C opened: Surge of about 150
                                          people per HSE Report p7.
14.48.31        Video RJH2                GATE C closed.
14.51.30        SNIG 5 pj.                "Speech heard in background"
                                          "Letting anybody through." "It's
                                          bloody chaos at Leppings Lane
                                          because thousands can't get in,
                                          they have just broken gates down
                                          and Superintendent M a r s h a l l ' s
                                          screaming for them to open the
                                  4 /lt   inner gates and to let people in
                                          and Murray's saying in control,
       um   M   .    ' 7L- L> ■           we've got to monitor tickets, if we
                                          get Liverpool mixed up with Notts
 {ju*r                                    Forest t h e y're going to have
                                          trouble even if we get a serious
  i&dxtoJfM 1                             problem."
14.52.06            Video RJH2            GATE C opened for second time.
                                          Entry of about 2,000 people per HSE
                                          Report p.7.
14.53               SNIG 1                F/C giving out messages to other
                                          police v e h i c l e s c o n c e r n i n g a
                                          missing policeman.
14.53 to            SNIG 3 pp2-6          Chat and banter between F/C (PC
14.58                                     Rook) and other forces about not
                                          accepting any loads due to the
                                          football match.
                                          SYMAS submit that listening to the
                                          tape gives no indication of any
                                          crisis or concern in F/C.
14.57               SNIG 1 p.7            Superintendent Brougham radios in
                                          that he attended Leppings Lane end
                                          with a PA but "they’ve already got
                                          a PA in use there so we are now
                                          resuming back to driving school".
                                          Again listening to the tape no
                                          suggestion of any panic or concern
                                          in F/C.
14.57.35            RJH2 & TB2            GATE C closed.      Area behind GATE C
                                          is clear.
14.58               SNIG 1 p7             Reports from traffic control that
                                          city centre clear of traffic.
14.59           SNIG 1 p8          Telephone call to Ground Control "I
                                   don't know whether we need any
                                   y et" "No I'm r i n g i n g Ground
                                   Control".
                                   PC Waugh rings G/C (PC Ryan) "Yes
                                   i t ' s ops. Do y o u w a n t a n y
                                   ambulances. We are trying to
                                   monitor to you but you know it's
                                   ..." *Ryanv*it's chaos at the
                                   moment, we've got no reports of
                                   injuries but we, if you can monitor
                                   the situation if you can just keep
                                   standing by."
14.59.12        RJH2               GATE C opened third time.  Steady
                                   stream being monitored by mounted
                                   police.     Fans having to show
                                   tickets (see evidence of Macrell
                                   transcript day 30 p99E-G).
15.02           SNIG 5 p8          "Background speech" "Superintendent
                                   Marshall are you calling me, over"
                                    "Can we close the gates again?"
                                    "Yes, they can be closed, God
                                   bless?"
15.04           SNIG 1 p9          G/C calls for dog handlers.
15.04 to        SNIG 1 p9 & 10      F/C summons dog handlers to GATE 0.
15.06
15.06.10        SNIG 1 plO         G/C calls Operation Support.
15.06.30        SNIG 1 plO         F/C sends more dog handlers.
15.07.01        SNIG 3 p8          F/C puts SYMAS on notice that
                SYMAS 1 pi         "ambulances might be required".
                                                           fic.
                                   Conversation between. Rook         and
                                   Superintendent Clarke.
15.07.50        SNIG 1 pll         G/C - F/C’."Fleet of ambulances to
                                   Hillsborough."
15.08           SNIG 3 p9          G/C - SYMAS'.(continuation of the
                SYMAS 1 p3         same phone call as at 15.07.01)
                                   "Fleet     of a m b u l a n c e s to
                                   Hillsborough".
15.08.50        SNIG 1 pl2         G/C (Ryan) to F / C ;"Ambulances to
                                   Leppings Lane end please, Leppings
                                   Lane." "Roger, ambulances to
                                   Leppings Lane end."
1r      hT'"*   liYMAIEap p4-    ) rolice- Constable Waugh to SYMAS
                                     fc
           S 'l^ S   f f   ^
15.09      per SNIG HILL       ) "Ambulances to Leppings Lane end
           times               ) a big fleet immediately, as many as
                               ) you've got please."
15.09.40   SNIG 1 pl3            F/C to G/C : "Is ACC with you?"
                                 "Please confirm Operation Support"
                                 ACC gives confirmation.
15.10.55   SNIG 1 plO            F/C (Rook) to SYMAS "Just to let
           SYMAS 2 pi            you know we have called Operation
                                 Support.        There are hundreds
                                 i n j u r e d t r a m p l e d underfoot,
                                 everything." SYMAS tells Rook that
                                 they are responding.
15.20.10   SNIG 2 pi             G/C to F/C:"Can you confirm we have
                                 more ambulances on route - only
                                 h a v e 3 at t h i s l o c a t i o n at
                                 present."
15.23.50   SNIG 2 p3             F/C to G/C: "Our last instructions
                                 were for ambulances to Leppings
                                 Lane. Is there any change? Over"
15.24.30   SNIG 2 p4             F/C to G/C*. "We would like some
                                 ambulances also to GATE 0. Things
                                 are getting blocked up at the
                                 Leppings Lane, some ambulances to
                                 GATE 0 please."
15.24.50   SNIG 2 p4             F/C to G/C:"Where's GATE 0?" ii
15.28.30   SNIG 2 p7             G/C to F/C*. "Could you ask for a
                                 radio message Hallam to request the
                                 crowd application - yes stand by
                                 yes. Requesting for doctors to
                                 attend at the stadium, doctors at
                                 the stadium."
15.29      SNIG 2 p7             F/C to G/C*. "Roger, requesting Radio
                                 Hallam for doctors to attend at the
                                 stadium, over."
          OUTLINE COMMENTS ON VARIOUS FACTORS RELEVANT TO THE
            MATTERS WITHIN THE INQUIRY'S TERMS OF REFERENCE

PREAMBLE
We expect that most of the matters set out below have been
accepted already by the Tribunal, but we list them to demonstrate
SYMAS' strength of feeling that the disaster should not have
occurred, and could have been avoided.
1*   CHOICE OF GROUND
     A.      Leppings Lane End
             1.1   Inevitably, because of need for segregation,
                   Hillsborough's design was not safe to accommodate
                   one set of supporters if they had to enter the
                   ground at Leppings Lane.
             1.2   There is an obvious bottle neck leading into the
                   outer perimeter gates and there is the added
                   problem of channelling the supporters into the
                   appropriate turnstiles for the north stand, the
                   west stand and the west terracing.
             1.3   It should be noted that the shortest distance
                   across the funnel leading into the outer perimeter
                   gates is only 24 metres.
             1.4   Once the supporters gain access through the outer
                   perimeter gates those heading for turnstiles A-G
                   have to negotiate a minimum bottleneck of 8
                   metres between the handrail leading down from
                   turnstile G and the edge of turnstile 16.     The
                   maximum distance across turnstiles A-G is only 13
                   metres.
     B.      Turnstile Flow Rate
             1.1   The L i v e r p o o l supp o r t e r s were allocated
                   approximately 24,500 tickets for the semi-final,
                   covering the north stand and the west stand and
                   terracing.
             1.2   Paragraph 47 of the Green Guide gives a maximum
                   notional rate per turnstile at which spectators
                   can pass through, not exceeding 750 persons per
                   hour.
             1.3   Based on the figure of 23 turnstiles for 24,500
                   spectators, at the rate of 750 per hour, it would
                   take almost 1 1/2 hours for 24,500 spectators to
                   gain entry into the ground.
      1.4 If one then takes the figure of 7 turnstiles for
          the 10,100 s p e c t a t o r s for the west stand
          terracing, based upon the notional rate in
          paragraph 47, it would almost take 2 hours for the
           10,100 spectators to gain entry.
      1.5 It should be clearly noted that the above
          estimates represent the minimum possible time to
          allow spectators into Hillsborough based upon the
          Green Guide figures.
      1.6 The inadequacy of the turnstiles to accommodate
          24.500 spectators appears to have been recognised
          by the South Yorkshire Police and SWFC.       See
          Transcript day 11 p38D-G.
      1.7 In our submission it was absurd to believe that
          24.500 spectators could have been safely allowed
          entry through Leppings Lane in the time available.
FAILURE TO DELAY KICK-OFF
2.1   The senior officers inside the police control box
      should have realised by 1430 hours that the crowd of
      supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance could not
      get into the ground by 1500 hours even on the most
      optimistic of flow rates through the turnstiles.
2.2   It therefore follows that kick-off should have been
      postponed prior to or very shortly after 1430 hours,
      and indeed many people were under the impression that
      kick-off had been delayed.
OPENING OF GATE C
3.1   The decision to open Gate C was inevitable in all
      circumstances, but the failure to prepare and cater for
      the resultant ingress of supporters into the concourse
      behind the west stand and then onto the terracing, was
      a clear and fundamental mistake by the police.
SIGNING AND LAYOUT OF CONCOURSE
4.1   Once supporters found themselves in the concourse area
      behind the west stand the directional signs onto the
      terracing was so poor that it resulted in the majority
      of supporters quite reasonably deciding that there was
      no way onto the terracing other than through the
      central tunnel.
                                             /OHWVCi
4.2   The situation was made worse by the faaaflwe of the
      internal wall which although useful for a normal match,
      probably dissuaded many supporters going to their left
      after entering through turnstiles A-G and Gate C.
4.3   There were clearly enough officers In serialft^ito make a
      line to direct spectators to pens 1 smmH 2, 5^and(4-
      see PC Burton day 17 p21G to p22D.
Layout of Terrace
5.1   The layout of the radial fences, perimeter fence gates
      and barriers was, at the very least, piecemeal,
      haphazard and carried out with little or insufficient
      thought concerning the safety of supporters on the
      terracing.
5.2   The emphasis in erecting the radial fences, perimeter
      fence gates and barriers was clearly on containment of
      the supporters on the terracing, and for example we
      would point to:
      a.    the disagreements as to the use of the gates in
            the perimeter fences in the event of emergency
            evacuation;
      b.    Dr Eastwood's assertion (unsupported by other
            members of the Working Party) that breach of
            paragraph 115 of the Green Guide was a deliberate
            policy decision. Please see Dr Eastwood's plan No
            11424-8 which shows that the gaps were in
            existence before he obtained his retainer from the
            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, i.e. pre-1978,
            and were made by the removal of existing sections
            with no new uprights being constructed.
Siea or    omdo   i-
                   h   nangitpi
                              rin
The perimeter gates leading onto the perimeter track are
clearly too narrow for the purposes of emergency evacuation
onto the pitch area.


The capacity of the whole of the west stand terracing, and
in particular pens 3 and 4, has been clearly wrongly
calculated.   Reference should be made to document headed
"Sheffield Wednesday Football Club west terrace - ideal
distribution of persons" for pens 3 and 4.     The Health &
Safety Executive has calculated that the maximum numbers of
spectators for pens 3 and 4 are 822 for pen 3 and 871 for
pen 4. Furthermore, if one takes into account paragraph 216
of the Green Guide, the appropriate capacities of pens 3 and
4 are substantially reduced, to 542 for pen 3 and 605 for
pen 4.
8.   LACK OF ANTICIPATION
     8.1   Whatever criticisms can be made of the Liverpool
           supporters, it appears fairly clear that the South
           Yorkshire Police should have anticipated the sort of
           behaviour from the Liverpool fans which they alleged
           took place on 15 April 1989.
     8.2   In particular, this is borne out by the evidence
           gathered by the South Yorkshire Police during the
           course of the Inquiry, and served in the last week of
           evidence given to the Inquiry.     This documentation
           contains numerous reports of behaviour by Liverpool
           fans during the course of the 1988-89 football season
           which indicates a pattern of behaviour identical to
           that which took place on 15 April.
     8.3   The following are examples of such reports:
              i. Humberside Police - Hull City v Liverpool dated
                 18 February 1989.
             ii. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
                 dated 12 December 1988.
            iii. Metropolitan Police - Arsenal v Liverpool dated
                 9 November 1988.
             iv. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
                 dated 24 September 1988.
     8.4   In addition, during the course of the 1987-88 season,
           there is a report from the Hertfordshire Constabulary
           concerning the Watford v Liverpool game which took
           place on 13 February 1988 where 1,500 Liverpool
           supporters arrived at the ground without tickets and
           were allowed in.




                                 4
            U S
                                                                      'O.CJP '—                 \.oo
                                                                         2 ~ -C O                 ^ ,QP

                                                                (Vl       \ o ,~%q   .



                            .st~-~           ‘m
                                              y^~         '




Vv^=>   ^         (Saw,—,                                             tcsooo -jr



                                     . .Q fc -t.'tl                                £ . < ,                        S u O        -^o

                                                                       "^N*- (K rO i^.
                                      ^<W<_                     icoS^'Aa o^Xa\                    ^v^iAW ^-)OWt

                       ^Avn ^ "                        V^,CO

                           ^j                            10^0



        3
        < *.                                  n_ voo

                              •'ILaS              q*-^    'V-'s
                              ^."iO                   ^'o ”"^'''"t      -$A\                                          icaO &~A^n.




                   >J<1“             —'•^>                ■^o     ^t,     jjcs«A-^_       d/;» '—                                    ~t>

                                                                               c?c^W*v<,            ^v»—       c^o^*3~,


                    ~^'— >V&a*. %_A-                  c^SSw^                             °o j       <A,               ^ h w /< » s

                                                 V^VOO^Aj ,
                                                                 4      A'^          ' %<A"            So.t-     i(__fl^ ^
                                                                                             -'                           c-oCVvv^
                                          o


 (o        Vvov—<-3

       s                           -°°'-—             <s>™0                                <su_ ^yOiL.o

      ^■StO .         6,a^ ^ j            oA -        ..      ^=°_I^ COW*«3 0_^               _
                                                           w/osi-S*- *~^a CflT-ifiYdt, Cy-v**?^-*


      £ U"7                             (f7«^,A\                 w^v.
      1 ,i .if .              C*~i*a~         O       e»*-**-^                                                  -*«»   W js
                                                       naa^jjw

                                IV,               ^                        "O-fl-          ICO




                                                                             \v w




                    It^e-Ov                   *-€^-*-»V " n^.                      o^'wOi^y*!"’ ©-«— «*J(K
                                          O^b^O Se-*v                                     *-t  Q^OyzKjL* <
                                                                                                         2w|U?Wj_*~i)
                                      C|?              'jV                          *" yv£) -^0*^0'^ rfL^- yt-^V,

   ^ Sc«^                                                            ^V\       —



  X.-SS>           -
                   js?'-*^^
                                                Q>v^^->"                            ‘Ot'T*? ei-^r
                          '~TVC-3 ^<yu Nctvv^a^       4-                              ^              ' "^\^»              CO^XJ^


                         ^Y^atu—        ^Vmb^”                                     ^Q^X*       '—*     j^twj,   v«^    V**- ~Cvj^yvW
                                                                                                                                   'v--£j




              (sr&fes- --        ^L— '-^     Of^-Si -S'                ^
                                       p-a^r^«_                  - "TVi^ c'o^a u^ ps^a^
                                       (os,       cJ P>A* e^-it-r^. ✓Wl-       t^j\g

'VO'L "                         /^o-t-ac.         uI^~«4q                              .


S ,0m ' ^ .«3S                                          co

 ^»'OS , “S.^                                                    ^         tftfcV-         Oi-w -^5^Xeu^,       ^isUjl)

       "V <r? ^          r«OO^sA              S'                 oa,       ^«V <^                       VCJ>7

  3.,^                                                                                     1              S^j
             S.lS.                             ^
             •"is,c~)                         •                                       ~e-~^a-*~




   ■^O^vv^            u1                           "it                o^V_                  ->Uc*-



                                                         0 -^ < 7 >         C^CvOo.         jfirffoX-




             \^\            (Va NVs->'-'* -       -V*                        cLofi^^sij--        VvcO       C T l'/'-V tt*




            ta O                 &.^vov^— ^                                 c^ n~           <^-^<>vvOi)

           *—i   2O                                                     ^                                    *          Vv*D          L ^ --    ~1V_
                                                                            ^       ‘"^O            JtOVC-V'            C-k*-^p»uttA-w



CL~\
 ^jsA^N^     $^
             C            Q
                          >«^ -'C
                            5J« '— .                 VxP
                                                     v-u^ "T Vb   .ICO©
                                                                   'v-*“rT O
                                                                           a-
                                                                            —' f^/vw-*.   (t
                                                                                           oov
                                                                                             V~M—^ . ^ — "tvjoA^eJ

                                                        <*VV W-V ev^s^—                 i=_ ”TVa— ''(j          ^a— ^
                                                                ^Sas—     ^v-"^




  >M-        '»^ S»           <^              l^xr*         <£)         O-Nre^1 (2»Wvi                  <^-«»-’                     - pD~~rvt       ^   cJL^«*-^-^t^



                             ^ y              (2»\x^.             p*^' ~               ,       -        o        U           t   c             to-^..
                                                                                                 vCj                  C^VnJLWLA^.



                           W^Kq_                   c& a^X
                  Cwv.3     Z© «                         p—       '"?
                           ^)wA_.a                 VsC^* t?S'J^t
                                                               a
                                                               *pi^             '-'«» a»-e.jO
                                      ^'^Vjl^       V^^/Ojt—     V^i^Cox >.           «“£          *   Ld
                                                   *""fc&-^a— ^ -s»*ai ""tMjAvvv^A

"^Vj<»p*isaX          w                  ^Vfljy^     ^CV«w                                         \ ^w lO   'tWv
                                                                 \      ^

           Q a^Vok,       '"*   ^ C^»"                    ^                 ^\i    ww*v'-^ur            »-p >*. ^

                 ^lOi^Ntr ""^V^V\vvw -*^                      V*-MC^ t\c^X'       ^vo^     t'%4w             '*”'



                      Z o - ^ o         JjW-
                                                    ^ Jd^©'s%


                                     LOIOCV\
CV-OocA
                                              ^                        ^                                              jj^ ,           p -a ^ * y ^ »    ^ - A ^ p tX

                      C ^ A ^ — »        ~\                                       « C [,'^ u a^ -^ “      <&"       ^^ A J> A .^




                                                  .""^V^VV        < ^ ?lfc‘' ^ ' ^ l*%^ tJ,>*   "^ O        vX--«A-      . :\^ « ^ u f r v ^ ?




                       0-4^         fQr*>&                     *•■*.           ^^PL—                   C-L^>^*' -^\\v^                      -^pQ/^^         ^O     V^




* n   <£& v




              £.,                                            -         &           Vyv;^ ^5? J| CVO^D -i                                          3 ScW^'-
              3   ,     'f’<X*ai_             ^         ^ V cnV>xavv^


                                                  Q>    oil" cv^-nP-s. a—^Vo <^(jua
                                                  ©                                                             ^
              tj,
              .5 . ftwri>A»<. ,,^'^tl■*                                     <x*-'w*^y                  £>i>^ocA«*_. S^

              *7, ""(icWwA            Q~J.             ^Uk.-Ji, ^ ^auwA^L



      u       <^a-r;>—b\W\V\r-vj              v>«^Wi-.                         0-4-
                                                                          y^/    ^\L^jaX a ^

                                           X^^V'-nkt,                     V'                 \.cj
                                                                          O       "^K^A ^
                                                            ir^p ,


Of. ^

                            <«L€>Ol?
                            Q, Go \
                     y      <D ^04
                  .— _ x     SZ.o-8

»fe                 >/
& ^                         W C - 2.
m i<\.      —                 Zo(s
  4 to ^ w J W              sioq
'lAsi&L. jfeO^              V=,\XO r'L
         »S1/$ /            ^ VX06
^ ^ *i'SO                   ^ ■So.6 ....
 T4 * *-                    Th>\\0^                                     """ttfv^*>Q^cc^& ^j^>—
                            %\\o\
  a 3<= — •                 TLS03,                                                 l^T ci «*&-?» «3^“- ^ vJL cA J ^


                             TLSTo^.
                             TLSo^
              1 S ^ v/       <D€0\
                              ^>§PS
                             S^vol
                             ^\CTL
                             & 103.                                      ^            ~Xb
                              ^» icx^                                Co^VoftXp   £.03^—        XrJ^z&Z. C|^^04
                              s\or
                             3LSt>3>
                              S.^ 0 7
                             S.vj,
                                 oS
<*$%f63    '* W i$ * ei o
<mib                         <£»^'V
T fin y   <*2fa              ^ U o l,
~34gi     ^                   ^>^1.
81        t53>±               ^% dS
                             oqo'S
                             ^ -6 0 7
          \£<A                                          y /tw ^
                             Po'S   4 ^ -°   e“-,V-   -^(o ''OwLjii!*


                     •9e~>                    <0'($




IV

^V*   CL/\



(V C«v<^
       (y-j w >Cj^
C-OSTC&Y

                                                                  CS^.

                -      u    en-vSv*—        J=v_ ^ .vO. f -C .                     XCi&       -                      P\o^

                                                        rtpc^b>
                                                                                          * ^ a^v'"7>
                                             -'•'4
Hv^i.GcMOS (^Wi) -      u     o   A k ->




£r<P*,ok>        -




                        ’
                        Q'V'           VWjCVc^n                    ^^OS'



                                            ,       (^fv-sw-a) Va^wyj Vcxv-t. lS*l3 „                                    wit
                             e -*r^ ja x X ^ -^

                            CL^-£-'                     O-V**       * Vj^Jb1
                                                                           '
                                                     -        &K**»            O-'O-'t
                       ^> .210^ ,                   C^jn^wgO      \S^P7 , NC^teair o^-^o
                                                 (^^Arci'jejD         ^LvO“Z_ *^v%kjL^ YO^-



                                                        ^?N3>fV               ^cVw^tS^              ^Va—-     ^<Xo-^ooc)
                                                          cyjM^D         dK^JL,                      °'°- '°—
                                      V3clJ}—                     VOo.'V                          C^<vv*«.Q
                                                ■\W 5     -^v-v*. O.-    -Vc^Vi   iq )


HOVv/aws.                                  ^^ i-3>         '—      ^So-y.                 r                    CoC!l»\




              ^v>)>-uD oSJaoJ'- l(sOO

yoytVu_              ^v~     O^O-»0  - V\a^U>^ t 'O                         n-                          .O a>-
                                                                                                    <^°3vi2,

                     "~fVN-^l-^_ CZ^                                                      ^Z-OfN-C^ 08;- S»»-cA-t
                      Vs_^>s«^_p Vjiv,, ^r^o-vO^

                                     v-35^-             ^ V         Vw„J3v4- \$m&tn\jL.                  Cw
                 eV           V                 ^             o         “<«>>                                    ^
          - V^oo                ^=rt£W-                                                 ^E"^=>*>«*. cO                  >VSSS^^-. .*»                 cy9^~A                 '■^'■^-v
                                        C>v~a^
                                         CO*v5




               \£OS. S3>                          V\*c^3t\v-v^                  <tsAi-oV ...CoV^^k
                                                                                                                                      ^ .. ev"" <2_ (^j?v^«.                   ey->ey
                                                                                d>^^-          cK^ Nwv^W"£.^                     '^jVjuVfe-       Co
                                                                           \a £ -                         o - v i\
                                               ©Jf-                  "t^-vi ~^- \'r \^              ‘'^         v-^>v^            ^OV*iA Vtwt aj^S^vj
                                               vwSto/-                <^oLyv.^>»va             ^^""\          & :*ie'               ”^a- e^y-sv^ ^jkjiAXe.
                                 ,                             jfc ^ --^            'V ^ l                       >-^7     C'--                                                          o^*
                                          ^       \            v ? oc?A                         Xr-O^                                  fV c ^ -   -^J^V                  IV ^w V o ,



                                                                          Svrn^s
               \^C)(s> •'2.e\     ToV«,      c-o'^'^'A                              Gj$vo\            a o-»^
                                       I^'-C^Oas^-      £7^”      ^CL^p^'C^a              _CVv^ Jo) ^^f^'-^*°\»*»r<>''-«=j\^
                                      *VW^--      ,**..           0~ '^>^X .a^^     ,-^«»^ Nae^ 1 VN*jzAj!.9 ^ ”fWs^~
                                     '"Kavit, \vpA                     ff~    'Ct dp ^pvj^^va^. cx.'~A. sV\o^v-a
                                          ^   co a ^vxl      tVa.v^ w v o A i    V>o-\/^_                      o-
                                               TVO^a A.O'P            ^                      ~^V^A"            O-V^^Sj^ctyvulo             0—e-       V\oV       vvecftfcs)            o^~

                                              * ^ \v i          o W c ^ t.   .                                             J^C 5^          *                 C 3'^>\^A

                                               o^rc--           j~«cy>-B=^/-«v-c\ ow                                 ^            —.Vj^VoLxxciL-j             o.v^dv           ArW

                                                                                                                                                                   „         ■r
                                              S 'y 'O ’flEs               (^w Sr^            O °" ^ \                        K t< ^        v C -\\      •,                         flArv
                                              \ SA.s \ * A                                       avvd           <XSi«.S\                  ^ o '^ '           V'W-ev.£. _
                                '’"^T'^-a-'       cc*^“
                                                      V                -e>vA-o            cr^~            ^^         .*"^

               tS'o^.xr?        ‘
                                ^.W,                                                'Vv<<k«_<,            s.'rortL           COv^^'\                               '°~^ ‘\
                                                             oo-dl
                                              \'Qv^saa»~4'Aa oC^aXs^
           iSTd? > m            'S?y($~'<*z>                                         co^WcV                                                                            *^o
                                              iVy£^./wT\                                                (v>^>-iavve, "^O                c^                     T*P^^A»oro,
           V-S"O^                ^yv^SwV        C^v^la.cV'  .O .                                                                       "*to          ®^\a        V ^-y-^-,             ^3
                                        a-s^ess
C^pp^x.    \^ \0      ,         L 3 O      V^O^^O\W7 «3 fiOO ^ )oAa»_^                                                     \Q}h—>c, S»/^~iA5. €>
           I                    ^ vvS v/vi^-lG ^                 S> V_*0~7                                                         ^     O^vfc/u.,     Y_fl,^pf**cys          ^-'°
                                                  < 2 ,^ 6 .     .                                                                        V '                     a   O sJ        v\


                                                  C^Tsa*-^                   c^^^\=^Aco^vCP^                                 cc^© k ,

                 ^   ^7                                               \ 0"~L.       C l                 - '
                                                                           <&r                                O^?ou)             «,v\j          / T^rUo uvsA-tx
                                                                                                                                                    <9^

'(V^apvov       \^S~7                 .^ v y ^ a s ^ . o - w   A '         <QO^               (^fto-cVy/1
                                                                                                        '                        ^      C S ~ W W -»o   t
                                                 ,-^?C Vt\~>               \a - ^                 •'Ut- .
                                                                                             (paX^.c



                                     ™+W            ©vW                       _X^cS~                       S-lo-2- <—3 S'ZOOV                     ^ .W^-^a) t~3» vjOwVtVustCv'*’.
                                                                   A « i     •S fifi/         C C tA r \                  o tw V f i-




                iS.'?                                                      <X>~1. O^i*                                           ^       <*Jv^*^r           c^- VflL^p^K^p Vjulv
                                         ■e-vvO

                 lv2«3»......................... C -O A O          ^S sp V ^ -^          ol>JD        ftO O    T 'lo A .g ^     o- j^a^c-         csA—         ^e-w '-o'o-t- ^ 2 « x i?
                                          e.vv5 .

                .\svs,                             bj^oL                   % zoe                                  /C o                      } O-V*vr\V0*Q

                '^U,                                                       1^~iOfo £|                                            ^

                \5T7                                                                                                                             O _ w \ - 'o - p




  V«3       .           ^ ^ ■< 2 /                             ^                    / * ^ \ \ c^*;           ^s£U/A»-         0 '^ X » \A { x^ c4-^>
                           \sa_3,                  \   C<^-\^- ,€>s-'Vs* ~hflLc^ G '                                                        ■S«^07/ ^voz. ; S 2 o^
                           S203> ,                ^'Z-O^         - ~ ^ J W V C W rfi' ~^VjL'                                                         O O -^ c - (\ft
                                                                                                                                                '<->
                            tv/us.^               c»-0      3^vty4- "\^«^       cV*&-                                                   OwV-.'t^e ,




    V-°K-« —    ^ '•£>_         CV'A't- J?

       ^ .%. (^*»V <5^,(^>. «£*>-> "Kjl, rvfl—*>                                                            Ww^
                                     -^Q^oXXr   . “ta   SsC.   i~   «^0




                                •^   W JU ,                         Vc,




     ^ Cb/^Sx^t-Vy

      (^ lA. k'V'-~'*-^''CV->



      £)=«2^ .



®.    Q&v




     f^-




            V_0We-'

           TVfl.




          (?"
          (V;
w u .

 $oi{
       ~         S s V f W te s          w><J^~

      Ss^-Oy>W^> __3o t-<    ^^Csl_ 3>pja^^
^j"^ **0                ^ aA/tA*,: *^3 «^\>o        *5"15»!-yS>-t(AA^.

                                  ^$. ^ U o       <a.v^-rs 5^ a~J CsJ^«.
                                                              ‘S aO /O

sQ£0   .    —i                  J 'i0tU3
                                                       c®Aj




                 l5jl>   -   {jiAPp^c      x.   vrj—



\J CX,'A^
                 SOLICITORS


                                                                         it .
                                                                       V* c.




                                                                                                                                                       &4P
                                                                                                                                                    :y-:> i
                                                       C ri t i c j i s m s
                                                                                     t', V *
                   i                  ,cri ti visss; 'o£ *•                                &Et$e a xfed; 'i.ri -^uro'^atiobip
                   copt^ifie^ i a               <M .article'                                             h^rhs"'              1         .Tfci;
                   Independent, of,-17 April'                                          -di);:
                  ft«W3$aper&;.- ...*tf©'^remark^-^-rg^k?^. - f c V * «•v # $ X - 7*' j
                  -£t;%erid*d’ ••^illsb o rQ u g h as, gLti^e^odJr ’ft*           *on.             •’ ’ :
                  *1939, ‘Diirin-g 1th# sdifrge --.af "tri©'^.eVi'4fena;d'j.it■''became' '%jpla!r* *
                   that the_.£4?rst £ivp.*6i;it±qisiaS !by‘,'Doct»i, A xeidtl|d ,^ ^ e n ts 's
                   in.: t h e -,afea-'
                                     .b©i$r*d the -'Leppings ■/tar<fe''.'a’tandr'Sn<a--/'^<Bxx&cMS'tf4&V:- ■'■•■;' i
                   25 pi 2ID )■.' I’--;,;---*/*:*.:.*'' \
                   - .             ./"'■.        •' ' ’   : *' ■'."
                                                                  ••            ;-/ ■ •(■:■ ■;' .; v \   ■•'.'.<•*v.i ■/    ;-
                                                                                                                             ' :s~i"          :i ' *:-r 1
                  DQCTO




,;*v
   *                    "PACTS
                                                                                                                             i£ ■ ■ *•.*• .£ ,       ^     -

                                        > ^ iice a a r r :■ vir,.;.;. s t .
                                                                                                                    4 . :v*V%UV
                                                                                       ■r^-133.'- »-ana 'i:see '|*±p *
                                                                                                                     ‘u -Fi3H2$^:V
                                                                                                                             v, .
                       ,wi
                   1“         ■*1 5 1 3 . ■• '5-107 sv'.r:
                              : -15^.6.             , ft.ri .                   Ifeayes."■1.52~B)"               ",K ' '■          ■■■'
                       -
                                                  <D-Ji . -i 580                     _ L.froa-- thlSi^ai:
                                                                                                        n.b.ul&ftGe*,                                  s ,
                        *
                                                 ,th©.-:p.!»tcl
                              ■ .1521 ■••*■' S20B' aA':
                                -1535 •.
                                                                                                                            -V    -
                               ‘TH J'S.■do.ptor. g«ci
                               .
                               ,
                               '»,mti-l k b H u t- -rs^s
                                            .                   ,



                                A b o u t '40''^C'asi'iit;t«-::. .iitre                                            Lepp;ixi§;s                    ■ -^ ':
                                ©ndJ.'fey- SYM&&} n sx 'v h ib h - .5 w^res ■                            §•       by                                 '!' ;
       *                        cajua. tie*,’ ha^                   *. *-*
                               ‘ g r o ui i d b y . Ij50^ 3V'4£S:- r a e o r d l ^                                   ||g e. 1                              ^
                             /"•'Therefqrs         , ab
                                         e fo r« k ,  *o3i0^ifjcS":
                                                                  ..
                                                                   ->
                                                                    . 35,
                                                                      3 5 c*a'gOTJt.le:
                                                                                      s^’%                    6m"6hWTv^Sut‘Vi;t6a^i!'                          ,
                                                                                                                                                               X
                              ■.ware ,cc^y&y 34-^1 'B¥MAS •vela^dlefs •'b,e.!S:fee#n ^2^35
                                X6D6*.     . ;*'-';’-
                                                    '
                                                    V\ ' ,v-v*‘V.'           '''"          ' * "r*
                        .".Lapk .of triage5';                     .,
                         ■ ■ 'J.v         ,"■ ,;■•;-:-■1■■>,.,■*■'•■     ,>
                        FAGTrS::                                                                 >
* ■■>.*'•••■4*
             •
                        .■.■',’
                              *
                              . _, ; r* v**X
                               * * . J‘A^ “
                        *» "   ’•. .a •••
                                       see. __________                stfrte^eat^' 'p & i a^feaph..:$' I
                        ;.'.' >. -            Hir. ■Y o it a il.' k                        . .^age^.-•I'-'^F »_...';                             ' * « «

                                  .r■,ieej] *  ' ■--■■■■                ■ -      |w»p^^'gfeapW^' ,1:            v                         f        r
                                             '                       .statemecv^ '5
b.     Other personnel - police * also:

' -'      see 'Miss'         rs evidence -.day 17 .page 1.59E-H-

'"A- full .casualty team .with resuscitation, equipment ..-did
not arrive. £roitt..ttie hospital .until about" 4/15- pm«
FACTS:. .

  a,;' A full c a s u a l t y tea m arrived: at the designated
■'* ..'casualty clearing station .(the. gymnasium) at the.
       Penistone Roafl end- o f 'the ground,..   ’
       statement' paragraph 12 shows that the medical-, -team
       iQft Northern General.Hospital at 1.544; ..It- .would
    .. therefore have been'.'at the ground by 1550. at the very
       latest.
b. 'A casualty team did' hot :attend at Leppings .Lane, '.and
   .all. casualties 'had been-' removed from .that, end -of: 'the
    ground 'by '160.6' (see. -above).' ■                   " :-
•c, '•--K furthsr :casualty team, arrived frcjs .Barnsley
       District.-General Hospital at the designated .casualty
       .clearing etcTiop. but was'not .rs.-qui.rwet, .;
.d,. ■.'The .-isnplloati.cn that only. the casualty tea^a weald
       ■have''. i-esMS.Cite.tlor; equipment .is wrong*- .
                                                        ■ All -SYHAS
         front1 ine ambulances carry portable '.'and fi-jcsij
   ■■■-. resuscitation' equipment, which was used.-at L'app'ing-s
        .lane. 'Fire -service also carried resuscitation
         equipment..
"There was no oxygen, airway‘tubes, and drips,'.'.                .

FACTS
a * -No oxygen- ■            Wrong,, a 11 S Y MA- s f r o n 1 11 n e':..
                             ambulances;, carry pneupac ■minute trta.n
                 ’          .oxygen re^usci'tators and. hav-e'. a
                         .-'"'static supply, of' oxygen on.board,'
b.v.-'No airways -'"Wrong.:-■ .
                        i'-; All' SYMAS- 'frontline .vehicles carry
                             a. .selection .of- airways,: and 'a.large
 ■                     ■ ...number..were, .inserted,       .
                        ii, If the doctor means to refer to the
                           .lack of Intubation equipment/.such
     •■      _           ■: equipment" i s .earned, b y ;paramedics
                            for.-use by them as they are trained
        .■        v                       to use it*. . .A l t hough' there ws-rs.
                                                 'doctors- present; in 'the crowd-
                               ■ ■ ■ . - ' viio 'wsr&.-co-nip3t6n;t "to us§ s u c h
                                       'equipment.': had.it been avail able 'for
                                          general use ■■ (apart '     ■'■£ roar .t"hat':
                             v           brought -by. paramedics and the
                                         medlcai teani} i t i s Unpractical to
                                         expect' a supply .of. such equipment,
                                         which can only safely be 'used .by"
                                        "those .trained to use it-, to be
                                         available .o n the;'dffchance.', that
              : .'                ,'    suitably .'qualified persons may be
                -                        among' spectators.,, (This ..doctor
                                       ■ -admitted .that it waa soae. tiros
                                        . s i n c e .he had c a r r i e d out an
                                         intubation hlciself - s e e .day 25.
                                        -page 124D),
                            'ill, A- consulfc&n.t "anciesthe.ti.st (day 25
                             :    p27D->'.- agreed that If "the tuba ■vs re
                          -      'wrongly -inserted it- ;ccul<3. .kill-the
                  • '.. .     ;. '       s;r\t-
                                              , T'*v<s*'t re&tment thac, was
                                  being- -ad «-.tni s x. e-rad by. ‘p 01 ics
 .     ■                          'ofl-iosrsv fans,           "     ... y         '
  ■ ’■                                                , .tritely -CPF, 'w-;5:?? 'th®-
                                 'correo-t c-i«.aifflesn .-i-h £ ft e
    ■                   .'■       circaiTiSteru.'aft and uf.doiitt.-v51y. di.-;;5.
                            : . -save lives*■             ■ '■■    ■ ...■.;
c; '!'Jo;.drips .'                -    'Wrong;                    'i
                      ■" .       ' ■J'Infusion -gquip^ent ■is carried.-by
                  :                   ■.-parajifj-edics/'--and 'requires, special
                                      - training-,' howe-vei:, -there. is' no
                                     .'■.evidence' that "any casualty; w&a
                                      .prejudiced by the .lack 'of -'infusion
                               '
                               ■ '.'; 'equipment,                ■ -. . ,
                          . 'ii< "Mad'ieal -T.«atft (gymnasium) ''obviously
                  ■     '.-   - - nac..'1'.V* drips: because spectator
             :                    'nurse f j 'Eoc.l'«.stoh gave -svidsncs.
              -       : " ' .. '.. that ha .*»£■;■£ .'up iC drips -ready tor
                                   doctors.. {Transcript-day; .5-pl5'0.>-. ■'■

".More ■lives' could 'have. bd-sri saved, if-.staff                    mid equiprasnt
had ariivsd -sirlier "                   ■-

FACTS i ; ' ' '              ' -- -:          ; ;                        . ..
a,:' Before ha was refltindsd' .that he 'had            ..s-uch ■ &.
      statement to the .press> Ds: In.- chief'('day 25 page
    . to' 116G ) accepted; that 'it.' was' .pure ;speculation
                  whether or not further ■lives;could have b&mi saved
                  .(day 25 page 11-5G to' tl&h), 'and on. -cross 'examination
                  {day. 2 S- page 1-2 7 C to D ) agreed that it -was
               -''"unfortunate" that" he .had:-so-ught out. the press to
            '• ' .make public pronouncements 'which it was not. possible.-
               ...'for him to. -make.
                    if as SYMAS submit, '.'the,■crushing started at,-the very
                    latest at 14 5 9 , by ■the time, that: .any aisfiical
                   .a s s i s t a n c e -got: to the most --severely;, crushed
                    spectators they h&$ been deprived of -oxygen, for' -over
                    4 minutes and -therefor®-' it. -is., unlikely that t-h©
                   ■ presence -or otherwise-' of -such equipment,..-       -any
                    practical' difference,-,-                                  .h ■              .."•••



6,           "Complains about the 'lack. :.of 'defibrillators-1’■                                .

     :--               ■■       "■


     '■■'.s.- We'fcsiieve 'tha't the i n q u i r y e.c.;:&pts 'that the- use of
■           ■ dai'lofiJ-lator®, on. the'pitch- in 't-na oircuTRstanc^'s cj£
              this t r & g e <1y vv,o•11 a ■ft.a 'v<& ';:tear;..- ct:o f © f?s i o a a 1 1 v-
              ix'-r©wyQnsitla,                      v,
                                                     -
                                                     3 w \-tay 'isi-i
              11    ‘#e“ 4t- , ;
           '.b.     Ift .caaet t*nyhou1y hs.y afiV.' ficujts abcat It we/.list- tiife
                  : ttitx i.ciiJ,tias i ;   .'...-.                        -
                       h      "I-f.           u^sh it can,, kill:
                               ■ - the' patient'
                                   th® operator                -'
                                                                ■
                            ■'.    any.'.: third party..corning into -contact -t;lth the
                                  .patient,                           ^            '
    - .■■'■'         Mi. ■ Before 'l i & i r t q ' u s & 4 i m x i o m l .-gv.ia.sa-i-n&s -.far
                      '---. aiTibuisnc&men lay -.Sown .that -..an. ECG-.reading lor
                              «.hi'igiiL. iJ; .*/*.>
                                                   .^     , oht-s.li"i€iO. ■i'sott. tbss -iiia-Dairie .
                                                                                                      ,
                      '-'. ■ In. ort3er foih the- reasJiny ■«m.d 'diagnosi-t 'to: os
            .            '
                         . . accurate the patient •and' th* CBlLbxri 11a t o r ' m m i
           '-     . - .'   ■■h& oo'Kpi^tely IsGlAted frost; .Any mov&irmnt ant.
■■'■■■■■            -         t -he -' s u r r o u n d i n g envixcnsient .must ts.
         '        ;: ; sufficiently .sth&ie to permit -an' a-cc-yratc
     - .'■              :'' SSS-DS.ySiint c-f - ths ECG". rsccrfed. Spu-icta
                             ■readings can-occur, in-a crowd', "- .                        .. .-. ..
                v -ill, .'in- -the 'circara.etsftces of .this .tragedy when
                         other!4 i.3 €s' relatively t it ■individual, s w<$ra
      '.          . '" rendered" hypoxic'.(lack -of oxygen}, . the- 'likoly
                         h&art 'pattern is asystole (continuous- x ins. or

                                                   4 '''




                                                                                          it'C
                                            electrical activity with no effective' heart
                         .          •’contractions) ■and n o t ' ventricular fibril lation.
                                     The purpose of a -clef ibriilator J.e -to jolt a
                                     fibrillating .heart rhythm 'back, into a' normal
                                     pattern, •• The standard" treatment for 'asystole;
                                     is CPS. Successful CPR would normally produce
                                   ■ :a. regular heart ■pattern rather- than ventricular
                                     fibrillation.
                      - iv* However,. ■given the length of time during which
                          ' most of the '.patients had. .been deprived of
                             oxygen, ©yen the use of a defibrillator would
                            ■not have made any practical 'difference (see Dr
                             t»'3 statement to- the police, page 7 "Rsy
                             thoughts that In view of the length .of time he
                           .'■was pulseless' it would probably be kinder if he-
                             died*    I am -sure he must have, been severely
                             brain damaged by that time" and at .the bcttcm .
                             of the* page. ,51 locked ■desperately for somebody
                             not '-dead but seriously .II1 who 'needed help. '.-I
                             could not find anybody in that category in /the.
                            .goal ''arsSv I/hay we're either''all d%aa oz -okay
..     ■                     with no.tfii.ng- in beiwesri,i!} ..


1, . A .list 'of &qy ips'.sni                                            by- e.l I            i rorv: I in s-
     ttmbularscee Is .appfex’Jaci hereto,
2,           ’ -v* i«* ‘                              1.. >. 4 i :       '   A       T “> *              '   1
       .■not b y ' t h i r d                                         '                         '             ■
3,-’ Biich of the equlpw&nt >a-g to fc»& kspt.with the amtu,‘&sic&
     for .use on. the .joymay to. hospital.
4,, -The primary purpose of ih& afiiDuleftos ■is tc-'give inm9dlat&^
 ;.        treat.r51c.rvt ' t o * c a s u a l t i e s and c o n v e y th s i“v t o h o s p i t a l , .

5,      On 15 April 1985.. ina n y —5 I'MIV3 . aiti»u.l'a.rtcem.en treated
                           wiiiJ 'CPR a n d r e s u s c i t a t i o n , s s v®; a,
           c a S : j g i i , ' c i ‘S   &                                                                        < ? & -


      ' -conveying -172 i n j u r e d , t o h o s p i t a l , ' . Any ' c r i t i c i s m o-f la-sk ■'
      ' of a-qiiiiiittfirtt Oft SYW&S'vehicles- is. iil^nriformed.
          OUTLINE COMMENTS ON VARIOUS'FACTORS RELEVANT TO THE
            MATTERS WITHIN THE "INQUIRY'S TERMS OF "REFERENCE

PREAMBLE

We expect that most of the matters set out below have been
accepted already by the Tribunal, but we list them to demonstrate
S Y M A S ' strength of feeling that the disaster should not have
occurred, and could have been avoided.

1*   CHOICE    of    ground

     A,      Leppings Lane End

             1.1      Inevitably,- because of need for segregation,
                      Hillsborough1s design was not safe to accommodate
                      one set of supporters if they had to enter the
                    ■ ground at Leppings Lane.
             1.2     There is an obvious bottle neck leading into the
                     outer perimeter .gates and' there is the a d d e d ’
                     problem of channelling the supporters into the
                     appropriate.turnstiles for the north stand, the
                     west stand..and the west terracing.
            1.3      It should be noted that the shortest distance
                     across'the funnel leading into the outer perimeter
                     gates is only; 24 metres <
            1.4      Once the supporters gain access through the outer
                     perimeter gates those heading for turnstiles A-G
                     have to negotiate' a m i n i m u m bottleneck of. 8
                     metres between the handrail .leading, down from
                     turnstile G and. the edge of turnstile. 16.     The
                   ■ maximum distance across turnstiles A-G is only 13
                     metres,

     B*     Turnstile FlowJRatg
           .■1,1 The      L i v e r p o o l $ u p p o r t & r s w e r e a 11 o c a t e d
                    .approximately 24, 500 tickets for the semi -final,
                    covering .the north stand and the west stand, and
                    terracing,
            ■1,2    Paragraph 47 of the .Green Guide gives a maximum
                    notional rate per turnstile at. which spectators
                    can pass through,, not exceeding 750 persons par
                    hour *
            1.3 Based on the figure of 23 turnstiles for 24,500
                 spectators, .at the rate of 750 per hour,, it would
               . take almost 1 1/2 hours for 24,500 spectators to
                 gain entry into the ground.
^    BY:^ER(3i< TELEC
                i u l u uOjPIER
                           t i w 7fdujma
                                   0 1 0 *; 3
                                            5 - v7 - a
                                                     89y   1 22:3 6 PPM
                                                                ! 36  M ;;                    0 7 4 2 7 0 0 5 6 8 -s
    FROM    D   L   B   SOLICITORS                                           7i •   s    lqoq
                                                                                        • 13 b i    1i : 2 8           P , 10




                                 1.4       If one then takes the figure of 7 turnstiles for
                                           the 10,100 s p ectators for the west stand
                                           terracing, based upon the notional rate in
                                           paragraph 47, it would almost take 2 hours for the
                                           10,100 spectators to gain entry,

                                 1.5      It s h o u l d be clearly noted that the above
                                          estimates represent the minimum possible time to
                                          allow spectators into Hillsborough based upon the
                                          Green Guide figures.

                                 1.6      The Inadequacy of the turnstiles to accommodate
                                          24.500 spectators appears to have been recognised
                                          by the South Yorkshire Folic© and SWFC,       See
                                          Transcript day 11 p38o-G.

                                 1.7      In our submission it was absurd to believe that
                                          24.500 spectators could have been safely allowed
                                          entry through Lappings Lane in the time available.

             2.          FAILURE TO DELAY KICK-OFF
                         2.1 The senior officers inside the police control box
                              should .have realised by 1430 hours that the crowd of
                              supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance could not
                              get into the ground by .1500 hours even on the .most
                                 optimistic of flow rates through the turnstiles.

                         2.2    It therefore follows that kick-off should .have been
                                postponed prior to or very shortly after 1430 hours,
                                and Indeed many people were under the impression that
                                kick-off had been delayed,
             3 *         OPENING OF GATE C

                        3.1    The decision    to open. Gate C was inevitable in all
                                circumstances,, but the failure to prepare and cater for
                                the resultant ingress of supporters into the concourse
                                behind the west stand and then, onto the terracing, was
                                a clear and fundamental mistake by .the police,
             4.         SIGNING AND LAYOUT OF CONCOURSE
                        4.1. Once supporters -found themselves in the concourse area
                             behind the west stand the directional signs onto the
                             terracing was so poor that it resulted in the majority
                             of supporters quite reasonably deciding that there was
                             no way o n t o the terracing other than through the
                             central tunnel.

                        4.2    .The situation was made worse by the presence of the
                               internal wall which although useful for a normal match,
                                probably dissuaded many supporters going to their left
                                after entering through turnstiles A-G and Gate C.

                                                                             2
^   BY:XERO« TELEC O PIER 7 0 1 0   ;   5 - 7 -8 9   7 2 : 3 7 P M 7 ~" ‘      >742    700568^        "     ^   "
    FROH^ D L B SOLICITORS                                            7,    5.1989    12:,9                         p_u   '




                  4.3     There were clearly enough officers in serial 14 to make
                          a line, to direct spectators to pens 1,, 2, 5, 6 and 7-
                          see PC Burton day 17 p21G to p22D.

           5-      LAYOUT OF TERRACE

                   5.1    The layout of the radial fences, perimeter fence gates
                          and barriers was, at the v e r y least, p i e c e m e a l ,
                          haphazard and carried out with little or insufficient
                          thought concerning the safety of supporters on the
                          terracing.

                   5.2    The emphasis in erecting the radial fences, perimeter
                          fence gates and barriers was clearly on containment of
                          the supporters on the terracing, and for example we
                          would point to:

                          a.        the disagreements as to the use of the gates in
                                    the perimeter fences in the event of emergency
                                    evacuation;

                          b.        Dr E a s t w o o d 's assertion (unsupported by other
                                    members of the Working P a r t y ) that b r e a c h of
                                    paragraph 115 of the Green Guide was.a deliberate
                                    policy decision. Please see Dr Eastwood’s plan N o
                                    1 1 4 2 4 - 8 w h i c h shows that the gaps  were in
                                    existence before, he obtained his retainer from the
                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, i.e. pre-1978,
                                    and were made by the removal of existing sections
                                    with no new uprights being constructed.

          6*      SIZE OF GATES IN PERIMETER FENCE

                  The perimeter gates leading onto the perimeter track are
                  clearly too narrow for the purposes of emergency evacuation
                  onto the pitch area.

          7-      ESTIMATION OF TERRACE CAPACITY

                  The capacity of the whole of the west stand terracing, and
                  in   p a r t i c u l a r p e n s 3 and 4, has been clearly wrongly
                  calculated * Reference should be made to document headed
                  "Sheffield Wednesday Football Club west terrace - ideal
                  distribution of persons" for pens 3 and 4,            The Health. &
                  Safety Executive has calculated that the maximum numbers of
                  spectators for pens 3 and 4 are 822 for pen 3 and 871 for
                  pen 4. . Furthermore, if one takes into, account paragraph 216
                  of the Green Guide, the appropriate capacities of pens 3 and
                  4 are substantially reduced, to 542 for pen 3 and 605 for
                  pen 4.




                      —                 • \                                                   ••   V. v .   .
CU    B Y J X E R o I TELECOPIER 7 0 1 0   ;   5 - 7 -8 9   1 2 :3 7 P M   ;              0742 7005684   0 5 3 2 4 2 6 6 5 6 ;* 1 2

     F R0 MP D L 8   SOLICITORS                                                7.   5. 1989   1. 2*36              P , 12




              8.       LACK OF ANTICIPATION
                       8.1      Whatever criticisms can be made of the Liverpool
                                supporters, it appears fairly clear that the South
                                Yorkshire Police should have anticipated the sort of
                                behaviour from the Liverpool fans which they alleged
                                took place on 15 April 1989.
                       8.2      In particular, this is borne out by the evidence
                                gathered by the South Yorkshire Police during the
                                course of the Inquiry, and served In the last week of
                                evidence given to the Inquiry. This documentation
                                contains numerous reports of behaviour by Liverpool
                                fans during the course of the 1988-89 football season
                                which indicates a pattern of behaviour identical to
                                that which took place on 15 April.
                       R.3      The following are examples of such reports:
                                      1, Humberside Police - Hull City v Liverpool dated
                                         18 February 1989.
                                    ii, Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
                                        dated 12 December 1988.

                                  ill.. Metropolitan Police - Arsenal v Liverpool dated
                                        9 November 1988.
                                    iv. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
                                        dated 24 September 1988,

                       8.4       In addition, during the course of the 1987-88 season,
                                 there is a report from the Hertfordshire Constabulary
                                 concerning the Watford v Liverpool game which took
                                 place on 13 February 1988 where 1,500 L i v e r p o o l
                                 supporters arrived at the ground without tickets and
                                 were allowed in.
      ! IE R • ■ ^ l ^ ' ;^ ;' ^ ' ' ^ 2 ^ - - ^ 4 2 ' : 4 « ^ - . ;   1'i?::"'' ■'■■ •   '0 7 4 2 ' 7 0 0 5 6 8 -*   Mi»26SS6;
SOLI CI TORS                                                           ’.      5.1989               !: 3 8               P . 23




SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - FAILURE TO RECOGNISE THE DISASTER


  SYMAS’ submission is that South Yorkshire Police were in a
  position to identify the existence of a disaster by 1459
  hours at the very latest*        In fact, as the attached
  chronology shows, they failed to do so before 1505 hours and
  failed to call SYMAS until 1508 hours*

  In view of the unchallenged medical evidence it is SYMAS'
  submission that those 9 minutes were critical, and of all
  the claims that lives could have been saved, this is the
  only one with any merit.

  SYMAS' submission Is that there is evidence to indicate                                                                    that
  supporters were being crushed to death by 1459 hours                                                                            and
  that this was evident to anyone whose mind was                                                                                  pot
  conditioned by the need to contain supporters within                                                                            the
  central pens.

  It is SYMAS’ submission that the persons who were In a
  position to, and should have recognised the plight of the
  persons in pens 3 and 4 , are the police officers In the
  control box, and those stationed along the perimeter track
  in front of pens 3 and 4,

  Evidence
 a.         Photographs South Yorkshire Composite Album 2,
 b.         Photograph produced by leading Counsel for South
            Yorkshire Police on day 19 (transcript 19 pS5D),
            DB17/15.
 c.         Photographs taken by the Liverpool Echo and produced, to
            the Inquiry by Counsel for the Football Supporters
            Association. Document 278.
 d.         Transcripts of messages received and despatched by
            Force Control at Snig Hill.
 e.         Evidence of witnesses - both fans and police.

 We shall deal with each of the above in turn but propose
 Initially to draw the Tribunal's attention to the following
 chronology compiled from various sources.
D | TQ-ECOPltK 7010 J 9- 7-S9              1S:40FM i               0 7 4 2 •/tttJbfcpF'1   ■«»324Z5e»e«e;
. |li B S O L I C I T O R S                            7. 5 . 1 9 8 9   12:33                    P . 16



 ■X
                                                                           If



                 Schedules of Times Taken from Videos and Transcripts

  KEY
              VIDEOC:
              There are four videos to which reference is made, namely:
              RJH2                      This is the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                        film taken from the camera which has a fixed
                                        view onto the back of the courtyard behind
                                        turnstiles A-G.
             MAPI £ MAP9 -              These are tapes of videos made by BBC Outside
                                        Broadcast unit one using an operator set
                                        database and the other using a computer set
                                        database. For the purposes of this schedule
                                        no distinction is drawn.
             TB2                        This is the film made by South Yorkshire
                                        Police on the CCTV system using operator set
                                        database.
 B.          TRANSCRIPTS
             SYMAS 1                  Track 9                           DOCUMENT 128. These are a
                                                                        transcription of tapes
             SYMAS 2                  Tracks 10 & 11                    made at SYMAS HQ of calls
                                                                        received from Force
                                                                        Control SNIG HILL.
             SNIG             1       SA/1. KWP 30/15/17                This is a transcription
                                      Document 34                       of tapes made at SNIG HILL
                                                                        Force Control (F/C) con­
                                                                        taining messages received
                                                                        trora SWFC Police Ground
                                                                        Control (G/C) and messages
                                                                        transmitted by F/C to
                                                                        other police units
             SNIG             2   -   SA/2 KWP 30/15/18                 This is a continuation of
                                                                        the transcript of SNIG 1

             SNIG             3       SA/6 KWP 30/9/17                  This is a transcript of
                                      Document 129                      a separate tape made at
                                                                        F/C containing messages
                                                                        from F/C to the Fire
                                                                        Service and SYMAS

             SNIG             4       F1A 1230                          This is the Extended
                                      Document 73                       Incident Log compiled
                                                                        F/C. For the purposes of
                                                                        this chronology this/tape
                                                                        is not relevant.    4
                                                                                               •• « i: >v   ■• ■■•■ ' '   .......   -■        i.y.v

B Y : XEROX ’f ftLE C O P IE R 7 0 1 0   i S - T-SI "£gf4MbM   J                                      -■    ''
                                                                                                             •
                                                                                                             ■5S32426SSS; #1
FROM    D L    B SOLICITORS                                        :. 1 9 8 9    12:33                                                   P. 1 7


       | -v ":CV:r¥




                     SNIG        5 .«        KWP 30/14/17                  ) This is a further
                                             Document 254                  ) transcript of SNIG 1
                                                                           ) containing the background
                                                                           ) messages on the tapes
                                                                           ) representing inter alia
                                                                           ) traffic picked up from
                                                                           ) v h f channel 25 which was
                                                                           ) being monitored by F/C.
                                                                           > The times on this tape
                                                                           ) are identical to that on
                                                                           )    R N T fi 1 .




          C.        NOTE

                    There is a discrepancy between the times recorded on SYMAS
                    computer transcript and SNIG HILL transcript. They are only
                    a matter of seconds in most cases and for the purposes of
                    this chronology the times have all been taken where two are
                    available from the SNIG HILL transcript.       In such oases
                    where there is no SNIG HILL transcript and the titns
                    sequence, as recorded on the SYMAS transcript, is not in
                    line, a figure in brackets represents the best estimate if
                    the SNIG HILL time is applied to the SYMAS transcript.
 B Y : x G R O > /m .E C O P I E ® !7 0 1 0

F R O M •D i2 B S O L I C I T O R S
       :    t
       i        i }




            TXMtS                      SOURCE         EVENT

            14.48.04                   Video RJH2     GATE C opened: Surge of about 150
                                                      people per HSE Report p.7.
            14,48.31                   Video RJH2     GATE C closed.
            14.51.30                   SNIG 5 p.l     "Speech heard in background"
                                                      "Letting anybody through," "It's
                                                      bloody chaos at Leppings Lane
                                                      because tnousands can't get in,
                                                      they have just broken gates down
                                                      and Superintendent M a r s h a l l ’s
                                                      screaming for them to open the
                                                      inner gates and to let people in
                                                      and Murray'a saying in control,
                                                      we've got to monitor tickets, if we
                                                      get Liverpool mixed up with Notts
                                                      Forest they're going to have
                                                      trouble even if we get a serious
                                                      problem,"
           14.52.06                   Video RJH2      GATE C opened for second time.
                                                      Entry of about 2,000 people per HSE
                                                      Report p.7.
           14.53                      SNIG 1          F/C giving out messages to other
                                                      police v ehicles c o n c e r n i n g a
                                                      missing policeman.
           14,53 to                   SNIG 3 pp.2-6   Chat and banter between F/C (PC
           14.58                                      Rook) and other forces about not
                                                      accepting any loads due to the
                                                      football match.
                                                      SYMAS submit that listening to the
                                                      tape gives no indication of any
                                                      crisis or concern in F / C ,

           14.57                      SNIG 1 p.7      Superintendent Brougham radios in
                                                      that he attended Leppings Lane end
                                                      with a PA but "they've already got
                                                      a PA in use there so we are now
                                                      resuming back to driving school".
                                                      Again listening to the tape no
                                                      suggestion of any panic or concern
                                                      in F/C.
           14.57.35                   RJH2 & TB2      GATE C closed,    Area behind GATE C
                                                      is clear.
           14.58                      SNIG 1 p.7      Reports from traffic control that
                                                      city centre clear of traffic.
FROM- ,D L 6 S O L I C I T O R S                       7. 5 . 1 9 S 9   1 2:3 1      P . 14




           14.59                   SNIG 1 p,8         Telephone call to Ground Control "I
                                                      don't know whether we need any
                                                      yet" " n o J L' m ring i n g Ground
                                                      Control".
                                                      PC Waugh rings G/C (PC Ryan) “Yes
                                                      i t's ops. Do y o u w a n t a n y
                                                      a m b u l a n c e s . We are trying to
                                                      monitor to you but you know it’s
                                                      ..." Ryan: "it’s chaos at the
                                                      moment, we've got no reports Of
                                                      injuries but we, if you can monitor
                                                      the situation if you can just keep
                                                      standing by.*
           14,59.12                RJH2               GATE C opened third time.    Steady
                                                      stream being monitored by mounted
                                                      police.     Fans having to show
                                                      tickets (see evidence of Macrell
                                                      transcript day 30 p. 99E-G).
           15.02                   SNIG 5 p.8         "Background speech" "Superintendent
                                                      Marshall are you calling me, over"
                                                      "Can we close the gates again?"
                                                      "Yes, they can be closed, God
                                                      blase?"
           15.04                   SNIG 1 p.9         G/C calls for dog handlers.
          15.04 to                 SNIG 1 pp.9 6 10   F/C summons dog handlers to GATE 0.
          15.06
          15.06.10                 SNIG 1 p.10        G/C calls Operation Support.

           15.06.30                SNIG 1 p.10        F/C sends more dog handlers.

          15.07.01                 SNIG 3 p.8         F/C puts SYMAS on notice that
                                   SYMAS 1 p.l        "ambulances might be required",
                                                      Conversation between PC Rook and
                                                      Superintendent Clarke.

          15.07,50                 SNIG 1 p.11        G/C - F/C: "Fleet of ambulances to
                                                      Hillsborough."

          15.08                    SNIG 3 p.9         G/C - SYMAS: (continuation of the
                                   SYMAS 1 p.3        same phone call as at 15.07.01)
                                                      "Fleet     of  ambulances       to
                                                      Hillsborough".

          15.08.50                 SNIG 1 p.12        G/C (Ryan) to F/C: "Ambulances to
                                                      Leppings Lane end please, Leppings
                                                      Lane." "Roger, ambu l a n c e s to
                                                      Leppings Lane end."
                                                      PC Waugh to SYMAS
           SYMAS 1 p.4
15.09      per SNIG HILL   ) "Ambulances to Leppings Lane end
           times           ) a big fleet immediately, as many as
                           ) you've got please."
15,09.40   SNIG 1 p.13       F/C to G/C: "la ACC with you?"
                             "Please confirm operation Support"
                             ACC gives confirmation.
15.10.55   SNXG 1 p.10       F/C (Rook) to SYMAS: "Just to let
           SYMAS 2 p.l       you know we have called Operation
                             Support.        There are hun d r e d s
                             i n j u r e d t r a m p l e d underfoot,
                             everything." SYMAS tells Rook that
                             they are responding.
15,20.10   SNIG 2 p.l        G/C to F/C: "Can you confirm we
                             have more ambulances on route-
                             only have 3 at this location at
                             present."
15.23.50   SNIG 2 p.3        F/C to G/C: "Our last instructions
                             were for ambulances to Leppings
                             Lane. Is there any change? Over"
15.24.30   SNIG 2 p.4        F/C to G/C: "We would like some
                             ambulances also to GATE 0. Things
                             are getting blocked up at the
                             Lappings Lane, some ambulances to
                             GATE O please."
15.24.50   SNIG 2 p.4        F/C to G/C: "Where's GATE 0?"!!
15.28,30   SNIG 2 p.7        G/C to F/C: "Could you ask for a
                             radio message Hallam to request the
                             crowd application - yes stand by
                             yes. Requesting for doctors to
                             attend at the stadium, doctors at
                             the stadium."

15.29      SNIG 2 p.7        F/C to G / C : "Roger, requesting
                             Radio Hallam for doctors to attend
                             at the stadium, over."
        >■-■■                 - ' --
    XEROX TELECOPIER 7 0 1 0    ;   5 - 7 -8 9    1 2 :3 0 P M            0742 7005684   0 5 3 2 4 2 6 6 5 6 ;8
FRQ/M    D L B SOLI CI TORS                                          5.1989   12:22               P.    2
        /V




                                                 SUBMISSIONS OF SYMAS

          PART B
          1.    SYMAS submit that the telephone call at 14.59 from Snig Hill
                to Ground Control by PC Waugh was not, as claimed by PC
                Waugh, prompted by overhearing the conversation between
                Superintendent Marshall and Ground Control.
          2.     It is SYMAS1 submission that the length of time that elapsed
                 between the end of the communication from Superintendent
                 Marshall and the making of that call (some 8 minutes) is
                 consistent with an urgent call being made as a result of
                 overhearing scenes of desperation ana crowd distx
                 indicating a need for ambulances.
          3.    Triepropose to deal with each gate in turn in support of our
                 contention that in fact it must have been the cries of
                 distress from supporters within the perimeter fence and the
                 request by officers stationed at the perimeter gates which
                 prompted the call by PC Waugh.
          WAS IT GATE C?
          1.    Waugh alleges that it was Gate C in his statement and in his
                 evidence to the Tribunal.
          2.    However, his statement was not made until 27 June 1989,
                 after the existence of that conversation had been discovered
                 by Counsel for SYMAS.
          3.    In chief (day 31 p.lllB) PC Waugh said that he had
                telephoned G/C "immediately after” the repeated requests for
                 the gate to be opened.
          4.    In cross examination {day 31 p.H4D) PC Waugh confirmed that
                he had made the telephone call "within seconds" of hearing
                the repeated requests to open the gates.
          5.    There is no evidence from Marshall that he asked Gate C to
                be opened on the third occasion. In any event the evidence
                is that the third opening of Gate C was a controlled
                operation not caused by a crush outside. See:
                 - Bain: statement p.4 at the bottom of the page,
                 - Mr Madorell: transcript day 30 p.99E-F
                 - RJH2: supporters still entering at a steady stream
                   (14,59.12).
                 The 8 minute time lapse between "Superintendent Marshall's
                 screaming for the gate to be opened" (14.51.40) and the
                                                                 1




                                                                                            #
RCU   B Y : XEROX TELECOPIER 7 0 1 0   ;   5 - 7 -8 9    .1£:30P M ;                       0 7 4 2 70 0 5 6 8 -4        0532425555; # 3
      FROM   D L B SOLICITORS                                          7   .   5   .   19,59    12:23                        p   3




                      telephone call made by PC Waugh (14.59.30) is not consistent
                      with PC Waugh's making the call "immediately after" or
                      "within seconds of" hearing the repeated requests. No panic
                      or dangerous crushing evident from the evidence on the video
                      (RJH2) prior to Gate C being opened for the third time.
              6.     No evidence as to precisely when Gate C was opened for the
                      third time and no evidence that tn© tnird opening was
                      occasioned by any repeated requests from a n officer for it
                      to be done.
              7.     SYMAS submit therefore that it is unlikely that it was the
                      request to open Gate C which occasioned PC Waugh to make the
                      telephone call at 14.59.

              WAS IT GATE B?
              When was Gate B opened?
              1.     Gate B was under the control of serial 15 and Sergeant
                     Burns.
              2.     Stewards                           and Ridge were also present at Gate B.
              3.     The evidence was as follows:
                            3 Statement "Gate B not opened before kick-off."                                                         If
                     this is correct Gate B was not opened before 14.59.30.
                     RIDGE: (day 21 p. 128A) "Police ordered me to open the gate
                     at 14.55, i said "No way"".
                     PC AITKIN: Statement p.4 "Gateb opened.                                                       zuu supporters
                     came through, then with PC Ford and                                                           1 we closed the
                     gate. I looked at my watch it was 15.02,"
                     (day 17 p .61H-p. 62A): PC Aitkinconfirms Ridge   (. .. as to
                     time) but PC referred to gays Gate C already opened *
                     RJH2: No exact time possible but certainly Gate                                                   B was o p e n
                     £y ....^
             Could PC Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate B?
              1.     There is limited evidence as to exactly how Gate B came to
                     be opened * The main evidence comes from Sergeant Burns.
             2.      SERGEANT BURNS: (day 17 p. 30G) "I pleaded with Inspector
                     Bennett to open Gates (B) and stop the crushing outside."


                                                                       2
RCV   BY:XEROX TELECOPIER 7010 ; 5- 7-89   12:31PM ;               0742 700568-s   0 5 3 2 4 2 5 6 5 6 ;«   '4
      FROM   D L B SOLICITORS                          7. 5 . 1 9 8 9   12:23               P.    4




                     Bu L;
                     a.      No mention of possible fatalities;
                     b.      No mention of request being made by radio;
                     c.      In any event Sergeant Burns's radio was not      working
                              (see day 17 p„33G) "Radio dead since 14.30. Not working
                              until I heard the call for pitch invasion."
                     INSPECTOR BENNETT; (day 15 p.66E-G)
                     a.      Not make any request to F/C to open Gate A.
                     b.      Not aware of any such request to F/C. Didnot notice
                              how or why Gate B was opened.
                     In all the circumstances, and in view of the evidence that
                     has been given, w j subjpit it is evident that conversations
                     relating to the/(Gate B to be opened could not have been
                     overheard by PC Waugh.
                     Fans not shouting and screaming. Opening the gate probably
                     surprised them because it was towards their side per Aitkin
                     (day 17 p.62F-G).

              WAS IT GATE A?
              When was Gate A opened?
              1.    According to leading Counsel for the Inquiry Gate A was
                    opened at 14.58 (day ...).
                    INSPECTOR SYKES: Statement p.7 "I have no actual time of the
                    next event, but would estimate it to be at 2,50 and I then
                    saw Gate A open wide,"
                    SERGEANT HIGGINS: (day 17 p.92C) "Made a request that Gate A
                    be opened because I thought someone might be killed outside.
                    That message was received.H No evidence as to when this
                    request was made.
                    SERGEANT GODDARD: (day 18 p.868) Confirms receiving
                    Higgins's message. Says he personally gave permission (I!)
                    relying upon the previous instruction given by Chief
                    Superintendent Duckingfield.   He places the request 3 or 4
                    minutes after the opening of Gate C.    If he is right this
                    will be between 14,56 and 14.57.
                    Statement p.6 "By the time Gate B was opened C Gate had been
                    closed."
‘ j Ro A   b Y:XERO X   TELECOPIER 7 0 1 3   j   5 - 7 -8 9   1 2 :3 2 P M             0 7 4 2 7 00568-4      053242S6llV*rli
           FROM   D L E SOLI CI TORS                                         7.   5.1989   12:24




                            PC CAMMOCK: (day 29 p.38D-F) "Made my way to Superintendent
                            Marshall who was standing on the parapet. Asked permission
                            to open Gate a .
                            No evidence that this request was mad© by radio and
                            therefore submit not been heard by PC Waugh.
                            In any event we submit clearly not Gate A because the entry
                            through Gate A was orderly and controlled by a serial of
                            police officers directing the fang towards the north stand*
                            in any event the weight of the evidence seems to suggest
                            that Gate A was opened because Gate C was opened and it was
                            thought that a general permission to open gates had been
                            given.
                            We submit that in all the circumstances this is unlikely to
                            have been the urgent and unusual circumstances to cause PC
                            Waugh to act as he did.
                            In any event there is no evidence of any requests having
                            been made over the radio and no evidence that such requests
                            were repeated before it was granted.

                   WAS IT THE PERIMETER FENCE GATE TO PENS 3 AND 4?
                   1.      We submit this is the most likely explanation for PC Waugh’s
                           conduct.
                   2.       The evidence is clear from other sources that by 14,59 the
                            disaster had already o c c u r r e d .
                            EVIDENCEI

                            Liverpool Echo Photo document 278.
                            Taken at 14.59
                            Four hallmarks of the crushing clearly present, namely{
                            a.     Perimeter gates open;
                            b.      Spectators climbing over the top of                                    the perimeter
                                   fence
                            c.    Fans climbing up to the seated area of the west stand;
                            d.    Press photographer taking close-up pictures of people
                                   behind perimeter fence in pen 3.
                  3.       Further evidence from photograph DB17-15                                           (document
                           transcript day 19 p.35D-E) document 125.

                                                                             4
FROM   D L E SOLICITORS                  ?.   5 .1 9 8 9   12: 25              P. 6




               "That is timed at 14,59 and it clearly shows the west end,
               the Leppings Lane terraces. One can see to the right of the
               photograph the back of the goal, the goal netting, and one
               can see the gates in the terraces in the perimeter fence
               open,   I think those gates are 3 and 4, and at that time
               there are a considerable number of people already outside
               the perimeter fence. ? ... and your St John's people are
               already assisting? - answer - correct."
               Evidence from serial 1 officers on the perimeter fence
               PC Smith (day 17 p.114-115) stationed at Gate 3
               "I could see people were being pressed up tight against the
               fence; that they had not fallen back as they would normally
               fall back."
               "I think some people were shouting "Open the gate, we are
               crushed" or something like that."
               Cue: "Did you try to get through on your radio to anyone?"
               A; "X tried to shout "Come and open these gates. People are
               dying in here." or something like that. Quite honestly from
               past experience I had no doubt that they would not have
               received that at the time due to the noise of the crowd,
               sir."
               Cue: "Did you realise by then that people were in trouble?"
               A: "Certainly, sir,"
               Cue: "So did you in fact open the gate?"
               A: "We opened them, yes sir,"
               PC ILLINGWORTH (day 17 p.l35C)               On duty at Gate 4 after
               14.50 (day 17 p.l34D)
               P. 135B-E "As   people became distressed and I realised they
               were in pain,   I put a radio message over to say that there
               was a serious situation at the front."
              Cue: "Apart from seeing people in distress, could you hear
              whether they were in distress?"
              A: "Yes"
              Cue: "In what   way, what were they shouting?"
              A: "Words tothe effect of "Help, I'm hurt,                 I'm   being
              crushed,""
                                          5
Cue; "It was obvious to you that people were being crushed I
take it?"
A: "Blatantly obvious, yes.     PC Illingworth then opened
date 4."
Evidence from the fans
Numerous fans gave evidence that in the time running up to
kick-off and at the time of kick-off there were screams for
help and screams to the police drawing attention to the
plight of those at the front of pens 3 and 4.
We submit that it is unnecessary to recite all the fans
whose evidence must be very much in the mind of the
Tribunal.   We particularly rely upon the evidence of Mr
Hicks who was seeking to draw attention of senior police
officers in the police control box to the evident crushing
which he could see from his position in pens 1 and 2,
Summary
We submit that it is abundantly clear that although it is
possible that messages in relation to other gates could have
been picked up by PC Waugh which would have motivated his
telephone call to SYMAS headquarters, the balance of
probabilities indicate that it in fact was cries for help
emanating from the fans crushed behind pens 3 and 4,
We reassert this submission in view of the fact that again,
without request from G /C for them to do so, another officer
at F/C telephoned SYMAS at 15.06 merely to put them on
notice. It is evident that many of the officers at F/C in
Snig Hill were disturbed by the messages that they were
receiving by monitoring the VHF radio channel 2 5 and these
were by 15,08 totally unconnected with any respect to open
gates outside by the turnstiles.
In our submission these calls for help and calls of concern
must have been coming from officers at the perimeter fence
who were clearly upset and perturbed by the evidence before
their eyes.
11 is submitted that this would have been apparent to
officers in the police control box were they prepared to
believe the evidence before their eyes and also to
Superintendent Murray and Superintendent Greenwood when they
went down to the pitch and to investigate why fans were
climbing over tne perimetex ftmwe.
Superintendent Greenwood (day 12 p. 99E) identified himself
as the inspector in photograph South Yorkshire Police 2
(bundle F) photograph PR1/9A.        At that stage 15.02
Superintendent Greenwood asserted that he was merely
assessing the situation.   He accepted that it was clear if
one looked at those crushed behind the fence that some were
in difficulties and being crushed,        A perusal of the
following photographs; 1/10A shows that far from assessing
the situation Superintendent Greenwood in fact has caught
hold of a fan and is pulling him back towards the fence.
Evidence from the BBC recording   maf9   and 10
From an early stage shortly after 15.00 the commentators
viewing the pictures being produced by the video observed
that the problem is being caused by overcrowding and fans
are spilling over onto the pitch.
Evidence of the call for Op^r^tion Support from G/C
In our submission this was clearly in response to what was
then identified as a pitch invasion and not recognising that
in fact a major emergency had occurred.
We submit that it is abundantly clear that the tragedy
commenced some time before 15.00, that the tragedy was
identified by junior police officers present at the
perimeter gates at 14.59 and onwards, that that tragedy was
not Identified for whatever reason by senior officers until
15.05.24 (MAPI) when Superintendent Greenwood went onto the
pitch.
It is regrettable that no call was made to Sy m a S until 15.08
for ambulances because given their response time it is
likely, that they would have arrived at the ground in
sufficient numbers to have made a material difference to the
number of deceased than they were otherwise able to.

One is not able to say if in fact anybody’s life would have
been saved or, if so, how many but one is able to say that
undoubtedly had the disaster been recognised toy those in
authority earlier than it was and the appropriate assistance
been called some 8 minutes earlier than it was then
undoubtedly the chances of survival for many of the people
who were pulled out dead would have been enhanced.




                            7
              SYMAS-'. Interiia 'Reoosmendatlons

At any Specified Activity whore the attendance is expected
to exceed -25,000 and/or '.the past history an d/ p r other
circumstances indicate that ambulance service, presence is
desirable (a "critical match"), the. holder of the safety
certificate should invite ..'th© 'Statutory ambulance-, authority
to attend with .such personnel, vehicles and- equipment a s
shall he agreed between them but in. any event not .less .-than
an officer with o n e 'v e h i c l e .and crew, the appropriate
payment being mads by the holder o f the safety certificate,
This is in addition to the present attendance of St John
Ambulance Brigade or the British Red Cross, '


Each club being the' holder of a.safety certificate,, should
maintain a first aid room, ©quipped to a basic standard, as
specified by the licensing, authority after consultation with
th© appropriate■ambulance authority.        ■


The Football League,. Football Association and the relevant
licensing authority.should require .Qluba holding safety
certifXcstes and intendinq to' stege a -critical .m«tch to
arrange''that; the doctor in at tend.®nee;
a,   -is trained., and ..competent in- advanced first aid to a
     .standard equivalent to a NHS TA -Paramedic;
h.   is available   to traat any injured        spectators and to
     attend the .'first eid room, when celled upon, to' do so.

There shall be an agreed'and common method of comraun icat ian
■between all the emergency services, if necessary with -the
assistance of a. dedicated- radio and/or telephone direct link
to the ground and the respective -headquarters.


Before each ■critical .match the 'liaison officers from the
police■and.ambulance service should siatee contact and arrange
to be .in direct contact' with each other during.the match.
The. police' liaison off leer should fee in direct ■contact with
police control..
For,'all designated ground© there should be a j o i n t and
cowman  emergency plan drawn up by the .relevant police,
authority, fir© service, statutory ambulance authority and
the holder of the safety certificate, - The emergency ;plan
should detail;
 a.   The relevant     function of each       service during      an
      emergency.
 b.   Th© liaison officer from each, service, preferably by
      n a m e , their re sp ec ti ve station arid p a r t i c u l a r
      responsibility.
 c*   The agreed rendezvous points for each service and the
      { named) police' officer' who Is responsible for collating
      and issuing information t o , and coordinating ..the.
      response of, the relevant services,
d. 'Emergency access and egress.
e . Casualty clearing point,
 f.   Preferred routes to and from hospitals, to be kept clear,
      by the police during an emergency.

■The licensing authority should satisfy Itself before issuing
the safety certificate- that a. joint and coroson emergency
plan {ss described in paragraph 6 above} is in existence, f o r
the 'designated ground.

The statutory'ambulance authority should _be asked.to advise
the issuing' authority’,for each safety certificate on .the
question of;
a..' .access and egress for ambulances
b.    medical .equipment                           -
'a.   attendance of' ambulance personnel .and- vehicles. a t .
      critical matches
and should be consulted before there is any variation in the
terms of xhe safety certificate »a regards -items a, b and -a
above„

SS Gh 1975 be a m e n d e d
                          so as to require -the 1.1.censing,
authority to deal with applications for safety certificates
within ■six months falling .which it shall be deemed to have
been refused.
1W:25           S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                            0709 829842           >.01




             SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                        AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                             FAIRFIELD. MOORGATE ROAD.
                                                ROTHERHAM S 6 0 2 8 Q .
                                        TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 828820


             OUR REF:                                                        Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
             YOUR REP:                                                              CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                    AMBULANCE OFFICER
             Pleas# ask (or:




    4^0r*       \^,W2          od&zJZS'JZ* O n        Op .

        y   A                    CCXAJ Uag




                                                             *                  *




        O k c a t          (/ 3 ~ ? )
                       i u w o . m icui-ni'*'.- c   ocrkV 1c c              ttYtjy d<iy842     P. 02




Control Assistant                   1400 - 2200 Saturday 15th April 1989.



About 1510 hours X took a call from the Police who said **I want a fleet of
ambulances to Leppings Lane”. 1 passed this information to
as we had already had at least one call from the Police                              told me
that further information was also coming in from Hillsborough.


We mobilised vehicles to the scene.                 Ray Clarke told me to open up an
incident log.   Mr. Hopkins was in control and instructed the second
Middlewood vehicle to be mobilised and then informed us that he would be
going to Hillsborough to assess the situation.


We started to mobilise other vehicles* most of these were through radio
communications via Sid Bidmead.             As best Z could, I logged the vehicles
booking mobile straight away.


                informed the hospital casualties about the situation and
started to notify people for calling in.                    I then went with Mr. Clarke to
operate from the Incident Room on ERC.


I rang Nottingham, they were unaware of the situation, I informed them
about Hillsborough and asked if help was available if it was required, they
said "you only have to ask".


From then on, everything happened at once.


I rang Mr* Smith and informed him of the incident at 1535 hours.                      The
incident log was opened at 1512 hours, this being the time I received a
call from Force control.      The Policeman was panicking, I did not get any
information other than "I want a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane”. I
explained officers and ambulances were located at the ground already, he
did not give me any further information.                    I do not think the Police knew
what was happening when I spoke to them, he just wanted to get off the
telephone.
Station Officer P. Eason




At 1400 hours, myself along with Station Officer Higgins and Qualified
Ambulancemen           and             left Longley Station and proceeded to
Hillsborough Football Stadium.    On arrival at the ground, myself and
Station Officer Higgins liaised with Inspector S Sewell of South Yorkshire
Police. This meeting had been pre-arranged earlier in the week by Inspector
Sewell and myself.


The vehicle was parked as arranged within Entrance ’O ’ via Penistone Road.


Both Station Officer Higgins and myself were carrying portable radios which
were serviceable.    The crev also had a portable radio which was
serviceable.


Hr. Sewell advised us that no problems had been encountered and that
everything was going according to plan.


We took up our position on the pitch perimeter track and at 1459 hours the
game commenced.


A short time after the game commenced, X noticed a disturbance in the crowd
behind the goal at the Leppings Lane standing area and commented on this to
Station Officer Higgins.     It looked as if a scuffle may have been
developing.    Myself and Qualified Ambulanceman              walked down
towards the Leppings Lane end to investigate.      On arrival it appeared that
some of the crowd were agitated and our attention was drawn to a young man
who had a query fractured leg.    He had been brought out of the Leppings
Lane end and on to the pitch near the goal.     At this time there was no
indication of what was developing.


I tried to use my pocketphone in order to summon assistance ie for Station
Officer Higgins to send down Qualified Ambulanceman            with a fracture
pac and a stretcher.    The pocketphone did not work.    I tried moving
location repeatedly but the thing still refused to work.      At this time more
and more fans appeared to be spilling out of a gate within the enclosure
fence and were sitting on the pitch ~ some of them appeared aggressive and
'f       *

     2   .

     Station Officer P. Eason*



     X was aware of people hitting out and aiming kicks at myself,
     and some of the Policemen in the vicinity.       The situation still appeared to
     be little more than a minor disturbance.


     Owing to the hostility rising within the crowd and the fact that my
     pocketphone was useless, I advised                      that ve were withdrawing
     to our original position and we did so.


     Having consulted Station Officer Higgins, all four of us proceeded back to
     the Leppings Lane end with first aid equipment.       The idea was to monitor
     the situation and treat the fractured leg.


     Upon our return to the site, it was obvious that the crowd were even more
     aggressive and I believe that myself and Station Officer Higgins were both
     assaulted.     More fans were on the pitch as               and             splinted
     the mans leg.


     We were still not aware of the severity of the incident, although it became
     increasingly obvious that more and more fans were coming on to the pitch.
     I think I took Mr. Higgins pocketphone and tried to establish contact with
     control, but his pocketphone was not working either*       Mr. Higgins decided
     to return to the vehicle in order to contact control.       We had decided that
     the vehicle on stand by at Middlewood should be brought down to the end of
     Leppings Lane as a precaution.       1 started towards the Leppings Lane end in
     order to assess the ongoing situation.       It was increasingly obvious that
     some sort of trouble was transpiring within the enclosure.        As more fans
     spilled on to the pitch, Police were arriving in large numbers.


     A fan approached me and asked me to look at a little boy who he thought was
     dead, he pointed at a group of people surrounding the body of a small boy
     on the pitch.        I approached the group and a man claiming to be a Doctor was
     vnrVifio n n   fha   Ka   w    V—                             '   * *   ~
Station Officer P. Eason.



the pocketphone repeatedly but to no avail.    I told this Doctor I -w o t Id
summon assistance and then ran back to our ambulance*     Ambulancemen
and     ______ vere by now attending to fans laid on the pitch* I think
someone was kicking             I A Policeman told me he thought some of
the fans were dead or dying.


On arrival at the vehicle 1 contacted control and declared a Major Incident
and was advised to switch to channel one.     I think I asked for more
vehicles and I think I was told they were on the way.     I think X *9^ced for
them to come to our location.


I then went to consult Station Officer Higgins and found him in the Tevr of
the vehicle surrounded by minor injuries.     I told him I was going back
towards the scene and would radio with an update.    He said he would
establish a casualty clearing post at the gymnasium.


At around this time Leading Ambulanceman Flack arrived on scene and I tried
to direct him to the boy on the pitch* but by this time the pitch appeared
to be covered with people, some of them were carrying people on boards and
X directed them towards the gymnasium.


Failing to see the boy, myself and Leading Ambulanceman Flack took a
stretcher onto the pitch and headed towards where I thought he was.       We
found him and he was placed on the stretcher and removed.      I advised th«
Doctor to attend the gymnasium and consult Station Officer Higgins but I do
not believe he did this.


Once again X approached the Leppings Lane end to assess the situation.
People were literally crushed against the fence* some managed to be dragged
out by police through the gate and through tears in the fencing.       Others
were being hauled up into the seating above the terracing.      X did not know
at this time that the people crushing into the fence were standing on
 20-04--1989   10:28         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                0709 829842     P.06
*•


       4.



       Station Officer P. Eason.



       people who had succumbed to the crushing - a lot of fans were screaming for
       help within the enclosure.


       I ran back to the enclosure and was aware that Mr. Hopkins had arrived* we
       made our way onto the pitch and I warned him that the crowd were very
       aggressive.     He said get the incident vehicle to the scene.     I think 1
       radioed this request and I think I was informed it was en route.        At this
       time I started marshalling vehicles which were arriving.       Station Officer
       Higgins and myself had earlier agreed that the vehicles would be reversed
       side by side in twos up entrance *0*.     The vehicles were arriving in
       Penistone Road from the city end and I held them in Penistone Road until I
       could get them into the ground.


       Station Officer             arrived with the incident vehicle and was
       marshalled into the space allocated for him within Entrance ’0*.


       Shortly after this Mr. Jones arrived and confirmed what I was doing.


       For some reason, Divisional Superintendent Dale arrived and 1 think the
       Police told him that the vehicle loading point had been switched to the
       gymnasium entrance 25 yards down the road,        I did not make this decision,
       not was 1 aware of any other Ambulance Officer doing so.


       Divisional Superintendent Dale and myself discussed this and decided to use
       both access points for ambulance loading.


       Qualified Ambulanceman                arrived with a mini bus and I parked him
       on the pavement and told him to stay with his vehicle.        I then informed Mr.
       Jones of this and told him that this vehicle was available for transporting
       walking wounded.
      10:29           S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERVICE              0709 S29842     P.07




5.



Station Officer P. Eason.



At around this time Mr. Jones asked ate to relocate myself and incoming
vehicles to the Herries Road Bus Depot and treat this as an Ambulance
Parking Point.


1 took a further pocketphone and assembled a convoy which proceeded to the
Bus Depot.    1 contacted control and was acknowledged that I was stood by at
Herries Road.


As vehicles arrived X stood them four abreast in an open area at the depot.
I sited sitting case vehicles and a West Yorkshire Incident Vehicle
(equipment) separately vithin the area.     I then gathered Leading
Ambulanceman Flack, Leading Ambulanceman           , Leading Ambulanceman
      and Leading Ambulanceman          and told them Leading Ambulanceman
Flack was staying with me as a relay and advised the others to make sure
the crews stayed together and try to maintain their morale.


I asked Leading Ambulanceman         to complete a list of vehicle fleet
numbers and respective services at the garage.


I was increasingly aware of the numbers of vehicles arriving at the parking
point and 1 tried to contact control with the suggestion that some of the
vehicles might possibly be stood down in order to be used on other
emergency duties, once again the pocketphone refused to work efficiently.
It would receive but not transmit.


Eventually I established a poor contact with control via a Barnsley vehicle
on site and was asked to contact control on landline.
Leading Ambulanceman Flack having disappeared, I took Leading Ambulanceman
      with me into the garage to find a telephone.    With the help of garage
staff, I managed to open a land line in a managers office and 1 contacted
control and was connected to Mr. Page who instructed me to ensure that
0—04—1H09   10:29        S YORKS.PMBULftNCE SERVICE                 0709 829342        P.0S
    «


    6   .

    Station Officer P. Eason.


    either Mr. Jones or Mr. Hopkins contact him by vodaphone as soon as
    possible*


    X had no communication with site so I told Leading Ambulanceman               to
    despatch a runner to the ground with the message, this was done


    Some time later, Leading Ambulanceman             informed me that the vehicles
    at the garage were to be dispersed and that I was required at the gymnasium
    at Hillsborough.


    1 proceeded to the gymnasium and along with other officers I vas briefed by
    the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer,


    Mr. Page decided that Assistant Divisional Officer Motley, myself and
    Station Officer             should remain at the gymnasium and carry out a
    body removal programme if and as necessary,


    Mr. Jones advised me that all bodies were to be removed to the Medico Legal
    Centre, Sheffield.


    Assistant Divisional Officer Morley, Station Officer                and myself
    decided that Assistant Divisional Officer Morley would oversee the overall
    plan, Station Officer________ would be responsible for the radio
    communications and that I would maintain vehicle deployment and appropriate
    documentation.


    Food and drink was organised via South Yorkshire Police.


    Eleven bodies from Northern General Hospital and one from the Royal
    Hallamshire Hospital were transferred to the gymnasium at Hillsborough and
    after appropriate procedures within the gymnasium we commenced removal to
    the Medico Legal centre.
Z?OD   lfcJ•OfcJ   S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERVICE             0709 829842   P.09




7.



Station Officer P. Eason,



In all we removed and transported 94 bodies and accompanying police
personnel between 2130 hours and 0528 hours,


Mr. Hopkina declared the incident closed at 0530 hours and I returned to
Longley Station to organise equipment cleaning.


I eventually left Longley for home at 0640 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
-04-1989   10=30         S YORKS,AMBULANCE SERUICE              0709 829842    P.10




   Control Officer               O9O0 - 1630 OPD - 15.04.89 - stayed until 20.30.



   Superintendent R. Clarke asked for all the spare outpatient vehicles to be
   despatched to Hillsborough.


   12 vehicles were deployed between approximately 1508 and 1600 hours as and
   when they became available from throughout the county,


   1 kept the vehicles updated regarding the hospital status and I also kept
   them on the outpatient channel because of the pressure on the "E" and the
   ERC channels.     I actually used some of these vehicles for "E" calls within
   Sheffield because the incident at the ground had been cleared of all live
   casualties.


   I also used eight of the outpatient crews to transfer cases from the
   Hallamshire Hospital to the King Edward Hospital.     This transfer being
   conducted between 1730 and 1854 hours.     As they had completed their role at
   the incident the crews continued to transfer patients between hospitals.


   At 1534 hours, I transferred a medical team from the Northern General
   Hospital to the scene.


   We kept informing the Hospital of standby requirements, they asked us not
   to do this.


   Doctors and Nurses came on 999 lines to ask if they were required at
   hospital. The telephone numbers to. the hospitals were blockedt the same
   happened with equipment suppliers.


   The press calls were very heavy
All Vehicles on Outpatient Duties


Vehicles sent to scene, Hillsborough football ground.


1206 Bravo
 407 Sierra
 906 Delta
 805 Delta
 801 Delta
 601 Romeo
 505 Romeo
 203 Sierra
 607 Romeo - Single handed
 308 Sierra
 105 Sierra - doing cases for domestic side.
1101 Bravo


1635 hours


 805 Delta - broke down Glossop Road, Claremont Place, duty fitter informed
              and attending.




Transfer to King Edward Hospital from Royal Hallamshire Hospital   (KEH)


 505 2 stretchers toKEH          to   base i805
 607 2 stretchers toKEH - 1735 to     base 1805
1101 2 stretchers toKEH          to   base 1809
 203 2 stretchers to      KEH    to   base 1813
 403 4 double handed      to KEH to   base 1833
 805 1 stretcher
     2 double handedto KEH       to   base 1854
 801 2 stretchers toKEH          to   base 1823
 308 1 stretcher to KEH          to base 1843
-t“iXO    ifcj'Jli        S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842      P.12




  Superintendent T. Dale.


  At approximately 1450 hours I was stood by outside the White Horse Public
  House on Halifax Road.      At this time there were still hundreds of Liverpool
  supporters making their way to the match,           I left this position, thinking
  the match would be starting soon and there would be less chance of any
  incident once the game was underway.


  At some time after 1500 hours I was on the other side of the city, I heard
  Alpha 3 and 4 calling from inside the ground at Hillsborough and I thought
  there was something wrong.       Radio Sheffield reported the game had been
  halted for some reason but did not report why.           1 contacted control who
  were aware something had happened but could not give me much information.
  At this stage I made all possible haste just in case I was needed at the
  ground.       X heard control direct crews to the Penistone Road end of the
  ground towards the gymnasium entrance.


  X do not know what time I arrived at the ground but I contacted Station
  Officer Eason who was stood in the middle of Penistone Road informing
  ambulance crews to reverse into the gateway, the driver to stay with the
  ambulance and the attendant to go and help with the injured.           I asked
  Station Officer Eason how bad he thought the incident was and if there were
  any dead, he replied he thought there were about nine dead at the time.              At
  this stage, 1 think Station Officer Eason asked me to continue with the
  loading of ambulances whilst he found Mr. Hopkins, this I did.           At this
  time there were only two or three ambulances there and supporters with the
  injured and dying were trying to put people into the vehicles either on
  stretchers or on bill boards.       My handset from the staff car did not work
  and X tried to contact control on several occasions but eventually gave up
  trying with the handset.


  Whilst out on the road waiting for ambulances to arrive, I was approached
  by dozens of fans wanting information about relatives, how to get to
  hospital etc,       I saw an ambulance come cut of the South Stand entrance with
  blue lights and horns on.       I thought he was coming to the     incident and 1
  became frustrated because he was stuck in traffic unable to move.           The
  police appeared to be makingno progress with the traffic situation at this
  time.       I asked the Police to make sure the ambulances got through as a
-a4-Ih as    10:32         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERVICE              0709 829842      P.l




   2.



   Superintendent T. Dale,


   priority.     I think the ambulances in the loading area at this time had
   loaded and gone to the Northern General Hospital with a Police motorcycle
   escort.     1 ran   up the road to this crew the driver was Ambulanceman
             from Middlewood, he had two patients on board but at that time I did
   not know where from.     Later I found out the patients were from the Leppings
   Lane end of the ground*      I returned to the loading area to Station Officer
   Eason.


   At this X went into the gymnasium to see Mr. Hopkins.      His instructions to
   me were ’’get the major incident vehicle here fast”. I returned to the
   staff car and called control regarding the major incident vehicle, but the
   reception on the radio was very bad.      I could not make out what the Control
   Officer was saying.      Eventually I think he said the Accident Tender was on-
   route to the scene. He also asked about the number of deaths.          I reported
   from what 1 had seen in the gymnasium at that time there were about 30
   bodies.     I do not know if I was asked anything else as reception on ESC
   could not be understood.     I later found out that Station Officer Eason had
   contacted control re the Major Accident Vehicle.


   I returned to the loading area.      At this time more ambulances were arriving
   and were asked to reverse into the gate side by side*      Other crews were
   asked to wait until the vehicles in the loading area left before carrying
   out the same procedure.     One vehicle was left with no driver or keys this
   caused a problem for a minute or two until the driver and keys were
   located.     Back on the road* the police had moved some vehicles and told
   them to go round to Leppings Lane.      Certain crews followed these
   instructions instead of staying put.      Police also instructed vehicles that
  were parked waiting on Penistone Road to drive into the next gate as
   injured people were being brought to that location.      Some crews did this.
  We then had two loading areas.      Had police vehicles not been in the way we
   would have been able to drive in the first door, load the injured at the
   gymnasium, drive out of the second gate and away.
-1989   10:33         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                0709 829842     P.14
 I


 3.



Superintendent T. Dale.



Sometime around now Station Officer               arrived with the Major
Accident Vehicle, he was instructed by Mr. Hopkins to pull the vehicle into
 the space at the first gate, Station Officer Eason was at Gate One.         1 went
 around to the second entrance where 1 found a number of vehicles stood
waiting for patients, drivers at the ready.       There were also some police
mini buses which had been hired to move policemen to the game.       These
vehicles were used to move the walking wounded.       Communications between on
 site officers could only be done by sending a runner or going oneself,
which happened to be more reliable, as any ambulanceman that left the
 ambulances appeared to be utilised somewhere else.


 Injured were being brought out on boards and I had to stop several groups
 from just putting the injured, boards and the lot into the ambulance.
 Patients were put on to cots, some being resuscitated.      One young boy
 arrived on a hoarding and was transferred to a cot, Qualified Ambulanceman
         and myself using CPR until I found a policeman to help.     I then
 continued trying to organise the loading and movement of patients.


 I found a problem in that patients were being loaded by spectators helped
by our drivers, but then the attendant could not be found, this happened
more than once.     I despatched the vehicle with our man attending in the
back and a policeman driving.     Some ambulancemen (            ) and another
had filled a mini bus with less seriously injured, taking about ten
patients in one go.     The other police mini buses were gradually being
filled with walking wounded and people in bad shock.       There were people sat
all round the loading area in a state of shock, most were being looked
after by friends or other supporters.     I found that I was being approached
by dozens of people either wanting help or information about relatives or
 loved ones.    Unfortunately, I could not help these people as I had other
more important things to attend to.     At this stage we appeared to be
reasonably organised.    Vehicles available with drivers waiting, attendants
taking cots and returning with the injured.       When looking for ambulance
           10:33        S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE               0709 829842    P.15
(




A*



Superintendent T* Dale.



staff in the gymnasium, or among the police outside, it became very
difficult to find them.      Apart from motorway jackets which both police and
ambulance staff had on, identification became difficult.


As the scene became less hectic, I was informed by Mr, Hopkins to set some
more body bags as all the ones in the Major Accident Vehicle had been used,
I tried to contact control through the radio on the Major Accident Vehicle
but had no success, so I went back to the staff car and called* "Once
    again, 1 could not make out what control were saying to me*      Later I
    established that a Major Accident Vehicle from West Yorkshire was on its
way with more equipment.      Also at this time, we seemed to have an abundance
    of ambulances waiting on Penistone Road.


    At some stage, Mr. Hopkins asked me to go and wait with the surplus
vehicles at Herries Road Bus Garage.       I went to the staff car and informed
    control who then informed me that Station Officer Eason was already there*
    During all this Mr* Jones arrived at some stage and ran the loading and
    operations at the Number One gate.


    At some stage the Emergency Tender from WYMAS arrived, Station Officer
            ~|and myself met him and informed him we needed more body bags.
    Eventually when he found them there were only about    twelve.   All were taken
    to Mr. Hopkins who used them in the gymnasium.


    Mr. Jones asked me to take two vehicles around to the Leppings Lane end and
    collect some bodies and return to the gymnasium,      I took a WYMAS and
    Nottingham ambulance around only to find StationOfficer     Higgins had
    already dealt with the bodies and was in the process of loading the last
    two.   I returned to the gymnasium with the crews.
- 0 4 —l y y y   1 0 :3 4         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                0709 829842     P.
       «



    5.


    Superintendent T. Dale.



    I was told by either Mt, Jones or Mr. Hopkins to take Station Officer
    Higgins down to the Medico Legal Centre and prepare for the bodies
    arriving.           This I did, hut we had great difficulty getting through the
    traffic.          On arrival at Medico Legal Centre I dropped off Station Officer
    Higgins and contracted control - reception outside Medico Legal Centre on
    ERC was excellent.           Control told me to go to Herries Road Bus Garage and
    establish a land line*           On arrival at the Garage, Leading Ambulanceman
   ______informed me this had already been done and the message from Mr. Page
    was to tell either Mr. Hopkins or Mr. Jones to contact him at Headquarters.


    I then returned to the Sheffield Wednesday’s Football Club Gymnasium and
    passed Mr. Page's message to both Mr* Hopkins and Mr* Jones*              Control also
    informed me at some time during the operation that walking wounded needed
    to be taken to Barnsley District General Hospital.              This information was
    passed late on in the incident when most casualties had been removed.


    Mr* Hopkins informed me he wanted six ambulances to stay and the rest could
    go to Herries Road Bus Garage.           I passed this information to Mr. Jones who
    dealt with it.


    At this time, most of the incident had been cleared, all that remained were
    the 90 or so bodies in the gymnasium.


    Mr. Page arrived on scene and the incident began to wind down.


    I was instructed by Mr. Page to bring in some night men early to help ease
    the work load.           This was done from the Control Unit.     1 later collected
    Station Officer Higgins from the Medico Legal Centre and returned to
    Hillsborough and assisted until midnight.
-04-1389   10:34         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842   P.l




  Station Officer Higgins.



  1505 hours - A crowd disturbance was noticed at Leppings Lane, I asked
  Station Officer Eason and Ambulanceman                   to have a look.   I then
  notified control of a crowd problem at Hillsborough but there did not
  appear to be many casualties at this time*


  Station Officer Eason returned and informed me that many people were
  injured.    I informed control of this and then proceeded to the Leppings
  Lane end to try to establish the number of people injured*         I was still not
  aware at this time of the severity of the situation as many of the injured,
  and all of the bodies were on the floor behind the Leppings Lane wall.


  1 had extreme problems with radio equipment at this time, transmitting was
  impossible from the location of the incident.        The crowd were lashing out
  at everyone in uniform, including ambulance staff.


  I returned to the vehicle to transmit to control and was told by a Police
  Inspector that there were approximately 30 bodies at Leppings Lane eud
   (they had seen these on video).    I passed this information to control.      I
  used the parked ambulance at Penistone Road by the gymnasium as a base and
  asked the Police to make sure that the gymnasium was available as per the
  major incident plan.


  Shortly afterwards two ambulances arrived,         I directed them onto the pitch
  and told them to find Station Officer Eason who was at the far end of the
  pitch.     At this time Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Morley and Mr. Dale arrived at
  approximately 1520 hours*


  1 was directing Police and fans to the gymnasium area with casualties and
  bodies, but the medical resources available at this time were very limited*
  Mr. Hopkins asked for the major incident vehicle, which arrived shortly
  afterwards with Station O f f i c e r ] a t        approximately 1545 hours.
o-t 1303   xtj.oo       b IiJRKb.AMBULANCE SERUICE              0709 329342     P.l




  2   .

  Station Officer Higgins.


  We unloaded body bags* canvasses and poles and took them to the gymnasium
  area.    As more vehicles and staff arrived, I trietd to establish the more
  serious injuries, make cots available and transport to hospital.     Walking
  wounded were also put into vehicles were a seat was available.


  From the start of the incident, I had tried to make a route available
  through the gymnasium area using both entrances, one in - one out, but this
  was impossible until later as Police vehicles were parked at the junction
  of the gymnasium area.


  By this time, Mr. Hopkins had taken control of the incident and I was left
  estimating condition and priority of patients, and directing ambulance
  staff as they loaded patients.


  Mr. Jones had by this time arrived and was dealing with availability of
  staff and vehicles.


  By approximately 1650 hours, the gymnasium area was clear of casualties and
  1 was told by Mr. Hopkins to take two vehicles to the entrance area at
  Leppings Lane to collect eleven bodies which were at this location and
  return them to the temporary mortuary.     This I did.   I was not aware of
  this incident.    Upon my return I was told by Mr. Hopkins to go to Medico
  Legal and await vehicles arriving, ensure as efficient turn round as
  possible of vehicles and return the vehicle complete with body bags to the
  temporary mortuary at Hillsborough.


  Superintendent Dale took me to the Medico Legal centre at 1800 hours and I
  remained there until 2000 hours.


  No bodies were received at the Medico Legal during this time as an amended
  plan was agreed at the ground during this period.


  At 2100 hours 1 returned to the ground with Superintendent Dale and helped
  with the loading of bodies for transport to Medico Legal.
Station Officer Higgins.




I left the ground at 2330 hours to go home.


Conclusions


From the start of the incident we were in the wrong place - at ground
level.


If we had been in our usual place high in the ground we would have been
aware of the incident more quickly and Police Officers would have been more
readily available*


Mr. Eason, myself and static crews could not contact each other by radio,
we could only contact control with extreme difficulty.    The equipment was
inadequate.


The Police Officers both men and sergeants seemed unaware of the incident
plan for the ground.    They wanted to put casualties and bodies into the
nearest ambulance.


I found in the initial stages of the incident that it was difficult to make
fans and police accept that the bodies they were bringing out to me were
dead*    I feel that a team and doctors at the onset of the incident at toy
post (casualty and mortuary) in the gymnasium would have helped greatly.


The senior St. Johns staff helped readily but the junior staff who were
children could not cope and should not have been put into this position.


As the incident progressed, St John senior staff were left dealing with
their own cadets and were not available to help with medical teams*


The numbers of off duty SYMAS road staff that attended the ground were
invaluable.    They were a major factor in ensuring the incident was dealt
with as quickly as it was.
2kJ—Jd4—1989   10i 36     b YORKS.'AMBULANCE SERUICE             0709 829842      P. 20
*      •


      4.



      Station Officer Higgins.


      To document events as they happen as per major incident plan is impossible,
      unless you have sufficient officers at locations.   I found myself directing
      the incident and still treating many patients asmedical staff in the
      required numbers could not have besn available.


      The response time to the ground by SYMAS officers, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Jones,
      Mr. Morley, Superintendent Dale and Station Officer i       1 was greatly
      appreciated by Station Officer Eason and myself.    The numberof officers    to
       control an incident is as important as the numbers of crews.     The jobsthat
      need to be done in a situation of this level need officers capable of
       following instructions from the senior officer.


      The parking of vehicles outside the ground should not be allowed, it
       greatly hindered the ambulances trying to attend the incident.
20-04-1989   10:37          S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842 ,    P.21
*     I



      Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A* Hopkins.



      At approximately 1420 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, I attended the
      control centre of SYHA5.     The reason for my visit was to update myself as
      to the situation with regard the football and associated traffic conditions
      within the county and particularly Sheffield area.


      X asked if the two Liaison Officers had left for Hillsborough, it was
      confirmed that they had left Longley Ambulance Station en-route for the
      ground.     I was informed that the two officers had left with an ambulance
      crew who were also going to the ground to stand by.       The second additional
      cover vehicle had been put on stand by at Middlewood station, a short
      distance from Hillsborough.


      At approximately 1508 hours Superintendent R. Clarke took a call from the
      South Yorkshire Police (Force Control).      I got the impression that Ray
      Clarke was surprised by the call because he started to explain to the
      caller that we had two Liaison Officers in the ground with a vehicle.            As
      soon as that call had finished a second call came from Force Control, this
      time it was answered by


      The call Ray Clarke took asked for a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane
      end of the ground.     I immediately questioned this as X know from experience
      that ambulances cannot gain access from that area into the ground itself.
      Mr. Clarke told me he could not get any further details and I said get the
      second standby vehicle to Leppings Lane to get some information.          I
      actually passed this call myself to Middlewood Ambulance Station.          X also
      fceld M*.          *o ooataot tho dwtjr Ti   Bnn   fli**r flf fhO erftUTld for
      further details.


      The call               answered seconds after Mr. Clarke’s confirmed they
      wanted a fleet of ambulances to the ground.        Because of the nature of the
      calls and the conflicting detail X decided to make my way to Hillsborough.
      This would be approximately 1512 hours,       I left control and together with
      Mr. Morley who had just returned from Sheffield, we travelled as an
       emergency response to Hillsborough in a marked ambulance car.
0-04-1989   10:37'      S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842      P. 22




     2.



     Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A, Hopkins.



     En route 1 decided it was a strange incident because of the way in which
     the message had been vague from the police and because of the manner of
     conversation I was hearing over the radio.


     I told Mr. Morley to radio control and tell them to make all Trent
     Ambulance vehicles available as soon as possible.     1 heard this message
     transmitted by           who finished the message by adding "particularly
     Sierra mobiles".


     On leaving Headquarters, 1 decided 1 was going to attend the normal
     rendezvous point for incidents at the football ground which is the
     Penistone Road North entrance to the gymnasium.     1 knew our Liaison Officer
     would be there or in that area,   I arrived at Hillsborough at 1522 hours,
     parked my vehicle and left Mr. Morley with it.      I than went to the only
     vehicular access to the pitch, walked down toward the ground and looked
     toward Leppings Lane end of the ground.   X saw a complete line of Police
     Officers right across the width of the ground.


     I ran across, went through the police lines where I could clearly see lots
     of injured people on the grass.   I   looked at thestand it was a mass of
     faces and it became clear that the    ambulances atLeppings Lane could not
     get to this incident from the location.


     X could not get involved with the injured, my responsibility was to get
     resources there immediately to deal with the situation.


     I turned and began running back to summon help.     I saw a Police Officer
     fall down with a little girl in his arms*      I picked up the child and
     carried on running with her in my arms up the ramp exit*      I stopped and
     looked at her, she was dead.   The crowd at that time were clapping and
     cheering and were generally noisy.
                      iurcK3.HrisuLHNU£ bbRUlCE              0709 829842     P.2




3.




Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins*



The Police Officer caught up to me and said "she has had it hasn't she
kid?” I replied "yes, take her into the gymnasium" and gave him the child's
body.


I saw Mr. Morley stood at the ambulance vehicle, 1 shouted for our Major
Incident Vehicle and ambulances to attend the Penistone Road end of the
ground, entrance to the gymnasium.    I also asked for the Chief Metropolitan
Ambulance Officer to be informed at home, this was approximately 1530
hours.


X then went toward the gymnasium, the first thing X saw was outside the St.
Johns ambulance room a group of what can only be described as children*
they were in uniform and appeared to be extremely upset.    I entered the
gymnasium door and it was pandemonium, there were Police Officers and
already some bodies laid on the advertising boards.


There were casualties everywhere and bodies laid on the floor.    I turned
around and went back to where the ambulances could back in, we could only
get one ambulance in at a time because of the way vehicles were parked*
The area was full of Police vans and Police horses and one of our
ambulances which had parked before the match kicked off.    The cots from
that vehicle had gone and the crew had responded to the Leppings Lane end
of the pitch to help with the injured.


Station Officer Higgins reported to me, he said "it is caos" I said "find
me that crew and get that vehicle moved".     I turned to look at the
ambulance and saw it had been filled with dead and injured people who had
been brought there by the crowd.     They were laying on the floor and sitting
on the wheelarches as the stretchers had already been removed by the crew.
                     o turcKb.N'to.t.HNCt btKUlCE              0709 829842      P. 24




4.



Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins*



X wanted an ambulance onto the pitch.       X formed the opinion that this would
let the crowd see that help had arrived.        1 thought the crowd were clapping
and cheering because they thought help was at a premium.


The Police appeared to be containing and area full of injured people and I
wanted desperately to get an ambulance in.


I got one of my vehicles into position at the top of the ramp ready to
drive onto the pitch when the St. Johns Ambulance appeared at the bottom of
the ramp blocking our entrance.      To my horror he appeared to have the
vehicle side wedged against a metal ramp providing wheelchair access to the
stand.


The vehicle was freed by a large group of Police Officers bouncing it
straight.    This vehicle then exited from the ground.


We had reversed our vehicles to allow this and then we drove forward again
only to find that our vehicle got wedged on girder work supporting the
gate.    Because of the inability to drive in a straight line it was
necessary to bounce vehicles straight to gain access and egress from the
pitch.


The wheelchair ramp was a surprise to me as on my previous visits to the
ground, it had not been there.      I am    notaware ofany notification of its
prescence.


I then sent a further ambulance onto        thepitch as the crowd appeared to
respond favourably to the first one.With the        increase of ambulance staff
and fire service personnel we were able to take control of the situation,
removing the injured.
                         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842   P. 25
04-1989   10=39




    5.



    Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



    I stopped at the top of the ramp and was then approached by Leading
    Ambulanceman               X sent him into the gymnasium to attend ta the
    injured getting them ready to transport.         I went to my vehicle and asked
    over the radio for the location of the Major Incident Vehicle, I was told
    he would be there within minutes.


    At the time the Major Incident Vehicle arrived driven by Station Officer
                  Control informed me that the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
    Officer had been contacted and was proceeding to Headquarters*         Mr. Jones
    then ran to me and I asked him to take charge of everything concerning
    loading and despatch from that location and Penistone road.


    I then went to return to the gymnasium where X was confronted by amale who
    told me he was a Doctor and had three more Doctors with him, but they had
    no equipment,     I saw one of my staff, I cannot remember who it was but I
    asked him to take the Doctors names and take them into the gymnasium
    introducing them to Leading Ambulanceman                 who had his para medic
    equipment with him,


    Mr. Morley then came with an Ambulance Station Officer from Nottingham who
    had four or five staff with him.     These people were in civilian clothes and
    had been supporting Nottingham Forrest at the match.        Mr. Morley wentonto
    the ground wearing our satin yellow ambulance jackets,


    I then entered the gymnasium and found Chief Superintendent Addis and
    liaised with him.     I came out and returned to the ambulance loading party
    by this time the match had been abandoned and fans were filing out of the
    stands.
                     S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE               0709 829842   P.26




6   .

Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



The number of injured coming from the pitch area had slowed down.       X was
conscious of the fact that there was a number of seriously injured in the
gymnasium and I was anxious to have these people transported to hospital.
X observed many of them had been infused by our para medics and Doctors.


I had already agreed with Chief Superintendent Addis that the gymnasium
would be the temporary mortuary and X would remove the injured as soon as I
could.    We then commenced transferring the injured from the gymnasium to
hospital.


By this time the Police vehicles which were blocking the egress and access
routes for my vehicles had been moved and the      flow arrangements       were
better.     Mr. Jones and Mr. Dale had ensured aclear passage for ambulances
which had been the initial problem at the earlier stages of the incident.
Mr. Jones came to me in the gymnasium area and told me he had ten
ambulances on Penistone Road outside the ground with a further twenty five
in Herries Road Bus Garage.     He also informed me that he was aware of
eleven bodies on the circular road of the Sheffield Wednesday corner of the
ground (Leppings Lane).    I questioned this "do you mean outside the
ground?".     He could not be specific as he had   seen them with a PoliceChief
Inspector who had in fact pointed      them out to him earlier.   I nowknow that
Mr. Jones thought the circular road was part of the ground but in fact is a
service road outside the perimeter wall.


The priority at the time was the removal of the living injured not the
known dead.     Events began to move   quickly and in a short space of time I
despatched three vehicles with anofficer to bring these bodies to the
gymnasium.


I lost complete track of time, but X knew the next thing to do was to
liaise with the Police with regard the course of action to be taken with
the bodies.
        Iijs4kj       S iLiRKS.fifIBULAi<CE SERUICE            0709 829842   P. 27




7.




Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



The original arrangements with Chief Superintendent Addis after
consultation with the coroners office was to transport the bodies to:-


     Medico Legal Centre, Sheffield,
        Royal Hallamshire Hospital.
        Northern General Hospital.


and if necessary Rotherham District General Hospital.


I previously agreed to do this as X could complete the transfer of 80
bodies in one exercise.


However, Chief Superintendent Addis informed me that the coroner (Dr.
Popper) had stopped the original plan and was employing an international
London based organisation to remove and prepare the bodies for
identification.


Much later Dr. popper arrived and we discussed with Chief Superintendent
Addis how to dispose of the bodies.        It was agreed that the bodies would be
photographed by polaroid and developed at the top end of the gymnasium.        I
set up a screen to obstruct the view of relatives from the mass of bodies.


No body was to be removed prior to positive identification.


Ambulance cover was scaled down to six to facilitate the eventual removal
of the bodies.


X then left the scene at approximately 2000 hours on Saturday ISth April
1989.     I proceeded to headquarters and then went home.
                                                                        r.




R CLARKE - CONTROL SUPERINTENDENT


On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was Duty Control Superintendent on the 1400”
2200 shift.

Shortly after 1500, I received a telephone call from Force Control
informing me our attendance might be required at the Hillsborough Football
Ground, although they were not sure at that time and would let us know.

Almost immediately after, Force Control telephoned again to request a fleet
of ambulances as there was "an incident" at the ground and there were
persons injured.

I informed Force Control that we had Duty Officers with vehicles inside the
ground, and would alert and mobilise them and assess the situation.

I then requested Control Officer       y who was on the Emergency Desk to
call our Duty Officers at the ground and get a situation report. At this
time a vehicle was being mobilised to the ground from Middlewood Station.

Information then started coming in simultaneously from the Duty Officers at
the ground and Force Control, that a large incident was in progress and
more ambulances were required. At this time, we did not know what the
incident was or numbers involved.

Mr Hopkins who was in the Control Unit at this time, proceeded to the
scene.

Moments later, information was received from Force Control that many people
had been injured and there were fatalities.

By this time, additional support vehicles were being mobilised to the scene
from various points throughout the SYMAS area, by Control O f f i c e r o n
the Emergency Desk. Control Officer        ]on the out-patient desk, C/A's
      Iand       , and myself. Superintendent         and 1         Ihad
just arrived at the Control Unit in an off-duty capacity, so I enlisted
their assistance.

I instructed C/A       to start the Control Log, and record as many events
as possible. I took I          into the Control Superintendent’s office and
instructed her to start the re-call of Control Staff and call in as many as
possible.

Myself and Superintendent         then contacted Derbyshire,
Nottinghamshire and West Yorkshire Ambulance Services and requested them to
move support vehicles up to the SYMAS boundaries and informing them of the
situation in hand.

It was about this point that it became evident that Control Officer
was becoming overwhelmed by the volume of vehicles and radio messages,
therefore, ensuring that cover was being maintained on other Emergency,
Urgent and domestic work which at this time was very busy, I decided to
Control the Hillsborough incident on ERC in the Major Incident Room.
                                    xr,vnx                W?09 829842   P.29




SHEET 2 - R CLARKE


I took C/A       with me and set up the ERC facility, I continued then to
establish contact with as many vehicles as was possible. The major
incident communications vehicle was mobilised at the request of Mr Hopkins.
I was getting messages constantly from the Control Room anbd I attempted to
keep in touch with what was happening in there.

It became evident there were problems with communication at the scene.
Some of the transmissions were unreadable, likewise, others were not
receiving mine with clarity, resulting in messages having to be repeated
several times in some instances.

I continued to work as quickly as possible.   Mr Smith was briefed on his
arrival.

Control Staff re-called to duty were by now arriving. Vehicles were by now
reporting movements between the scene and hospitals and a ferrying
operation was well underway.

It was established that sufficient vehicles were in attendance as the
incident progressed and those not required back at scene were sent to
various holding points.

As more Control Officers arrived I designated Control Officer         to
take over on the ERC Desk, and carried on with other duties within the
unit, until the end of my shift.

My priority at the outset of this incident was to mobilise vehicles to the
scene to deal effectively and quickly with the incident, at the same time
maintaining cover for the SYMAS area.

Events moved very quickly, and I selected what I saw as the immediate
priorities, and carried them out with the staff I had with me.

I have submitted this report honestly, outlining the main sequence of
events, as I remember them.

Control staff carried out their duties in a calm, efficient manner to the
credit of the Service.
                     b YURkb.HMBULFiNCE 3ERUICE             0709 829842

»


Duty Controller             1400 - 2200 hours*


Alpha 4 (Paul Eason) radioed from Hillsborough Football Ground with the
following message ’’ground restless, can I have a vehicle to standby neater
the ground".    This was before we received any emergency call, I think it
was about 1500 hours.


The request for a further vehicles on standby was in addition to two
vehicles he had on scene.    I told him I had one vehicle at Middlevood did
he want this nearer and he replied ”no it’s ok there'*.


Alpha 4 (Paul Eason) radioed again asking for the Middlewood vehicle to be
despatched as an emergency call to Sheffield Wednesday Football ground.


At approximately the same time, the Police rang asking for a fleet of
vehicles. Superintendent Clarke informed me of this call,     Mr, Hopkins, who
was in the control unit, asked me to get Alpha 4 to investigate this
request with the Police because we did not have any further information.
At this time 1 think another call came in from the police, but 1 do not
know the detail.


Alpha 4 reported back regarding the requirement for a fleet of ambulances
he told me "people have been crushed, there may be fatalities”. I
immediately despatched all vehicles available at that time.     That being
four or five emergency vehicles from:-


     Parkway
     Batemoor
     Middlewood
     Maltby
     Rotherham


and then later X despatched vehicles from


     Barnsley
     Hoyland
                     o   iuwa.HntiuuHNct itRUlCE               0709 829842     P.31

I


2.



Duty Controller



I told Superintendent Clarke that things       were getting out of hand and we
had better operate ERC from      the Incident Room.   I gave out two orthree
general calls over the radio telling vehicles responding to the
Hillsborough incident to goonto ERC,      Superintendent Clarke    went into the
incident room with                 to operate the ERC channel *


___________was in charge of the day vehicles on outpatient duties, most of
these were on station.     He mobilised all his available vehicles to the
scene from throughout the county.


As volunteers arrived on stations, they were asked to mobilise as soon as
possible to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground and change to SRC channel.
0 -0 4 -1 9 8 9   10:43           S YORK'S.h MFULANCE SERUICE               0709 829842
        t




                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBOLAJfCK SERVICE

                                             REPORT


  HAKE:            ADO - Support Services, Mr Roger Morley

                   Duty Officer


  DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:            19 April 1989, 1430 - 1639 hours


  Following a routine patrol of the Sheffield area to ascertain the general
  traffic and crowd situations, I was returning to Ambulance Headquarters
  when I heard radio messages from Control to Alpha 3, relating to a fleet of
  Ambulances being required at the Lappings Lane end of Sheffield Wednesday
   Football Ground.


   Shortly afterwards,           I arrived at Headquarters        at the same time as Mr
   Hopkins was leaving the Control Unit.              He approached me and said there was
   trouble at         Hillsborough.        He drove the vehicle and we proceeded to
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.


   Enroute, at Mr Hopkins request, I contacted Control to have vehicles clear
   and available as soon as possible, in anticipation of large numbers of
   casualties.            I heard a radio message informing all vehicles to change to
   ERC.


   We arrived at the Ground at 1523 hours.             We went directly to the recognised
   Casualty Clearing Point at the Gymnasium.                    We parked our vehicle with
   difficulty near the top of the slope leading directly onto the pitch.                  The
   area was heavily congested by Police Horses and Police vehicles.


   I informed         Control of our arrival and asked            for as many vehicles as
   possible to be made available.               Mr Hopkins went into the pitch area to
   assess the situation.           I stayed with the vehicle to maintain communications
   with Control.           ERC proved to be un-usable.



                                                                                 /continued
-►JH-1303 itJ^J            o iuRKb.AMBULANCE SERUICE                           0709 829842       P.33




  2


  19 April 1989


  ADO - Mr R Morley




  People from the crowd were constantly approaching me for help.                        Casualties
  were being brought up the slope from the pitch to the area under the
  Penistone Road end of the North Stand by spectators to the vicinity of the
  First Aid room.      Many of the fans were extremely distraught,                   I was trying
   to stay in a position where I could give help and direction to as many
  people as possible.


  Mr Hopkins returned from the pitch and asked me to ensure that the Major
   Incident vehicle was attending,            1 supervised the marshalling and loading
   of   vehicles.      There    was   still     a   lot   of    aggravation      from    extremely
   distraught people.      1 was anxious to shield Ambulance crews from as much of
   this as possible.


  Due   to   the restricted      access to the area,            it was    inevitable that on
   occasions Ambulances actually caused obstruction due to the length of time
   that crews were away from vehicles rendering aid.


   I was approached by Doctors,            Nurses and volunteers        from all areas of the
   ground.    These   1   directed    to    the most     appropriate    area    as   indicated   by
   their   skills.    This     involved     Ambulances    and   staff   from   Nottinghamshire,
   Derbyshire and West Yorkshire.            Red Cross volunteers were also directed to
   the First Aid room.


   Arriving crews were directed             to the most seriously          injured cases.          I
   attempted to keep myself informed as to casualty locations.                       As the back
   doors of Ambulances were           opened,    spectators     were attempting to remove
   anything from the vehicle which they thought would be of use.                             This I
   restricted as much as possible.           Vehicle crews were inevitably split up and
   in some cases not re-united until much later.


                                                                                        /continued
0-04-1989    1 0 :4 4
                             S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                  0703 S29842      P.
     I




 3


 19 April 1989


 Mr R Morley



 After most of the living casualties had been moved, I handed over the
 marshalling role to an Officer from West Yorkshire.                 The operation was
 eventually transferred to the Gymnasium yard and by this time all the live
 casualties h«i<I bee a moved to Hoopital L


 1 was      asked by Mr     Hopkins   to ascertainhow many bodies were at             the
 receiving hospitals.       This was io order to establish how many bodies would
 eventually require disposal and to where this might be.                 X visited the
 hospitals to find out this information.         There was uncertainty as to where
 the bodies would eventually be taken.           There were 11 bodies in the 118
 casualties taken to        the Northern General Hospital and 1 body in the 80
 casualties taken to Royal Hallamshire Hospital.


 Staff at the Royal Hallamshire were expecting the imminent arrival of a
 large number of bodies.         I ascertained that the bodies were going to the
 Medico Legal Centre and I informed the Unit General Manager at the Royal
 Hallamshire Hospital of this.


 I returned to Hillsborough, plans were made to recover bodies from the
 Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General.             Most crews were then stood
 down.


 I was then briefed by Mr Hopkins in the presence Of the Coroner, as to the
 plan of action for         identification and eventual removal of bodies             from
 Hillsborough to the        Medico Legal Centre.         I had three crews, plus one
 reserve plus                  land Mr Eason at my disposal.


 Station Officer                  coordinated movement      inside   the morgue   after
 identification.        He was also instructed to report progress to Control every
 30 minutes*
                                                                            /continued
                     S YORKS.AMBULANCE SEP 'ICE             0709 329842   P.35




4


19 April 1989


ADO - Mr R Morley



Station Officer Eason was put in charge of transport and documentation.
Each body was accompanied by a Police Officer whose collar number was
noted, together with the patient's nause if known, and number*


I took overall charge of this operation overnight and attempted to look
after the welfare of staff as best as possible.


The operation was concluded at 0550 hours on Sunday 16 April 1989
u-04- iyoy   it' 45     S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE               0709 829842   P. 36




     D JONES - ASSISTANT CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER


     I returned home after shopping between 1500/1505 on Saturday 15th April
     1989. I had been home approximately 6-7 minutes when I switched on the TV
     to see reports of the Liverpool v Notts match. The TV immediately
     displayed live coverage from Hillsborough on BBCl where the game had been
     stopped after 6 minutes play, the scene changed advising further coverage
     would be seen later. At that point I was not concerned with what I had
     seen on TV because it merely appeared to be a crowd spill from the terraces
     onto the pitch. However in my own mind I felt concerned, TV immedaitely
     returned to Hillsborough by this time it was apoproximately 1517, I saw a
     massive crowd spillage with bodies laying on the ptich. I did not wait to
     watch any more I ran to change into my uniform whilst doing so 1 asked my
     wife to telephone control and tell them i was on my way into Headquarters.
     My wife also works for SYMAS as a control assistant and was asked by
     Control to report to headquarters with me in order to assist in Control.
     We arrived at Control at approximately 1530, 1 immediately sort out
     Superintendent Clarke who was in the incident room, he told me that several
     vehicles had been despatched to the ground and that Alpha 3 (Higgins),
     Alpha 4 (Eason) Trentamb 2 (DCMAO), Trentamb 6 (ADO Support Services) were
     either at the ground or on the way. The M.I. Vehicle was also en route.

     I did not wait for any further update and took the keys for a staff car and
     left for the scene, this would be at approximately 1540 hours as I pulled
     out of Headquarters I met the CKA0 who had been called out and was just
     arriving. We briefly exchanged informals and I continued to Hillsborough
     arriving at 1550 hours.

     On approaching Hillsborough I could not get to the pre-arranged and agreed
     casualty clearing area in the gymnasium. This was because the Penistone
     Road section from Herries Road towards Halifax Road was completely blocked
     by Police vehicles, Police Officers, Football fans and traffic going in the
     opposite direction to me. Because of this road blockage I knew I could not
     clean a path for my vehicle and therefore decided to gain access by the
     entrance which leads to executive suite of Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club.

     I saw ambulances leaving this area and had to manoeuvre my vehicle past
     ambulances, police vehicles and fans. I got to Leppings Lane end and
     parked my vehicle by the high wall adjacent to the Police control boc (E
     Gate).

     I immediately informed Control "on scene" and was not acknowledged. I left
     my vehicle, and used my hand portable again I received no acknowledgement.
     I commenced walking towards Leppings Lane through masses of fans who
     appeared to have no pattern of direction. They were trying to go in every
     direction.

     The situation was completely chaotic, I contacted two ambulances in a short
     walking distance from my own vehicle. I very quickly checked them for crew
     and patients, they were both fully loaded with patients, police officers
     and helpers, in fact I would say they were overloaded as against normal
     situations. I despatched them to a hospital, I cannot remember who the
crew members were# At this point I noticed a number of bodies laying on
the floor against the railings opposite the west stand area of the ground
outside the ground. The exact loaction was between E and C gates. These
bodies were partially covered with plastic bags, blankets and items of
clothing. I cannot say exactly how many there were but I would say
approximately eight. These bodies were in a line parallel to the railings.
I continued toward Leppings Lane entrances and passed at least one fire
tarden on the drive close to the Leppings Line gates.

All of the Leppings Lane and the adjacent area was heavily congested with
people I could see in the distance on Leppings Lane itself that there were
a number of ambulances in a convoy with crews still in the cabs, I believe
there were five ambulances* I had walked from the area of 'I' gate along
the outside perimeter road to Leppings lane itself* I am convinced that
after dispatching the ambulances from the *E* gate area and walking to
Leppings Lane that no living casualties were in that area. In fact the
area was densely crowded. Because of those reasons X re-deployed the
convey of ambulances to the Penistone Road Gym entrance which is the agreed
casualty clearing area for the ground. During the inspection walk I met
L/A         who appeared to have been organising the clearance of
casualties from that area.

In Leppings Lane I met a Divisional Fire Officer from South Yorkshire who
was stood adjacent to the mobile fire control unit and two tenders. I did
not stay there but attempted to make my way into the ground to get to the
gym, en route I met Chief Inspector Wareing of South Yorkshire Police and
told him to get me to the gym as fast as he could. As we walked he pointed
out more bodies on the floor, we progressed through the ground under the
North Stand with great difficulty due to the agressive nature of fans
leaving the ground. I was approached by a man who introduced himself as a
doctor and asked if he could be of help. I kept him with me and we
continued to head for the gym. As I approached the gym 1 saw ambulancemen
and police officers both treating and loading patients into ambulances in
the agreed casualty clearing area.

During the process of walking from the *C* gate area to the gym, the route
I used did not allow me a view of the pitch area as I walked below building
under cover, I know this was the North Stand.

I sent the doctor into the gym and one of my colleagues, who I can't
remember, informed me of Mr Hopkins* location. I entered the gym and
immediately saw Mr Hopkins, dialogue took place. He asked me to take
charge of the loading and movement of vehicles by the gym.

I despatched vehicles with casualties aboard and then walked onto Penistone
Road North and saw heavy congestion of football fans, police officers,
police transit vans, dog vans and ambulances. I saw a Police Inspector and
informed him that section of road had to be completely clear of vehicles
except ambulances, 1 think this was approximately 1625 hours. This was
partially achieved as well as clearing the central reservation on Penistone
Road North opposite the gymn entrance 'O’ gate in order to allow ambulances
to mount the reservation and turn right. This action allowed free passage
of ambulances to either of the receiving hospitals. I returned to the gym
to update Mr Hopkins and shortly after this it was established that all
live casualties had been cleared from the ground and were in or en route to
hospital*   This was approximately 1630 hours.

Mr Hopkisn told me to get as many body bags and blankets as     I     couldfrom
our vehicles which were lined up in Penistone Road North. X think at that
time I had twelve ambulances in line* I had the blankets and body bags
taken into the gym, whilst this was being done the Barnsley     MedicalTeam
arrived at gate ’O ’. The crew who brought them was A/M         and A/M
         and also A/M     |
                          . I sent them into the gym to see Mr Hopkins.
Shortly later they re-appeared back at the gate and I was advised that they
were no longer required. They stayed with me whilst I re-deployed the line
of ambulances to Herries Road Bus Depot. A Nottingham vehicle failed to
start in the line, thje crew eventually started the vehicle, I contacted
Control with a hand portable and requested that the duty fitter be sent to
the Bus Depot to render assistance to the crew. X began to stack vehicles
at Herries Road on standby. X then despatched3 ambulances alongwith S/0
Higgins to collect the bodies which ad been left at Leppings Lane and bring
them to the gym. X loaded the Barnsley Medical Team on to a vehicle manned
by S/0          and A/M \         . I told S/0           to return the team
and for him to remain at Barnsley as Liaison Officer. As X continued to
move the ambulance from Penistone Road to Herries Road, a Police Officer
came to me with two teenage boys who were in adistraught and shocked
condition, I placed them onto a West Yorkshire ambulance and told the crew
to take them to Barnsley District General Casualty Department because I was
aware that this hospital were taking minor injuries from the Incident. I
also told the crew that one that had been done he sould report clear to his
own Authority* I then moved approximately 6 ambulances into the gym car
park area by use of gate between the terraced houses on Penistone Road
North.

I contined to send other vehicles to Herries Road Bus Deport during this
time it was pointed out to me that the Barnsley Medical Team had left their
equipment, this was loaded onto an ambulance and sent back to the hospital.

The bodies from Leppings Lane were brought to ghe gyro I then closed the
gates to '0* entrance and advised Mr Hopkins that he had 10 ambulances in
the gym car park and 24 ambulances at Herries Road Bus Depot.

I stood down all outside authority vehicles at that stafc. As far as T was
concerned the immediate incident had been cleared. In conjunction with Mr
Hopkins I stood down all SYMAS vehicles with the exception of 7 which were
returned for the transportation of the dead at a later time.

I left the scene to return to Headquarters with Mr Hopkins at approximately
2000 hours.
   B A & ’T,    A-a -              todlKf*J*


                         T       ^ * K 7 e /» iT           CoM M ( rw T
                A xe
                        <
                        '^W• •i1SIV m
                                    A/
  ^£F7/*;<1     /*»#

(W s V I        6#      1/t.tAlUil <W tOL'kAi
                        uuvt t . m .
C»A ioCurl&ty           *NfF£iG* aha *»<*-«-                    -

                         4 w if Ab\»<-£
iH v M                   tu v i etcusn t/t,Mufa
                        or fiettftujitm rttufinb
                        fA m -iiia .
                         $g-6/*>u'i         ;wAftr
                                                                -
                        StiVH4 P>jts.t At* A*&
                        frstvSi fo iv ie ftacn,c\
                         *J>7V~ M'MSboob

                4*      M A m i moi ye 7
                        CoMfLeitfb ms                           -
                        iNvennA-tvm s
                £h       it   A il *-*i   S&*J fcl
                        l&fat.7    ?«     S .Y ««.   v
                p/it>   &y.cc w         s « *c
S J -M
                         HihihuH fi«S1     A 'i          \ ib
                              A w / «e>»<rM7s
K.t<l M         IM       SUFei'i tmifH.*it£
                        tM m tes ^voAiL't
                         (Z&jfhrb' fi/fiA'bAM<f>
                         ha«.ici^ti PJUtt'f              l*°M&nu» 6 f
£ &.£«          Y<*JL     iNiPstrtioti •
                                                           fiAs"l <9l>
               .k/ r i      SiCC l o fc e s s CL.u&
H A .S i
                           Hi   com?tr> iw J     &P
                           FiAifA\S> Phi*.a>€l

                            17 IMS Li HXL't J*MT
                 »>*♦
                            C tu 4 t4 0Hb SHoClL'l
                           6& It* A fy ll7 iirt To
                           fatM ili.'i tHnipY -}>+£
                            tovMCLf. 7#47 ->*€
                           M&J <hJLt7Ax d
                           { h it LIU lit <jOv(<-& B£
                           Ptov>±e3> in
                           f*b/t%i      / aj 4 CLoi£
                            S £ t)i* rJ

1 3 . (.        tS*+        /KO MgHiteri Ot'
                           f M T A'J>

                            M M & n it/* Or               *
 li.l4 .tf      zn
                            f i t i - r A>*>

J tf.tJ fc      U     f     MO MOHioti 61s
                             ftA S ?

                & \        tfo H & iM ? O r
                            f r e s i 4 i>

% ze<          tm          Syce7®      5<*</s c :

                           A!>G4.(/A7£ f i t S7 A>
                          +f t f a h i* lo a n
                          f A d t - m e i s tfo iti i d

           t
l\,(          1& l     N o m & o » * 6?
                       g r& 7 ft& fAcn.,~)ie$

               * y     *&««£? & i fre t l &m .           Ho              OF
                       a n         ih f t i 'i
                                                        fits? 4ib f& e n -m e i

                       }/tAP? SCMi&ui£ To
               m
                       befirte'Le&j, * * m w            Al/Tbb£i7y'J


                                                        / • * specific AGii\ji*m6£<r
               ie *     b € 6 fr l e v w l              £gSfousi4it.n'i paC.
                                                        f i t t 7 A<Jy TO ST f t
                        C i££lifilA 7€

                       M e c u * i t usAmn
is . 8- t o    un r
                        7o ^ cc • HAitJ
                       Pit i l A>b ieoM t w 't n
                       70 ie Svfi^LlSi U)1H
                       DteAvtne ftisT AO
                       e<Zu\PMev7
   W 'y        tn**i   fefiotn rfy sy<cc L&**~
                       te*A*rrf€HT : 1 7 is
                       & N 7 u ity r& 7tt*iT
                       ?H£ titA C lt* & d
                       CorVuncpt w S ****1
                       te *T   uool&     Hfa£ Q*i
                                                    M
                       w M OAj..rt) f a * * *
hoc            M S     3 cr> iHtfectt*** stfouu
                       line uubt f i l t i l At)
                       F A C iu ilie *
                       GOLtiprittk 7 *
H. t% 8 *   M s    free     To
                   *
                   4 .2    ?vud P>An AiJ>
                  £&om Acaui/Le* 7o
                   &€ S\fPfL<& *Ji1H
                  4H4</47e f i/O Aid
                   £U,vi/>rttnJ7 '.


Y tS = t$         iii.a e
*V M f            COMitfH&L Xgtwcei                   /TO AT<SK1i*W * f -

                  l i P o / t l o/J fw n v to -      P i A i l $r> fAHuhes,

                  1HiP€<ntan 6t* J>6**               OA GAt/iPtfCti 7


3ft 3.***         Clly dp Snefftt£i-l
                                                    (-H *
                  /o A L 'f 7 0 f t A C
                                                     ■?.            JMAlc
                  St£AVIC6t L677<se 6F
                                                    A o i/titf 4wA m w U b M
                  t i 6-                     Mtff
                                                    If f 7V€ SrAbiuvi 7o 7 H i
                  4>le*i>£.J     ttrf& 7 i
                                                    SATiSPAc-tifff* op
                   C<S4.7ilhtA76
                                                    e o u fjc iu A S ui7A i< .'f
                                                    S to /A s) f i4 S7 A £
                                                    Zoo     ."
                               £oCWJr

                        .
                    —                                       J5S.'S




                  .?jk^..S-s^ W s!




                    T*^J                1~S^«A-*-«~v                                   .


                   *2kjfir. .. :r A sN rs^ ^ *^V ^r                 CX>3JS   n<>Q-n^

                   4 *W ^ W      \&t?r       v-..
                    V^V^i -fvjL.
                    haJ ^T""i'-»V

€ >
            KS.


      ■i4
                                                                'f-xQc   9^\D
                                                      ,'~*X^/Tvcj
                                      WO

                        'V^cJU*       .£ ..-                                  i^^4aW n     .
                                                            4
                            £ y c c     ■€>
                                       c..



                               :^mff>— "Vf ;                            ..........




                                      n .-     ,;-.
                                                                                                                                                                                           —V-
                                                                                                                                                                                        ,■**



                                               *ijZ P ft                                                                                                    ______   ft& k - C?C* 3   g jA "OC«^oD

                                                                                  W ° *^                                                 ___________ ;
                                                                                                                                                     0mm w i                            „„____




                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                         _L *A \     _____               Sljtess?__—
                                                                                        T                        L_z_

                                                ^               —
                         &>■      A f e u w v jU j________________ O s^                  oO Q w              /< ^ V A - ^    ~^> W
                                                                                                g^s0^v«jCXt,                            <yyO
                                                                           ¥ f^wCyi «uJ *                                                      -jy ^ ^ a
                                                                              sX otdD                            St&iA                          *~=^*L..
                                                                          -                                                                        .:         -




S * & $ :$ !     ____                .     ^     1   ___________________ k .


                                                                                                                 ._ « as * * A £ r f c J t
                                                                         M u l& . C->            :._


                                                                              fc>dinj>^ __l^c. -C ^
                                                                                               fr-- --                                 ^11^1.           .



                                                                                    '>_________e->....... *•!*).•..


  a& < X atzb:..... -          .........., __    -         _.._           ...........                       ..           .................__
   j S 'l f l            ______S£Z JS>....                                                                                     H o /7
                                                            ^^©♦w ).                    ” T^-4*-... \.>»<l<>4,                                  <\~s*r^ 0
                                                           _ .           W-                                                       '^ x e^ y r*-’
                                                                                             y»\yvA0o-'^JL. ___ «*?’'"*'              CO|>?'>'3;
                                                            .           «*-..      &&>s>r ->—                     ^ '-*'*-■>                                ^ ', .
                                                                    “ fw >
                                                                      -       _«teP.                                                    ^ f is v'^2~>~K
                                                            joo^. r ? c^ \ Wo


                .. _ .                   A j^ v           ...___................             <S«*ry-'«A -^b                             . .*'?»■
                                                                    .\'-r>.^w£Vv-r <=^\
                                          J^P 3> ■      :-■- •--. ■. T ^ e‘r'—................. ,.' <?VV^^O0v^»:-. . <4tO^*>~^>..
                                                „..., _          :____ 'ia              l* s * r .                                                0 r^ X a y ^ K .        .   -
                                                 ____             ......_|^.iet...:._JCk!^...                                       ^rmS
                                                                           fl^_,_ •»<
                                                                          " \\     <5U-                 Tw.'V-'-*)




                                                                    ■              o                               ^ .. Q).            Sto* SnflAA* .
                                                                    •&......^a-^5                      -jdLea-. ......                              -A f c
                                                                                                                                                              ..
                                                                                                                           ++^Ww ^ MkMh.
TXfc*.
                      At
                                       «uO -^SUU-t




                           -c         to    -Oi
         & W rfat;_




          _ .   4m.                                   xo'^Ti     :
                                o>   £^&ckkik -   ^®o avjt «yss..
                          MAJOR INCIDENT VEHICLE- INVENTORY




CATEGORY                       ITEM                               NUMBER


Administration                Clipboards                          10
                              Incident log sheets                 50
                              Lined paper                         -*
                              Major incident form                 -
                              Pencils                             24

                               Medical Gasses & Equipment
                                                                                              ■■Y"V':-•
Ambulance Aid Equipment        Airway, size I                      89                          ’"" 'Y
                               Airway, size 2                     106                          :y y :y
                               Airway, size 3                      95
                                                                           ■■                   ' '  ■:
                               Entonox                              6
                               Entonox head & tube                  1             *           ■
                               Flynn oxygen ventilator              1           ;.-is*'
                               Oxygen, size F                      30                          ■ :::Y
                                                                                          ;
                               Oxygen tubes                         8
                                                                                                  ;;:
                                                                                                    a;
                               Carrying Equipment
                                                                                                    -’^Y-
                               Blankets (new)                      40
                               Blankets (old)                      32
                                                                                                    , yy
                               Carrying poles                      20
                               Thermal wrap emergency blankets,
                                                  paediatric        5
                               Thermal wrap green sheet,
                                                  hospital         72
                               Neil Robertson                       5
                               Orange emergency stretcher           1
                               Scoop stretcher                      2
                               Shroud covers                       25
                               White sheets, hospital              11
                               Thermal wrap emergency blankets,
                                                      adult         3

                               Dressings
                               Burns sheets                        30
                               Cotton wool                         24
                               Dressings I                        125
                               Dressings 2                        216
                               Dressings 3                        176
                               Gauze, 1 metre (pack#)               7
                               Maternity packs                      2
                               Triangular bandages                144

                               Splints
                               Cervical collars                    46
                               Frac-pac                            11
                               Hayes splints                        3
 *. *                                                SHEET 2




CATEGORY          ITEM                          NUMBER



Personal Safety   Ambulance Officer incident
                                    jacket       1                  7
                  Blue hard hat                  4
                                                               V''
                  Chemical suits                 9
                  Debris gloves                 11              ... ■.

                  Full-length yellow luminous
                                     jackets    20
                  H.V. jacket                    4
                  Rubber gloves, heavy duty      4 (pairs)
                  Warning triangles              2
                  White hard hat                 4
                  Yellow hard hat               20

Rescue Kit        Bolt crops (large)             1
                  Bottle jack                    1
                  Fireman* s axe                 2
                  Hammers, 141b.                 2
                  Lashings                       2
                  Philips screwdriver, 10"       1
                  Wrecking bars                  2
                  Saws, G.P.                     3
                  Stillson wrench, 18"           1
Emergency signs   Ambulance loading point        2
                  Casualty collecting station    1
                  First aid supplies             1
                  Parking point                  1
Miscellaneous     Batteries                      6
                  De-icer                        1
                  Flasks                         2
                  Fire extinguisher              2
                  HYGI wipes (packe)             2
                  Identity jackets              30
                  Tissues (packs)                2
                  Torches                        2
                  Towels (hand)                  4
                  Wash basin
TRENT RHA - HILLSBOROUGH
CONTENT OF STATEMENTS
Statements.should include the following details
Name
Job Title
Date of Birth
Home Address
Qualification
Any relevant training
Number of years with SYMAS and other previous experience and who
with, including different positions held at SYMAS
Duty shift for Saturday 15th April and previous two days
What they were doing when they first heard anything about the
Hillsborough disaster, how they heard about it, what they did.
Where did they go and who with
What problems they encountered on the way
How long did it take to get there
Difficulties in relation to getting to the ground, access to the
ground, precisely where they went
What they did when the got there
Any difficulties they experienced as a result of spectators or
police, or any contact which they had with any of them
Any difficulties they had as a result of the position of the ramp
Any contact with St. Johns Ambulance personnel
Any communications, whether verbal or over the radio and any
difficulties which they experienced
Which radio channels they were using
What equipment they carried and howit was used
Which Hospital they went to and why and      which route   theytook
Anything they know in relation to the major incident plan
It is important that, as far as possible, precise times be
included.   In many cases it will not be possible to include
precise times, but there will be events which a number of
individuals recall which will allow statements to be cross-
referenced.
Use plans wherever appropriate
l   M
        / 2   -e-   M           jt




                                                  i o
                            I
                                      6
                                             -    1    ^

                                      A
                                            0^        v    ~




                                     * IA
                                             ‘i




/ <7V c \/\—            (




                                                                                      1
                                                  r        V®
                                                   y       CKA^   i f O ^ J (t^ ^ -



                                                                       O W A M ^ f    ,
                               ILANCE S E R U I C E                              0709 B29842            P.01




        SOUTH                                METROPOLrTAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                      AMBIANCE SERVSCE HEADQUARTERS
                                                           MOORGATE ROAD,
                                               ( " O 'T h E R H A W   S60 2BQ,
                                      :;E-            s.CTHERMAM (0709)828820



        oi>s ne=:                                                                     Mr- A- PAGE, JP. F,A.SX
        w ,in r ,                                                                         CHIEPM6TR6POUTAM
        Y 0 U - REt-                                                                      a m b u la n c e   omce-R
        Piijasfas*to?'




  0 ^ Q £.\)T

^-br"     f c X 2 . CXfcfc.


 yVtr               A     Coj.jv.a^ HCX^n




"Totem                                                                             fc*v^.

 O K c *            t   /..<     f)
                      & ^ ">   .3   29£ 42
20-04-198s;'                          S YORKS,AMBULANCE SERUICE                     0709 829842       P.02




      Control    Assistant                           1400 ~ 2200 Saturday 15th April 1989.



      About 1510 hours X took a call from the Police who said ”1 want a fleet of
      ambulances to Leppings Lane".                    I passed this information to
      as we had already had at least one call from the Police.                             told me
      that further information was aloe                   coming in from Hillsborough.


      We mobilised vehicles              to the      scene.    Ray Clarke told me to open up an
      incident log*      Mr, Hopkins was its.             control and instructed the second
      Middlewood vehicle to be mobilised and then informed us that he would be
      going to Hillsborough to assess the situation.


      We started to mobilise                 other veMtfles, most of these were through radio
      communications via                                 As   best I could, I logged the vehicles
      booking mobile straight away.


                        informed the hospital casualties about the situation and
      started to notify             people for calling              I then went with Mr, Clarke to
      operate from the         Incident Room on ERC.


      I rang Nottingham,             they were uaawate of the situation, I informed them
      about Hillsborough and asked if                   help was available if it was required, rh^y
      said ’'you only have to                ask".


      From then on, everything happened at once,


      T rang Mr. Smith and informed him of the incident at 1533 hours.                       The
      i   Ident log   was opened at 1512 hours, this being the time I received a
          i1 ttom Force control.                The Policeman was panicking, I did \%oi get any-
      information other than "1 want a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane".
      explained        i t ® and ambulances wets located at the ground ali                   Jy, h»
      did not give me any further information.                      I do not think the Police knew
      wHat     was happening when 1 spoke to them, he.just wanted to get off the
      telephone.




                                                                                                             .
                     0 7 0 9 8 2 38 4 2
20-04-1989   10:26               S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                    0709 829842    P.03




     Station Officer P. Eason




     At 1400 hours, myself along with Station Officer Higgins and Qualified
     Ambulancemen                   and <                left Longley Station and proceeded to
     Hillsborough Football Stadium.               On arrival at the ground, myself and
     Station Officer Higgins liaised with Inspector                S Sewell of South Yorkshire
     Police. This meeting had been pre-arranged earlier in the week by Inspector
     Sewell and myself.


     The vehicle was parked               as arranged within Entrance *0* via Penistone Road.


     Both Station Officer Higgins               and myself were carrying portable radios which
     were serviceable*          The crew also had a portable radio which was
     serviceable.


     Mr. Sewell advised us that no problems had been encountered and that
     everything was going according               to   plan.


     We took up our position on the               pitch perimeter track and at 1459 hours the
     game commenced.


     A short time after the game commenced, I noticed a disturbance in the crowd
     behind the goal at the Leppings Lane standing area and commented on this to
      Station Officer Higgins *              It looked as if a scuffle may have been
      developing.     Myself and Qualified Ambulanceman ____________ walked down
      towards the Leppings Lane end to investigate.                On arrival it appeared that
      some of the crowd were agitated and our attention was drawn to a young man
     who had a query fractured leg.                He had been brought out of the Leppings
      Lane end and on to the pitch near the goal.                At this time there was no
      indication of what was developing,


     'I tried to use my pocketphone in order to summon assistance ie for Station
      Officer Higgins to send down Qualified Ambulanceman                     1 with a fracture
      pac and a stretcher,            The pocketphone did not work,      I tried moving
      location repeatedly but the thing still refused to work.                At this time more
      and more fans appeared to be spilling out of a gate within the enclosure
      fence and were sitting on the pitch - some of them appeared aggressive and
                      0?09 829342
20-04-1989   10=27           S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                   0709 829842     P.04




     2   .


     Station Officer P. Eason.



     I was aware of people hitting out and aiming kicks at myself,
     and some of the Policemen in the vicinity.          The situation still appeared to
    be little more than a minor disturbance.


    Owing to the hostility rising within the crowd and the fact that ny
     pocketphone was useless, I advised                        that we were withdrawing
     to our original position and we did so.


     Having consulted Station Officer Higgins, all four of us proceeded back to
     the Leppings Lane end with first aid equipment.          The idea was to monitor
     the situation and treat the fractured leg.


     Upon our return to the site, it was obvious that the crowd were even more
     aggressive and 1 believe that myself and Station Officer Higgins were both
     assaulted.      More fans were on the pitch as                and           splinted
     the mans leg.


    We were still not aware of the severity of the incident, although it became
     increasingly obvious that more and more fans were coming on to the pitch,
     X think 1 took Mr, Higgins pocketphone and tried to establish contact with
    control, but his pocketphone was not working either.          Mr. Higgins decided
     to return to the vehicle in order to contact control.         We had decided that
     the vehicle on stand by at Middlewood should be brought down to the end of
    Leppings Lane as a precaution.       I started towards the Leppings Lane end in
    order to assess the ongoing situation.       It was increasingly obvious that
    some sort of trouble was transpiring within the enclosure.            As more fans
    spilled on to the pitch, Police were arriving in large numbers.


    A fan approached me and asked me to look at a little boy who he thought was
    dead, he pointed at a group of people surrounding the body of a small boy
    on the pitch,       I approached the group and a man claiming to be a Doctor was
20-04-1989   10=28         S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                0709 829842        P.05




     3.



     Station Officer P. Eason.



     the pocketphone repeatedly but to no avail*       I told this Doctor I would
     summon assistance and then ran back to our ambulance. Ambulancemen
     and             were by now attending to fans laid on the pitch* I think
     someone was kicking                 A Policeman told me he thought some of
     the fans were dead or dying.


     On arrival at the vehicle I contacted control and declared a Major Incident
     and was advised to switch to channel one,     I think 1 asked for more
     vehicles and I think I was told they were on the way.       I think I asked for
     them to come to our location.


     I then went to consult Station Officer Higgins and found him in the rear of
     the vehicle surrounded by minor injuries*     I told him I was going back
     towards the scene and would radio with an update*       He said he would
     establish a casualty clearing post at the gymnasium.


     At around this time Leading Ambulanceman Flack arrived on scene and I tried
     to direct him to the boy on the pitch, but by this time the pitch appeared
     to be covered with people, some of them were carrying people on boards and
     I directed them towards the gymnasium.


     Failing to see the boy, myself and Leading Ambulanceman Flack took a
     stretcher onto the pitch and headed towards where I thought he was.          We
     found him and he was placed on the stretcher and removed.       I advised the
     Doctor to attend the gymnasium and consult Station Officer Higgins bt ", I do
     not believe he did this.


     Once again 1 approached the Leppings Lane end to assess the situation.
     People were literally crushed against the fence, some managed to be drags-’d
     out by police through the gate and through tears in the fencing.       Others
     were being hauled up into the seating above the terracing,       I did not know
     at this time that the people crushing into the fence were standing on
                     0709   829842
20-04-1989   10:28            S YORKS,AMBULANCE SERUICE                0709 829842    P.06




     4.



     Station Officer P. Eason*



     people who had succumbed to the crushing - a lot of fang were screaming for
     help within the enclosure.


      1 ran back to the enclosure and was aware that Mr. Hopkins had arrived, we
     made our way onto the pitch and I warned him that the crowd were very
      aggressive.    He said get the incident vehicle to the scene,       I think X
      radioed this request and I think 1 was informed it was en route.         At this
      time I started marshalling vehicles which were arriving.         Station Officer
      Higgins and myself had earlier agreed that the vehicles would be reversed
      side by side in twos up entrance *0*.       The vehicles were arriving in
      Penistone Road from the city end and T held them in Penistone Road until 1
      could get them into the ground*


      Station Officer                arrived with the incident vehicle and was
      marshalled into the space allocated for him within Entrance *0*.


      Shortly after this Mr. Jones arrived and confirmed what I was doing.


      For some reason, Divisional Superintendent Dale arrived and I think the
      Police told him that the vehicle loading point had been switched to the
      gymnasium entrance 25 yards down the road.          I did not make this decision,
      nor was X aware of any other Ambulance Officer doing so.


      Divisional Superintendent Dale and myself discussed this and decided to use
      both access points for ambulance loading.


      Qualified Ambulanceman                   arrived with a mini bus and X parked him
      on the pavement and told him to stay with his vehicle.          I then informed Mr,
      Jones of this and told him that this vehicle was available for transporting
      walking wounded.
20-04-1939   10=29           S YORKS,AMBULANCE SERUICE              0709 829842      P .07

- *




      Station Officer P. Eason.



      At around this time Mr. Jones asked me to relocate myself and incoming
      vehicles to the Berries Road Bus Depot and treat this as an Ambulance
      Parking Point.


      I took a further pocketphone and assembled a convoy which proceeded to the
      Bus Depot,     I contacted control and was acknowledged that I was stood by at
      Herries Road,


      As vehicles arrived 1 stood them four abreast in an open area at the depot.
      I sited sitting case vehicles and a West Yorkshire Incident Vehicle
      (equipment) separately within the area.      I then gathered Leading
      Ambulanceman Flack, Leading Ambulanceman              Leading Ambulanceman
             and Leading Ambulanceman           and told them Leading Ambulanceman
      Flack was staying with me as a relay and advised the others to make sure
      the crews stayed together and try to maintain their morale.


      I asked Leading Ambulanceman           to complete a list of vehicle fleet
      numbers and respective services at the garage.


      I was increasingly aware of the numbers of vehicles arriving at the parking
      point and I tried to contact control with the suggestion that some of the
      vehicles might possibly be stood down in order to be used on other
      emergency duties, once again the pocketphone refused to work efficiently.
      It would receive but not transmit.


      Eventually I established a poor contact with control via a Barnsley vehicle
      on site and was asked to contact control on landline.
      Leading Ambulanceman Flack having disappeared, I took Leading Ambulanceman
             with me into the garage to find a telephone.    With the help of garage
      staff, I managed to open a land line in a managers office and 1 contacted
       ->">trol and was connected to Mr. Page who instructed me to ensure that
                     07 0 9 829 8 4 2
20-04-1989   10-29              S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842        P.08

• Hr

     6.



     Station Officer P. Eason,


     either Mr, Jones or Mr, Hopkins contact him by vodaphone as soon as
     possible*


     I had no communication with site so I told Leading Ambulanceman                    to
     despatch a runner to the ground with the message, this was done*


     Some time later, Leading Ambulanceman                  informed me that the vehicles
     at the garage were to be dispersed and that I was required at the gymnasium
     at Hillsborough,


     I proceeded to the gymnasium and along with other officers I was briefed by
     the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer,


     Mr, Page decided that Assistant Divisional Officer Motley, myself and
     Station Officer                H should remain at the gymnasium and carry out a
     body removal programme if and as necessary,


     Mr. Jones advised me that all bodies were to be removed to the Medico Legal
     Centre, Sheffield,


     Assistant Divisional Officer Morley, Station Officer                     and myself
     decided that Assistant Divisional Officer Morley would oversee the overall
     plan, Station Officer                  would be responsible for the radio
     communications and that I would maintain vehicle deployment and appropriate

     documentation.


     Food and drink was organised via South Yorkshire Police*


      Eleven bodies from Northern General Hospital and one from the Royal
     Hallamshire Hospital were transferred to the gymnasium at Hillsborough and
      after appropriate procedures within the gymnasium we commenced removal to
       the Medico Legal centre*
                     8769 829842
20-04-1989   10:30          S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE          0709 829842    P.09




      7.



      Station Office* P. Eason.



      In all we removed and transported 94 bodies and accompanying police
      personnel between 2130 hours and 0528 hours.


      Mr. Hopkins declared the incident closed at 0530 hours and I returned to
      Longley Station to organise equipment cleaning.


      I eventually left Longley for home at 0640 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
                                 070 9   829342
2 0 -0 4 -1 3 8 3   10!   3 0               b YORKS, P M   E U L h i M C B   bERUI(JE             0709 829842    P. 10

, it


         Control Officer                             0900 - 1630 OPD - 15.04.89 - stayed until 20.30.



          Superintendent R. Clarke asked for all the spare outpatient vehicles to be
          despatched to Hillsborough.


          12 vehicles were deployed between approximately 1508 and 1600 hours as and
          when they became available from throughout the county.


          I kept the vehicles updated regarding the hospital status and I also kept
          them on the outpatient channel because of the pressure on the "E" and the
          ERG channels.             I actually used some of these vehicles for ”E" calls within
          Sheffield because the incident at the ground had been cleared of all live
          casualties.


          I also used eight of the outpatient crews to transfer cases from the
          Hallamshire Hospital to the King Edward Hospital.                                This transfer being
          conducted between 1730 and 1854 hours.                                 As they had completed their role at
          the incident the crews continued to transfer patients between hospitals.


          At 1534 hours, I transferred a medical team from the Northern General
          Hospital to the scene.


          We kept informing the Hospital of standby requirements, they asked us not
          to do this.


          Doctors and Nurses came on 999 lines to ask if they were required at
          hospital.             The telephone numbers to, the hospitals were blocked, the same
          happened with equipment suppliers.


          The press calls were very heavy.
                      0 7 0 9 829842
20-04-1989    10:31             S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE        0709 829842      P.11

   tv


    All Vehicles on Outpatient Duties


    Vehicles sent to scene, Hillsborough football ground.


    1206 Bravo
     407 Sierra
     906 Delta
     805 Delta
     801 Delta
     601 Rotoeo
     505 Romeo
     203 Sierra
     607 Romeo - Single handed
     308 Sierra
     105 Sierra - doing cases for domestic side.
    1101 Bravo


    1635 hours


     805 Delta - broke down Glossop Road, Claremont Place, duty fitter informed
                      and attending.




    Transfer to King Edward Hospital froto Royal ttallatn3hire Hospital   (KEH)

      505 2 stretchers to KEH               to base 1805
     607 2 stretchers to KEH - 1735 to base 1805
    1101 2 stretchers to KEH        to base 1809
     203 2 stretchers to KEH                to base 1813
     403 4 double handed to KEH             to base 1833
     805 1 stretcher
             2 double handed to KEH         to base 1854
      801 2 stretchers to KEH               to base 1823
      308 1 stretcher to KEH                to base 1843
2 0-04-1989              10=31                                           S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                                                                                       0709 829842         P.12

  %

       Superintendent T. Dale.


       At approximately 1450 hours I was stood by outside the White Horse Public
      House on Halifax Road.                                                                At this time there were still hundreds of Liverpool
       supporters making their way to the match.                                                                                                    I left this position, thinking
       the match would be starting soon and there would be less chance of any
       incident once the game was underway.


       At some time after 1500 hours I was on the other side of the city, I heard
       Alpha 3 and 4 calling from inside the ground at Hillsborough and X thought
       there was something wrong.                                                                           Radio Sheffield reported the game had been
       halted for some reason but did not report why.                                                                                                                       1 contacted control who
      were aware something had happened but could not give me much information.
       At this stage X made all possible haste just in case I was needed at the
       ground,                            X heard control direct crews to the Penistone Road end of the
       ground towards the gymnasium entrance*


       X do not know what time I arrived at the ground but I contacted Station
       Officer Eason who was stood in the middle of Penistone Road informing
       ambulance crews to reverse into the gateway, the driver to stay with the
       ambulance and the attendant to go and help with the injured.                                                                                                                          1 asked
       station officer Eason how bad he thought the incident was and if there were
       any dead, he replied he thought there were about nine dead at the time.                                                                                                                                At
       this stage, 1 think Station Officer Eason asked me to continue with the
       loading of ambulances whilst he found Mr* Hopkins, this I did.                                                                                                                          At this
       time there were only two or three ambulances there and supporters with the
       injured and dying were trying to put people into the vehicles either on
       stretchers or on bill boards.                                                                                     My handset from the staff car did not work
       and I tried to contact control on several occasions but eventually gave up
       trying with the handset.


       Whilst out on the road waiting for ambulances to arrive,                                                                                                                      I    was approached
       by dozens of fans wanting information about relatives, how to get to
       hospital etc,                                    I       saw an ambulance come cut of the South Stand entrance with
       blue lights and horns on.                                                                                I thought he was coming to the incident and I
       became frustrated because                                                                           he was stuck in traffic unable to move.                                                     The
       police appeared to be making                                                                                  no progress with the traffic situation at this
       time.                      I       asked the Police                                                  to make sure the ambulances got through as a




         'ill in iilirn’i'liftft'T lfii      IfjaafiltitiMtfhMYViri ~ "'f'tVn l A w t f - tffr't'rtfi i tiBfulirr' "In ■'MHhlii iD; «•*—   -' -Yrt ' ' - - -t t i - n r -   -r-i                               ' ;-X
                      0 70 9 S 2 9 S 42
20-04-1989    10:32               S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                  0709 829842    P .1




    2,




    Superintendent T. Dale,


    priority.     I think the ambulances in the loading area at this time had
     loaded and gone to the Northern General Hospital with a Police motorcycle
     escort.    X ran     up the road to this crew the driver was Ambulanceman □
               from Middlewood, he had two patients on board but at that time I did
     not know where from.           Later 1 found out the patients were from the Leppings
     Lane end of the ground*              I returned to the loading area to Station Officer
     Eason,


     At this I went into the gymnasium to see Mr. Hopkins.               His instructions to
     me were ’'get the major incident vehicle here fast” , 1 returned to the
     staff car and called control regarding the major incident vehicle, but the
     reception on the radio was very bad.              X could not make out what the Control
     Officer was saying.           Eventually 1 think he said the Accident Tender was on-
     route to the scene.           He also asked about the number of deaths.        I reported
     from what 1 had seen in the gymnasium at that time there were about 30
     bodies,     1 do not know if I was asked anything else as reception on ERC
     could not be understood,              I later found out that Station Officer Eason had
     contacted control re the Major Accident Vehicle,


     I returned to the loading area.              At this time mote ambulances were arriving
     and were asked to reverse into the gate side by side.               Other crews were
     asked to wait until the vehicles in the loading area left before carrying
     out the same procedure.              One vehicle was l e f t with no driver or keys this
     caused a problem for a minute or two until the driver and keys were
     located.     Back on the road, the police had moved some vehicles and told
     them to go round to Leppings Lane.              Certain crews followed these
     instructions instead of staying put.              Police also instructed vehicles that
     were parked waiting on Penistone Road to drive into the next gate as
     injured people were being brought to that location.               Some crews did this.
     We then had two loading areas.              Had police vehicles not been in the way we
     would have been able to drive in the first door, load the injured at the
     gymnasium, drive out of the second gate and away.
                      670 9 8 2 9 8 42
20-04-1989   105 33              S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE                 0709 829842      P. 14




      3.



      Superintendent T. Dale.




      Sometime around now Station Officer                      arrived with the Major
      Accident Vehicle, he was instructed by Hr* Hopkins to pull the vehicle, into
      the space at the first gate, Station Officer Eason was at Gate One.                 X went
      around to the second entrance where I found a number of vehicles stood
      waiting for patients, drivers at the ready*              There were also some police
      mini buses which had been hired to move policemen to the game.              These
      vehicles were used to move the walking wounded.              Communications between on
      site officers could only be done by sending a runner or going oneself,
      which happened to be more reliable, as any ambulanceman that left the
      ambulances appeared to be utilised somewhere else.


      Injured were being brought out on boards and I had to stop several groups
      from just putting the injured* boards and the lot into the ambulance.
      Patients were put on to cots, some being resuscitated.              One young boy
      arrived on a hoarding and was transferred to a cot, Qualified Ambulanceman
               and myself using CPR until I found a policeman to help.            I then
      continued trying to organise the loading and movement of patients*


      I found a problem in that patients were being loaded by spectators helped
      by our drivers, but then the attendant could not be found, this happened
      more than once,        1 despatched the vehicle with our man attending in the
      back and a policeman driving.              Some ambulancemen (          ) and another
      had filled a mini bus with less seriously injured, taking about ten
      patients in one go.           The other police mini buses were gradually being
      filled with walking wounded and people in bad shock.              There were people sat
      all round the loading area in a state of shock, most were being looked
      after by friends or other supporters.              I found that I was being approached
      by dozens of people either wanting help or information about relatives or
      loved ones.      Unfortunately, I could not help t h e s e people as I had other
      more important things to attend to.              At this stage we appeared to be
      reasonably organised.              Vehicles available with drivers waiting, attendants
      taking cots and returning with the injured.              When looking for ambulance
                            0709   82 9 5 4 2
■ 2 0 -04 -1 98 9   10=33   "           S YORKS. AMBULANCE SERUICE               0709 829842    P . 15


    m


           4.




           Superintendent T, Dale.




           Staff in the gymnasium, or among the police outside, it became very
           difficult to find them.              Apart from motorway jackets which both police and
           ambulance staff had on, identification became difficult*


           As the scene became less hectic, 1 was informed by Mr. Hopkins to get some
           more body bag3 as all the ones in the Major Accident Vehicle had been used,
           1 tried to contact control through the radio on the Major Accident Vehicle
           but had no success, so I went back to the staff car and called*               Once
           again, I could not make out what control were saying to me.                Later I
           established that a Major Accident Vehicle from West Yorkshire was on its
           way with more equipment.              Also at this time, we seemed to have an abundance
           of ambulances waiting on Penistone Road.


           At some stage, Mr, Hopkins asked me to go and wait with the surplus
           vehicles at Herries Road Bus Garage.              1 went to the staff car and informed
           control who then informed me that Station Officer Eason was already there.
           During all this Mr, Jones arrived at some stage and ran the loading and
           operations at the Number One gate.


   A       At some stage the Emergency Tender from WYMAS arrived, Station Officer
                        and myself met him and informed him we needed more body bags.
            Eventually when he found them there were only about             twelve.   All were taken
            to Mr. Hopkins who used them in the gymnasium.


            Mr. Jones asked me to take two vehicles around to the Leppings Lane end and
            collect some bodies and return to the gymnasium,               I took a WYMAS and
            Nottingham ambulance around only to find Station Officer             Higgins had
            already dealt with the bodies            and was in the process of loading the last
            two.     I returned to the gymnasium with the crews.
Superintendent T. Dale,



I was told by either Mr. Jones or Mr* Hopkins to take Station Officer
Higgins down to the Medico Legal Centre and prepare for the bodies
arriving.   This I did, but we had great difficulty getting through the
traffic.    On arrival at Medico Legal Centre I dropped off Station Officer
Higgins and contracted control - reception outside Medico Legal Centre on
ERC was excellent.    Control told me to go to Herries Road Bus Garage and
establish a land line.    On arrival at the Garage, Leading Ambulanceman
_____ informed me this had already been done and the message from Mr. Page
was to tell either Mr, Hopkins or Mr. Jones to contact him at Headquarters.


1 then returned to the Sheffield Wednesday’s Football Club Gymnasium and
passed Mr. Page*is message to both Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Jones.      Control also
informed me at some time during the operation that walking wounded needed
to be taken to Barnsley District General Hospital.       This information was
passed late on in the incident when most casualties had been removed.


Mr. Hopkins informed me he wanted six ambulances to stay and the rest could
go to Herries Road Bus Garage.    X passed this information to Mr. Jones who
dealt with it.


At this time, most of the incident had been cleared, all that remained were
the 90 or so bodies in the gymnasium.


Mr. Page arrived on scene and the incident began to wind down.


I was instructed by Mr. Page to bring in some night men early to help ease
the work load.    This was done from the Control Unit.     X later collected
Station Officer Higgins from the Medico Legal Centre and returned to
Hillsborough and assisted until midnight.
20-04-1989     10:34         S YORKS.PMBULANCE SERUICE              0709 829842    P.'l

• #


      Station Officer Higgins.



      1505 hours - A crowd disturbance was noticed at Leppings Lane, I asked
      Station Officer Eason and Ambulanceman                to have a look.   1 then
      notified control of a crowd problem at Hillsborough but there did not
      appear to be many casualties at this time*


      Station Officer Eason returned and informed me that many people were
      injured.     I informed control of this and then proceeded to the Leppings
      Lane end to try to establish the number of people injured.     I was still not
      aware st this time of the severity of the situation *s many of the injured,
          all of the bodies were on the floor behind the Leppings Lane wall.


      1 had extreme problems with radio equipment at this time, transmitting was
      impossible from the location of the incident.      The crowd were lashing out
      at everyone in uniform, including ambulance staff.


      I returned to the vehicle to transmit to control and was told by a Police
      Inspector that there were approximately 30 bodies at Leppings Lane end
      (they had seen these on video), I passed this information to control,        I
      used the parked ambulance at Penistone Road by the gymnasium as a base and
      asked the Police to make sure that the gymnasium was available as per the
      major incident plan.


      Shortly afterwards two ambulances arrived, 1 directed them onto the pitch
      and told them to find Station Officer Eason who was at the far end of the
      pitch.     At this time Hr. Hopkins, Mr. Morley and Mr. Dale arrived at
      approximately 1520 hours.


      I was directing Police and fans to the gymnasium area with casualties and
      bodies, but the medical resources available at this time were very limited.
      Mr. Hopkins asked for the major incident vehicle, which arrived shortly
      afterwards with Station Officer              at approximately 1545 hours.
                        0789   8 27642
2 0-04-1909   10 : 35             S   Y O R K R „ PMRf il   -'Ffv.;'i'r-£           0709 829842     F.;1

•#


     2,


     Station Officer Higgins.


     We unloaded body bags, canvasses and poles and took them to the gymnasium
     area.    As more vehicles and staff arrived, I tried to establish the more
     serious injuries, make cots available and transport to hospital.                      Walking
     wounded were also put into vehicles were a seat was available.


     From the start of the incident, 1 had tried to make a route available
     through the gymnasium area using both entrances, one in - one out, but this
     was impossible until later as Police vehicles were parked at the junction
     of the gymnasium area.


     By this time, Mr. Hopkins had taken control of the incident and 1 was left
     estimating condition and priority of patients, and directing ambulance
      staff as they loaded patients,


     Mr, Jones had by this time arrived and was dealing with availability of
      staff and vehicles.


      By approximately 1650 hours, the gymnasium area was clear of casualties and
      I was told by Mr. Hopkins to take two vehicles to the entrance area at
     Leppings Lane to collect eleven bodies which were at this location and
      return them to the temporary mortuary.                     This I did,   I was not aware of
      this incident. Upon my return I was told by Mr. Hopkins to go to Medico
      Legal and await vehicles arriving, ensure as efficient turn round as
      possible of vehicles and return the vehicle complete with body bags to the
      temporary mortuary at Hillsborough.


      Superintendent Dale took me to the Medico Legal centre at 1800 hours and I
      remained there until 2000 hours.


      No bodies were received at the Medico Legal during this time as an amended
      plan was agreed at the ground during this period.


      At 2100 hours I returned to the ground with Superintendent Dale and helped
      with the loading of bodies for transport, to Medico Legal.
                         6789   8 i !s 8 4 2

£!0-id4-1989     10^36                S YGRKS. Ah^LLn^'Cil SrRuifE
                                                                                  0709 829842      P .i
■%



     3,


     Station Officer Higgins.




     I left the ground at 2330 hours to go home.


     Conclusions


     From the start of the incident we were in the wrong place - at ground
     level.


     If we had been in our usual place                  high in the ground we would have been
     aware of the incident more quickly and Police Officers would have been more
     readily available,


     Mr, Eason, myself and static crews could not contact each other by radio,
     we could only contact control with extreme difficulty.                    The equipment was
     inadequate,


     The    Police Officers both men and sergeants seemed unaware of the incident
     plan      for the ground.          They wanted to put casualties and bodies into the
     nearest ambulance,


     1 found in the initial stages of the incident that it was difficult to make
     fans and police accept that                   the bodies they were bringing out to me were
     dead.      I feel that a team              and doctors at the onset of the incident at ay
     post (casualty and          mortuary) in the gymnasium would have helped greatly.


     The senior St. Johns staff                   helped readily but the junior staff who were
     children could n o t cope                 and should not have been put into this position.


     As the incident progressed, St John senior staff were left dealing with
     their own cadets and were not available to help with medical teams.


     The numbers of off duty SYMAS road staff that attended the ground were
     invaluable.         They were         a major factor in ensuring the incident was dealt
     with as quickly as it was.
Station Officer Higgins.


To document events as they happen as per major incident plan is impossible»
unless you have sufficient officers at locations.     I found myself directing
the incident and still treating many patients as medical staff in the
required numbers could not have be*sn available,


The response time to the ground by SYMAS officers, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Jones,
Mr. Morley, Superintendent Dale and Station Officer            was greatly
appreciated by Station Officer Eason and myself.    The number of officers to
control an incident is as important as the numbers of crews.     The jobs that
need to be done in a situation of this level need officers capable of
following instructions from the senior officer.


The parking of vehicles outside the ground should not be allowed, it
greatly hindered the ambulances trying to attend the incident.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A, .Hopkins,




At approximately 1420 hours ou Saturday 15th April 1989* I attended the
control centre of SYMAS,      The reason Coe my visit was to update myself as
to the situation with regard the football and associated traffic conditions
within the county and particularly Sheffield area.


I asked if the two Liaison Officers had left for Hillsborough, it was
confirmed that they had left       Longley Ambulance Station en-route for the
ground,    I was informed that the two officers had left with an ambulance
crew who were also going to the ground to stand by*                  The second additional
cover vehicle had been put on stand        by at Middlewood station, a short
distance from Hillsborough.


At approximately 1508 hours Super tot eudfettt 8. Clarke took a call fro m the
South Yorkshire Police (Force Control),               I got the impression that Ray
Clarke was surprised    by the call because ha started to explain to the
caller that we had two Liaison         Officers in the ground with a vehicle.                    As
soon as that call had      finished a second call came from Force Control, this
time it was answered by


The call Ray Clarke    took esked for a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane
end of the ground,     I   iosmediatftiy questioned this as I know fro© experience
that ambulances cannot gain arceas from that area into the ground itself.
Mr. Clarke told    ®e he could not get any further details and I said get the
second standby vehicle to Leppings         Lane to get some information.                 I
actually passed this call myself to .Middlewood Ambulance Station.                           I also
tali Jt* . Cls*he 4®            th<i        t 4 t>4     f»ff i c # r a t tflA ffroiltld f o t
further details.


The call               [answered   s-jenr-i;? after Mr, Clarke’s confirmed they
wanted a fleet of ambulances        to the ground.        Because of the nature of the
calls and the conflicting      detail I decided to make my way to Hillsborough.
This would be approximately        1512 hours *       I left control and together with
Mr* Morley who had just returned from Sheffield, we travelled as an
emergency response to Hillsborough in          a marked ambulance car.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Oifice**   A,        Hopkins.




En route 1 decided it was a strange incident because of the way in which
the message had been vague from the police and because of the manner of
conversation I was hearing over the radio.


I told Mr. Morley to radio control and tell them to caake all Trent
Ambulance vehicles available as soon as possible.                1 heard this message
transmitted by            who finished the message by adding "particularly
Sierra mobiles” *


On leaving Headquarters, 1   decided I         was going to attend the normal
rendezvous point for incidents              t:,e football ground which is the
Pen!stone Road North, entrance iu- rhe gyanasium,               I knew our Liaison Officer
would be there or in that area,         T arrived at Hillsborough at 1522 hours,
parked my vehicle and left Mr* Barley with              it.     I then went to the    only
vehicular access to the*, pitch, wallet! down           toward the ground and looked
toward Leppings Lane end of th*ground *            I saw a      complete line of Police
Officers right across the width             o f the ground.


I ran across, want through the police lines where 1 could clearly see lots
of injured people on the grass.              Ilooked at the stand it was a mass        of
faces and it became cleat that tb»            ambulances at Leppings Lane could        not
get to this incident from the location.


I could not get involved with the injured,              my responsibility       was     toget
resources there immediately tcv ds^l with the situation.


X turned and began running back        to    .e>u>-*®en help*   I saw. a Police Officer
fall down with a little   .girl, in his arms » I picked up the child and
carried on running with   her in say anas up the ramp exit*              I stopped and
looked at her, she was dead.      The crowd at that time were clapping and
cheering and were generally noisy..
20-04- 19b:y   10: 3S




      3*



      Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A, Uo^kins,




      The Police Officer caught up to me and said "she has had it h asn’t she
      kid?" I replied "yes, taka her into the gymnasium" and gave him the child’s
      body.


      I saw Mr. Morley stood at the ambulance vehicle* X shouted for our Major
      Incident Vehicle and ambulance?? to at send the Penistone Road end of the
      ground* entrance, to the gymnasium.                        1 also asked foe the Chief Metropolitan
      Ambulance Officer            to bs informed at home, this Was approximately 1530
      hours,


      X    then went toward the gyma*** aa>, t'r:--.- first thing I saw was outside the St.
      Johns ambulance roots a group of wh**' r:»R only be described as children*
      they vere in m i i l o M            w td                 io- he- extremely upset.       I entered the
      gymnasium       doer and it was panye>eeu’im, there were Police Officers and
      a l r e a d y sow.? b o d i e s    1 ai,-‘
                                               J on t‘>« A d v * r . i g i n g b oar ds .



      There were casualties evefyvb.ei'e and bodies laid on the floor.                              I turned
      around and vent back to where the a&bulances could back in, we could only
      get one ambulance in at a time because of the way vehicles were packed*
      The     urea was full of Police vans and Police horses and one of our
       ambulances which had parked beSors the                         m$toh     kicked off,   the cots from
       that    vehicle had gone and the ex**** >iad responded to the Lappings Lane end
       of the pitch to help with tV* iajured.


       St-al s.c® Officer Higgiris reported to ae,                      he   said ’’it Is caos*f I said "find
      me    that crew and get that vtslti.de <nvtfsd" , I turned to look at the
       ambulance      and saw it had bf*.en filled wi5h dead and injured people who had
       bnen brought there by the crowd,                        Thsy we.re      laying on the floor and sitting
       csa l'i& Wh.eelarches            as the stretcher* had already been removed by the crew.
                               y 7 0 9 8 2^8 4 2
2 0 -0 4 -1 9 8 9   1 0 :3 8                                                 0709 829842   P .   2 4




           4.



           Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A* Hopkins.



           I wanted an ambulance onto the pitch,          I formed the opinion that this would
           let the crowd see that help had arrived.          1 thought the crowd were clapping
           and cheering because they thought help was at a premium.


           The Police appeared to be containing and area full of injured people and I
           wanted desperately to get an ambulance in.


           I got one of my vehicles into position at the top of the ramp ready to
           drive onto the pitch when the St, Johns Ambulance appeared at the bottom of
            the ramp blocking our entrance.         To my horror he appeared to have the
           vehicle side wedged against a metal ramp providing wheelchair access to the
            stand.


            The vehicle was freed by a large group of Police Officers bouncing it
            straight.          This vehicle then exited from the ground.


           We had reversed our vehicles to allow this and then we drove forward again
            only to find that our vehicle got wedged on girder work supporting the
            gate.       Because of the inability to drive in a straight line it was
            necessary to bounce vehicles straight to gain access and egress from the
            pitch.


            The wheelchair ramp was a surprise to me as on my previous visits to the
            ground, it had not been there*          I am not aware of any notification of its
            prescence.


            I then sent a further ambulance onto the pitch as the crowd appeared to
            respond favourably to the first one.         With the increase of ambulance staff
            and fire service personnel we were able to take control of the situation,
            removing the injured.




                                                                                                       iSSUl?i
                                                                                                             TSL
                                                              ■zmmmn
                                       0709 829042   """"'\              ,5«*^
h       2 0 -0 4 -1 9 8 9   1 0 :3 9           S YORKS.AMBULANCE SERUICE              0709 829842   P.25
                       ...



*jp? *’’



                    Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.
IP
It
Ktis;
|
                   I stopped at the top of the camp and was then approached by Leading
                   AfllKlllanAdm*- P ~
                   Ambulanceman            ~          .                             .
                   - ,                   , I sent him into the —
                                                               gymnasium to attend
                                                                                '-r to
                                                                                    WV the
                                                                                       Ul«S
                   injured getting them ready to transport, I went to my vehicle and.asked
S*'                over the radio for the location of the Major Incident Vehicle, I was told
                   he would be there within minutes.


                   At the time the Major Incident Vehicle arrived driven by Station Officer
                 V. .        Control informed me that the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
                  Officer had been contacted and was proceeding to Headquarters* Mr* Jones
ib:
S'1
  :’               then ran to me and I asked him to take charge of everything concerning
                   leading and despatch fro® that location and Penistone road.


V                  I then went to return to the gymnasium where I was confronted by a male who
ij.
|lr                told me he was a Doctor and had three more Doctors with him* but they had
jfe               no equipment,           I saw one of my staff, I cannot remember who it was but I
                  asked UJun to take the Doctors names and take them into the gymnasium
                  introducing them to Leading Ambulanceman            who had his para medic
                  equipment with him.


                  Mr, Morley then came with an Ambulance Station Officer from Nottingham who
                  had four or five staff with him,             These people were in civilian clothes and
                  had been supporting Nottingham Forrest at the match. Mr. Morley went onto
                  the ground wearing our satin yellow ambulance jackets.


                  I then entered the gymnasium and found Chief Superintendent Addis and
                  liaised with him.           I came out and returned to the ambulance loading party
                 by this time the match had been abandoned and fans were filing out of the
                 stands.




I

                                                                W +rn-
         ,                        0709   829842         ’   ' ‘ ‘ '
   ^               -   10 ! 39              s   Y0RK5.AMBULANCE Sgfr'fCE v                0709 829842 ! P.26




         t=


                                                                      ’• '   Sf'"'   '*



              The number of injured coming from the pitch area had slowed down.                    I was
              conscious of the fact that there was a number of seriously injured in the
              gymnasium and 1 was anxious to have these people transported to hospital,
              I observed many of them had foeea infused by our para medics and Doctors,
                                                                                                               VJ : ".




              1 had already agreed with Chief Superintendent Addis that the gymnasium
              would be the temporary mortuary and I would remove the injured as soon as I
              could. We then commenced transferring the injured from the gymnasium to
              hospital.


               . this time the Police, vehicles which were blocking the egress and access
 plf:
              routes for my vehicles had been moved and the flow arrangements were
I *:          better.       Mr, Jones and Mr, Dal* had ensured a clear passage for ambulances
fk-zf
              which had been the initial problem at the earlier stages of the incident*
              Mr. Jones came to me in the gymnasium area and told me he had ten
SfiSv'        ambulances on Penistone Road outside the ground with a further twenty five
>h
              in Herries Road Bus Garage.               He also informed me that he was aware of
If
i- •          eleven bodies on the circular road of the Sheffield Wednesday corner of the
              ground (Leppings Lane).               I questioned this "do you mean outside the
              ground?".          He could not be specific as he had seen them with a Police Chief
              Inspector who had in fact pointed them out to him earlier.                    I now know that
              Mr, Jones thought the circular road was part of the ground but in fact is a
              service road outside the perimeter wall.


              The priority at the time was the r&moval of the living injured not the
              known dead.          Events began to move quickly and in a short space of time I
              despatched three vehicles with an officer to bring these bodies to the



              I lost complete track of time, but I knew the next thing to do was to
              liaise with the Police with regard the course of action to be taken with
              the bodies.
     ‘C^ ’' *                      0709 62934/                                                            '
            ;20$4-1989     10=40          S YORKS.GMBULWJCE SEK»fC|f| ?           0709 829842 .   P .27


                                                          ■*              >
 W»si4S&r       ’•
 :                :■
L           :



r


                  The original arrangements with Chief Superintendent Addis after
                   consultation with the coroners office was to transport the bodies* to:-


                           Medico Legal Centre, Sheffield.
                           Royal Hallamshire Hospital.
                           Northern General Hospital.


                     and if necessary Rotherham District General Hospital.


                     I previously agreed to do this as X could complete the
                     bodies in one exercise*
ii



                     However, Chief Superintendent Addis informed me that the coroner (Dr.
                     Popper) had stopped the original plan and was employing an international
                     London based organisation to remove and prepare the bodies for



                     Much later Dr* Popper arrived and we discussed with Chief Superintendent
                     Addis how to dispose of the bodies.       It was agreed that the bodies would be
                     photographed by polaroid and developed at the top end of the gymnasium,        I
                       get up a screen to obstruct the view of relatives from the mass of bodies.


                     No body was to be removed prior to positive identification.


                       Ambulance cover was scaled down to six to facilitate the eventual removal
                       of the bodies*


                       I then left the scene at approximately 2000 hours on Saturday 15th April
                       1989 * I proceeded to headquarters and then went home.




«v.   . .
"[i' '          07 0 9
-|19B9 •10:41             5 'iOPt,5.hIIEULANCE SEP1JICE                0709 829842   P.28




  R CLARKE - CONTROL SUPERINTENDENT


  On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was Duty Control Superintendent on the 1400-
  2200 shift.

   Shortly after 1500, I received a telephone call from Force Control
   informing me qur attendance wight “be required at the Hillsborough Football
   Ground, although they were not s u re at that time and would let us lcnow.

   Almost immediately after. Force Control telephoned again to request a fleet
   of ambulances as there was ’’an incident1’ at the ground and there were
   persons injured

   I informed Force Control that we had Duty Officers with vehicles inside the
   ground, and would alert and mobilise them and assess the situation*

   I then requested Control Officer          who was on the Emergency Desk to
   call our Duty Officers at the. ground and get a situation report. At this
   time a vehicle was being mobilised to the ground from Middlewood Station,

    Information then started coming is simultaneously from the Duty Officers at
    the ground and Force Control, that a large incident was in progress and
    more ambulances were required. At this time, we did not know what the
    incident was 6r numbers .involved,

    Mr Hopkins who was in the Control Unit at this time, proceeded to the
    scene.

    Moments later information was received from Force Control that many people
    had been injured and there were fatalities
  V                  ..                     . ....        .... ..... . .   ...
    Bv this time, additional support vehicles were being mobilised to     scatter;
    from various points throughout the SYMAS area, by Control Officer       "I6h?
    the Emergency Desk,  Control Officer __     on  the out-patient desk, C/A'$
                    I, and myself. Superintendent 1       ^and i        had
    just arrived at the Control Unit in an off-duty capacity, so I enlisted
    their assistance,

      I instructed I'C/A-       to start the Control Log, and record as many events
      as possible, X took               into the Control Superintendent’s office and
      instructed he t  to start  the re-call of Control Staff and call xn as many as
      possible.

                    pw^v^u^vi
      Myself and Su pe^intehdfstit       then contacted Derbyshire,
      Nottinghamshi re and West Yorkshire Ambulance Services and requested them to
      move support vehicles up to the SYMAS boundaries and informing them of the
      situation in hand.

      It was about this point that it became evident that Control Officer
      wa3 usi.uiiuus overwhelmed by the volume of vehicles and radio messages,
      was becoming
      therefore, ensuring that cover was being maintained on other Emergency,
      Urgent and domestic work which at. this time was very busy, I decided to
      Control the IfillsboroUgb incident on ERC in the Major Incident Room.
                                                                *1   .B   1 *   ' ? ‘ *

                                     o?0?   8 2 518 4 2
                 20-44-1989 ,^41,,               S )'OPf 5,                                           0709 829842    P.29



        1 * ''’
              Hl/s ‘



        IK             SHEET 2 - R CLARKE                       Y^
        mi
        •SW's:         I took C/A       with me and set up the ERC facility* I continued then to
        PR:            establish contact with as many vehicles as was possible. The major
                       incident communications vehicle was mobilised at the request of Mr Hopkins.
                       I was getting messages constantly frosa the Control Room anbd I attempted to
                       ’--- in touch with what was happening in there.

                       It became evident there       problems with communication at the scene.
                       Some of the transmissions m m unreadable, likewise, others were not
                       receiving mine with clarity, resulting in messages having to be repeated
                       several times in some instances:.

                       I continued to work as quickly as possible*                        Mr* Smith was briefed on his
                       arrival.

                       Control Staff re-called to duty were by now arriving. Vehicles were by now
                       reporting movements between the scene and hospitals and a ferrying
                       operation was sell underway.

                      \It v m established that            sufficient vehicles were in attendance as the
                       incident progressed and            those not required back at scene were sent to
                       various holding points.

                       As more Control Officers arrived I designated Control Officer         [w
                       take over on the SRC Desk, and carried on with other duties within the
                       unit, until the end of    shift.   my
           ■
                       My priority at the outset of this incident was to mobilise vehicles to the
                       scene to deal effectively ©.id quickly with the incident, at the $ame time
    /                  maintaining cover for the SYMA5 area.
    (
    t*
                       Events moved very quickly, and I selected what I saw as the immediate
                       priorities, and carried them out with the staff I had with me.

                       1 have submitted this report honestly, outlining the main sequence of
                       events, an 1 remember them.

                       Control staff carried out their duties in a calm* efficient manner to the
                       credit of the Service.




i
n p i ;
                                    0709   8 r ti 8 4 2
       , ■-20r04-il9B9 / 1 0 : 42                S vnpr=.
                                                   Y O R K S .amri ii anr
                                                              AMBULANCE'  SEF?1>I CE                0709 829842,         P.30




         • ;‘5 C o n t r o l l e r                         1400 « 2200 hours.


                  Alpha 4 (Paul Eason) r a d io e d tvpm                               F o o t b a l l ©round with the
                   following message "ground restless* can I have a vehicle t o sta n d b y nearer
                   the ground".       T h is was before we re c e iv e d any emergency call, I think it
                  was about 1500 h o a rs ,


                  The request for a further vehicle:? on standby wag in addition to
                  vehicles he had on scene,                 X told him I had one vehicle at Middlevood did
                  he want this nearer and he replied wno it’s ok there” .


                           k (Paul Eason) radioed again asking for the Middlewood vehicle to be
                  despatched as an emergency call to Sheffield Wednesday Football ground.


                  At approximately the same time, the Police rang asking for a fleet of
                  vehicles, Superintendent Clarke informed me of this call.                           M r , Hopkins> who
                  was in the control unit, asked me to get Alpha 4 to investigate
                   request with the Police because m                    did   not have any further information.
P#
                  At this time X think another                 call came in from the police, but 1 do not
                   know the detail.


                   Alpha 4 reported back regarding the requirement for a fleet of ambulances
                   he   told me ’’people have been crashed, there may be fatalities".                         X
IRS-.
is.>
SHF                inwediately despatched a.U vehicles available at that time.                           That being
•-..
                   four or five emergency vehicles froia;-


                          Parkway
                          Batemoor
                          Middlewood
                          Maltby
S?&:
                         Rotherham

                   and then later I despatched vehicles from


                          Barnsley
                          Hoyland




If"
life'
            ifPlpyi-

                         - 10:42
                       (89 -- -           S YORhS.AHBULftftt SERVICE ‘            -0709 829842    P.31


              #A»t-k>.<;
    ■? ‘
       i^       'i*2



1<,'                                                   ,   4u   w<
                                                                 ,

yi ,




                  I told Superintendent Clarke that things were getting out of hand And we
                  had better operate SRC        from the Incident Room, I gave out two or'three
                  general c a l l s o v e r the radio telllag vehicles respoadlag to the
                  Hillsborough incident to go onto ESC, Superintendent Clarke went into
                  incident room with Hath Lions to operate the ERC channel.


                                   >as  in charge of the day vehicles on outpatient duties, most   of
                   these were      on station. He mobilised all his available vehicles to the
                   scene    from   throughout the county.

                 ■As volunteers arrived       on   stations, they were asked to mobilise as soon as
§i:[-
SIS              1possible to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground and change to IRC channel. :




v
                                            ere? 829:542
            $M 989        -10:43                            b    Ci^l 3 . HtiPULhIJCE SEF^ICE                             0TO9 829642




     m&i                                  SOTt®          kmgeskxsk




           HUMKs             ado -              S u p p o r t S e r v ic e . ? ,    Mr Roger Morlejr

                     ■■■■■;■■'j;.';Duty;<»£f-i^er;


           vb#i^                                                                                 1430 “ 1639 hours
                                 wm i1111* '*■»" —   ~           —         .- - •        ..


           'Following a routine patrol of tha             area to ascertain the general
                                                                                     Sheffield
           traffic and crowd situations, 1 was returning to Ats'bulanc® Headquarters
           When x heard radio tttassag&s from Control to Alpha 3* relating to a fleet of
           Ambulances being required at the Lapping® Lane and of Sheffield Wednesday
            Football Ground,

            S h o r tly     a fte r w a r d s ,            1 strived At                H ead quarters       at     the   same   tim e   as   Mr

 Ills       Hopkins v m            le a v in g the C o n tro l U n i t ,                      He approached me and s a id these was
           . trouble at H ills b o r o u g h . H* «ro**>,                                      the   v e h ic le   and   we proceeded        to
             Sheffield -tfefcesday football Ground.

            E n ro u te ,    at Mr Hopkins request, I cootacted C o n tro l to have vehicles clear
W:1-
               id available as soon as possible, in anticipation of large numbers of
i
            c a s u a lt i e s , X heard a radio message in fo rm in g a l l vehicles to change to                                                _




            we arrived at the Ground at 1523 hour®. We went directly to the recognised
            Casualty Clearing Point at the G^iiasxtfflu We parked our -vehicle with
            difficulty near the top of the slop© leading directly onto the pitch, the
0':         area was heavily congested by Police Horses and Police vehicles.
fc*1
K, ,'
    •
    ■
    •
    .

             I informed C o n tro l of our arrival and asked for as many v e h ic le s as
             possible to be made available. Mr Hopkins went in t o the p it c h area to
             assess the situation* X stayed with the vehicle to m a in ta in communications
             with Control. ERC proved to he u n -u s a h le .


                                                                                                                                   /continued


     Si*
ADO - Mr E Motley



People fro® the crowd s^sre censtarsfely approaching «ie for help.                                            Casualties
were being brought up the slope Crow the pitch to' the area wades the
                                                                    .r-sp&itsdpo&a'- ,
                                                                                     t6V,th.e;;:..V:$ci^
Fitst Aid tcota.            Many o£ the faos w&r* exteeaely distraught,                                  I was ttying
■to:■;stay:-vifr;-a,.:■■pesii'tioa'' wtif&., '■!■■ '
                                                   ■•■could’-:;.g£#e^.iselj)::''aad-:-direction;':Y              as
■ ' f e o p l * ' . ; ;■■■

Me Hopkins returaed fro® toe pitch ?mJ askad ®ft to ensure that the Major
Incident vehicle ■vtus attending,                        I .lup^tvis^d the marshalling and loaditi.^
■.Of:'':v^eM'el'es.,v':';.':'.:':ii.here was   still      a       lot   of     aggravation           from      extremely
.:flsfcrasg|i'tpeople.'-.f T-;was siS¥i0i3S'-:td;;''0M:
                                                      e;t{|"SfltWlattce                                      -Msi^mmh''   of;
;^h£s\::a#y^6s:
              sii>le:,;':
                        ;

t>ue to the restricted ^cce.%.? to                         t'm      area* it was inevitable that oti':
oecasss.on$ Ambulance3 aatuaHy caused ot.ptviiction duo to the length of time
t h a t t*f<?«rs wore away from v e h i y l * * # ; ^ d a r i n g         aid *



■J:"va.s ■#ppr»acb.eit.\:by:';BoGtocsf ^Sutses^i'aiiC'-Taiottteers' ;fTO®';;;ali::;:srMsV:'f'^f y/tlae.'
.g'totind:.*:/,.:;::T-h#.S€-/'X.'y4lE'!acted to tbf,  A p p ro p ria te area as indicated by
th e ir    s k ills *      Thif*    in v o lv e d   Ambiilanct1*               staff       from N o ttin g h a m s h ire ,
PfeKb^shir^ and Vesfc Y o rk s h ire .               Re>i Crews v o lu n te e rs v e re            also directed to
:'tKe:'-first-                     ■

A r r iv in g    crews     were     d ir e c te d   to    r.t\&    most      s e r io u s ly   in ju r e d    cases,   I
 attempted to keep a y s e l f info*ra«c< a-3 to casualty lo c a t io n s .                                  As the back
 doors of Ambulances were o^en^d, gpoctator? were attempting to teaieve
 anything from the v e h ic le which they thought would be of use* this I
-restricted as much as p o s s i b l e C h i c l e c r w s were inevitably S p l i t tip and
 in some oases not r e - u n i t e d until much l a t ^ r .

                                                                                                              /continued
 mm
                            uros' j.'.'ot:
 -6 4 -1 9 8 9    10:44                  1 ' '.’H".; , f-M'Hi hUCF StV''ICE                           ;0 ? 0 9 > i:8 p ® 2 ' :;   ■ ':R‘.-3 ifc


                                                                         <»*$




    19 April 1989

    Mt       R Morley




    Ut.r » «              of the livJn*                              i>.d b « m »»v.4, I                                          ths
    •Mr.Kalli.18 wle             »       »» oefi“ ‘ f“ ,il ’,"*1 ™ ' k*1‘ir'-                     lhe °*'®r*tl'ra
( E L * * - * * - » rW                                                          -   » «*•                       *» “ • U ~
  casualties had W** Hsenms? to Koup ’.t>1 .

     x v,B » * «            by *         * * * * *    to                      to. “ -y          ***** « ” “                       **
                                  •■      « * -*••                      13                    * • • m,o?T           r .n r e
                          m«i«e        disposal      «.« to »<**»          «>«■• « W «          *••         1
     h„ Pl,.!.'■« f...d«. chi., ...........                                                   ■»•        « « * « « * “ t° ; h“ *
                                               ..       , j -vc.       rH^tvwet® 11 bodies                          1'n fc*1® 118
"    t.he        bodies     ^ u l d *ventu*llv       1.0   U*i   -■                                                                  m
     cami«lel*> t M M to tbe                r>,o-et                                           «.« I **>T »
     casualties taken to tori TUI 1***» ?t-t

                  „t tW M,«l II.lla.AiK- ««. exiting *«. i-»i.««t arrival of *
      Uc*»          m»!>« ot M i » . I                           ‘>*,£ th. W l « ««• S0«8 to tft*
     W c o         *>»./ CMr.r. ».«!                  I iotomo-J tU     IM.it « ~ « 1 «*»**« « «“ 505,41
     :;tiali.am0hi,tr@.:Hg:
                          spttal of ibif*-


         I    „ » « * «    to   HiU»koroo«l>,                            ” Je       t0   “ *°*"
                                       ™> <*• ^rn,-,»                               M*         « « • — • **» •W04



         X M , UK» bribed W Mt ■*»*. I.   *»«—                                           °f *»           " *°t^
              of .ctloo rocU»Ullr«.«. .1 « « t*rt                                          r«o«t »«* * -      ™
         Siil.b.«w* to •.»,»<.«'•» ^                                                          tl-'«      c” "5' »lM
                                         ^     I:.nil ?1r S.-.^- r     my d i s p o s a l *
     -,xitsse-tye'. p-i«3/,L------. _.       . !■

                  .       officer              coordinated movewent inside the morgue affce
         ;.-S-t#-t-lOtt.-,Oxii.ce:C-,■..______                                        nvt'frv
          identification. Bo v „ .Iso lootructad to rapo.t progtM. to Ooottol ov

             30 minutes*                                                                                                 /continued
         34-1989       10:44                    :    n t-i j , ‘- 'in .11 ii. P t ‘ ' j ~ ~    '•vp’i'jcr.                      829842        P.35



                \lv'




          ■t^ptr;
                iin959v'




          Station OffiCrft       vtna                             pjr,          jt ,             and documentation.
                                                                                          cn^rgs o€          transport

fSSa'*    Each body was aeoootpani                                  by a KS.xe*s Officer whose collar number was
          oof«*d, io^etti^r wi*h tfe#                                          .f known, m 4 nurob^t*

           I   to ok     ovei'ill       rh^tK-i        <">*•' -’j v i                   >:uLi urn «werolglsf        and atte m p te d   to   look
          ■■»£ t e r , rthis"-' wfelCare;" i>f..■ -$t aJ f ;                           . its*- vi


           t\i?' up‘> r pt\*i\ v h s mst.-*] i ^ . f                 ,*                       t ,,»<*• -m Sunday 16 A p r i l 1989.




 RP&i
t /   t                                    ^                                         *,                                                                    ,1                                  1     , * -


0 -04-1989                iC" “-:                         ’".              •,. ■                                                                                      '3709 029:-':42                P . 36
11*

IlllSi

         ft JONES - Afl&£S.T£*i;


       I rotu/:rt«iO uc-kh, ;ttcr                          i        3^0/(t*>0? si Saturday 15th April
       1909. 1 Jv*<!            ?./».<? v^cw! w.; .        ‘t1
                                                             - S' t'-iiwf«?■»« when 1 switched on the TV
       to see rej.cn,‘t-3 ,>ft>e                            H ?*:ft *>3tefe», The TV vtraedsUfcely
       display*?^ t m - «v r)g.»                    l>’        it           KBd vtiftc* the ganse had bPe>n
       «topped            '> r.intv*. ,/L-v--, ■> > i^tr.u* ;t-s-t#erl ^vjning Fxicthet coverage
       wouia fee seen \fci>v. At 3,'‘        >s-*v p-s ■*<t r «; not cwwftrrtfcd ^Lth what I had
       soeu on T"1             ’ X ni'-r- :                            Ne> ~ <towJ              t v m the terraces;.
       'Mito Hit- p?Uf                           *,*; r                  r^t» ,(tn.,rr)!«*«?, TV iniWMlalfcely
       returned l-o litiI,.'*'.^»>u^i , > '                   < *.» as Fi'ap-rovm^ly IM7, I «« a
       mr «t’v=>          '^>3 1!        -‘i ;                          CO th* jvUoH. I -lid not vait to
       v*t-'r> *ny B**sr.* I # i N' t.                  ;r,i u<v vM»tL’Oi,*® vhllsi doing so 1 askud my
       wii«i tn ;.-Vfh ■:»i."’if-*1 j-.,1 ■ !'             , \*i«- i vt-i 'n! »•>> '.'■♦}• into Headquatffccts,
       Wy a,1> r I -' v«v kj ^ r                     >.         -»tt ; ;*ni«^(.nt           '■ran aakod by
        I-sit-' 1 i '  .^pr*'                       '‘           » cu, *n rt^r ;« apsl^t in Control»
      ■tj* inii''1 -it <V •"!iir•* ». .pjM,-*                    f*         i jmii'5ifirmly sort out
       " xp* ?>,f.‘.NV'-f '-t          t>i» ^                     . '»’
                                                                      (’*'. .•>*,, r               ©e th*it s%,Y«'ta1
          v t ‘ \ t >■>          hvi       S                  h-j » . ! ’                 '         i         '              I s i s ’s w a u    ?tN »t    A t pH j   T    (H ^ g .f'iw s)»
         >,r ,, <■ (Fj,«>or.’ i■-"i'.’ h ’> < i.f*                                                                         .,ti            <* <ABv ‘r’j&o'url Set vice's) n?rc*
          r 1\\->t          \t       ?                                .*        u* ' 1                  ’ ,               ".f                                   -vi is a l n o Ht5 t o u t n .

          ?    '5, 1 i H f           i',4,1    ■   J,         ,            f I                                ’J . w       ■* „i     fra \       fV1#*             fi.t    f    -5V «1 f r    fn t   <iitU
          I *t'                  i !/s?            i-,        '•            ^             ' 1           ,•                 ■t        «x-ttrf-?t*!? : '•’40 ajiW't n*? X
          v»'<* s'" 4 ’ *('                                            i.***                   ■         1"           4       i „ i ’»»', ?r, , * a n * ' 1 <‘ nt an<3 ^as j u s t
              < •■ t » i ^                    f i , , >r- ,                          ■              ’             *    "-J1* ^ ' I              1 ’•!»>?               ' O ‘H i l l
          fit1ik-i'Ti if                  I^cir' h ■>’f .
         *u **tj -■’ii**>_ .i' vi1                                                  ,,i                  "   ‘, ^                    -   t v     Ok ?,*te arranged ^«<1 .■sgt«.'4
                - ’\ h       > *• i f i .                >t       •             .         *<        , '               > ’•                      •"a,'<                    t \ ? Penist.tM'ie
       iv" a t”*i, s                 I " > > i > . "s '^i, r’jai yy<? ctMjjpletelvf b? .'1'h!
       \>j     1.,- 'I»hi         Vf1,■• <'.- f’-  i, ::'•’•'!!! '«n' Artd tiaffic goir»|, i*> tli^
      ;p                   ,L 4 t ■  ’*' '■' ’*) '1 ::rr, ..o^J HooV*x<? Y vft^M t ^oyl-5 aot
        .•i*tJ«' ’« , V.h e ’* ** 'V'hi .i - <■' 1 ' >       u^ci del to jjiiu a c fc s s *>j tU«?
               f h Wt'i,*, > ,<i, ►, . v> ‘tr. * • i * f           fiMlfl ¥->!jfi0adR>‘ football

                    ■> **tf 11.     ’ i’; j '1- '     *i n.*     ’v i !ft? '/"'•» tnji
                  ~v‘--f , >,i * / ‘ l i , ■<> •' . ’- 1 y't > > It p\^n^\ T..vf** pnfl and
        t. '•<',«          .*/'ii 1, / .'<** .u > )’ ■ i**,,: ’o *U* icIj ■        .
                                                                                   "* OOtHr^X           ^Z
      :-'t3fit:e:);                               '■)  ■[:?:■. r                           ''■^^■'[:X::.y^X.
           1 . '(          1 ,r>'i ’ 1 fv ,!*■•*,                                        C         • ‘ ,              • "i i         Mvt              )-,jt *»r knowif<ig«>4,                   I l^tf
                       ('!)-, AH f »'?•■*: .* 5.Ml j ' -> u» U                                                                               r*       Wvd ,o ^Vrc-wL,
                  .*’!     -' v^.-1’•!>»^ *'► 'i  1 v t■**;. ‘X                                                                            ‘"4'jh     '«r.'jffJ'S Tan$
           ^                              h •c'- < > ^n' i i,, >                                                       i>'i>,            1v         '«£t d i c y b i g         to   f,o i n            j
          dxroctiort             .




          v> ,            ’
                          ,s ,                ■/ >»* < *, f >,^at       i t'o /nrmala»c<»i in a
          vn   to'i£ t)i        fi “t. a*,' <> >,t    I. i v^sry qr,ich,lv chpckfld ttiem Tor crw
          ml               , iV^v                       ,'’•*!->f vAfh p, cSe>nt.«* yolice officers
          .irvS h < - <■«!, n- f‘%rt ? ilrf „ >;            <-n: >
                                                                 *•    l^A'led ay agaiusi nocmal
          .•(i.tuAi'        1.      rchftS rH-vi                      I cactnot. r®cieober vho thf;
erw                                ^ I’ T"                                                                                                                   ‘"                   k        t-X oot’i;-? Inying on
t h e F t o o , r "*■/< - >• 4                                     ‘           *«                 >■       ' v ,'         ■- ’>•;**■ ■fttiA >,•■<»r j U ' i , ! « » < u o f t h e g t o u n d
o yr«u < 3* t h * « f .* u                                                                                   ^                                     M*’ n r anil , C - g a t « ,   "t ?w s . a,
fk»dxo, w - t v , ^ - f • - *.                                           c                              * «...                                         U g t,              M<i.ikcta ‘a»-J i t w u s o£
c Xoth-inf*                    T r u i w f p<>                                       ',.3.- ■»,. •»* 1 fw»f*                                                                       b u t 1 ®cretl<f s a y
4 p | ; i ‘e < i i M : I             -        P i . i h \ ,               T n                 -         »                  .-'fn             **. n 7 1km j W f t i i * j t o t h e f a i l i n g ,
1 c o a f i n y -,                  < *                    ;             ^I ■«'•,                      T *-v’                                  i «n<'f p j.v.'.-d i t l ^ « s t o n e £ i t «
                     or, :!* • 'i i i v * * . 'V ; , ,                                    f                » i . f,» rp> v *j ; ; i),« .;& te n *

A l l o*5, f,*"!.--     >n/, * <r«t                                                   .                                   > .4 *f \i. n ' . ^ u ,                l y ct n&g^st ds J w i t h
p .'? 4 .p lf T c m >11 < <■  >„ ,                                                                                             r,         y     r a r . p ? t 9* U t b % t t h e r e v a t *
<\    nymVr of                                                                                                    - , ,•_ »                                                            us Use cab#, 1 bt»Iievu
( V f ' I.".!*’ f > .                                                                .j                    > t _           - ;-,?                 y. ' s *v                                   ofc « y i                 g 4 t ( , ,t ] m i g
ih-f vil-ihV te-’
                -'i                                                      - <                                 . .. t5,.                  *                   !•»*,*.                    1     «       convincad that
 ^ f 'f                                          , 1- ' I                 •          , * v>-,                                          -1-         >'            2                aj *>h .u«a f i l i n g                         to
*5TVs, t .£? 1 ?R'                                                                                         •*                  '             V'T » I14 1,'»i su<vt                                           Tn fact tin*
v :■ 4                    M .'I'.,                                      1 ’                                                             ,                   1. m;. .u                            ‘ <)cs<c    Soy^d tbfi
  • r' -'r >»■-''' "■'• ' ‘r                                                                                                                                            J<r                                          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L9
 '     ';        V'1 *V'" 1■* ‘                                                                                   '                              'i%- ip                                                                        [ wt
>/■%],^ . I ’'•> '■>,■'     ■* '                                                                                   '                         it’’ *:m '*?,*■ <                                       '               tJ
  • ' i I’ . n l ?            > •        •!     ^1-, . I       ..


1 ■"r«''*t' V'c" 1 - * :      -                                                                                             -              U     , r» “
                                                                                                                                                      'n'jifi* \*“tvsh»r«. wbo
 » '*'*J               ‘ -l •                                                                                                           " . " i., ;nsv ’w<. t^\l«rs* i -hd
vo* f‘t*' •; >r» i.'.r • •  *                                                                                                                                | »0       ru tb.-
                          ’                   * a*                      ' !                                •'                    ' >n, t. ’                                            ’<>.rk4iU'.» ?t>hc,' n.u*
                                                                                                                                                            iv„f,                  A't                                            peIntc-u
            w* 1 s ’ ' ■ >                                                                                                  , ‘ » * i” ■■,' K<„r» rtu*                                        g-,                    «adct          *)iC-
                                                                                     .!>.                   ;,                    Ortf.ife of fan*?
 1 i r . *'* j                                   u> '       J                                     .-       ~ ' -it** Jsu - y'uia-C                  is i
     / ■'                                              ‘* '*                                      • >. ' •       j ^ ’f,f m j ijth &* d,i4 im            :>-
   t 1."i •
          ' t-                                                                                             -»>’<'0- .Li' .’ Ihr f, X j>s ^.5-mi?r,rcj^’i
,l( '                         r" * 4 '             '                     ’*                                  '                          f-                       ' ’ t *f ' I •« i ' i > '                                 ■%&•.>■••      si)
-1.         v i           S    >    >         t^               '         r

                     5' 1 - •                      •- «                        ■          '            ,     ■                              • ‘             ,t        .•      ■> rt. t t . f                s J j ) ,      ,h,»     c-t‘r
1                    ^              ‘                               •<                                       •             M       T                                               I                                           tA n H k tv ,
■„ *'*‘                                 ^       (.'n                'i ,             J                                      ;               *   .r, j ,

1 '•**                    . • j,-" , • ■ • . - .                  thv- ; r/.»»'!.
   -1'1 * - - 'c<‘' ' *’ -.r “■•          ■' li- i> Jntjo, .((          yvo iUU-*
   ’’ > 1-’       '          >  1■           ’ ^ !•'> , <.t *!•',/ _>.f3 , ;,av,
            ’'■' ’ '.'ri-' •                  ' :; s- t! ? •«; fi,
      ’‘ \                                        ‘ *’ >’                *•'          i :■                       '5                               - <'           , : tl t‘>, v i : ^                          art, i* '*v ;>. r > i o t i t i
^                                                          i                                                                                                     ,     l ,u        ,       roH'.              (.'fifrvl             ,

      ‘-><* f ^ <>                                                     ' n V .<1 .' 1                                      k            *• • .                             -j.* ^                Xu-P            I   •>tpO(. Ik.c ■inJ
ir. ' . t f i ; ' - * 1   1 <'t         *!* •(           <*         "         ' f,       •>:                 "              ,          >S       ;> 1    ,    .             II V    1>       c ! ^ a r         o r       v ' h i y l s a

           p         ,< «i! < i .                          1 '-h' i f ' , -                                       • ■ ,■ ,         ,,                                 I,w U   i    V   ’
                                                                                                                                                                                       f    lu-ac*). rf> <t was
j<=) tJ-iJ*                   ,r jj                            , .•»-*,                            -- ‘ ,                              ‘U s                          ,„J r,* ^nvilicn o.j                                          U) lon»»
p/.r,3 >?'_>■                  "».f4C 1»*- *<                                                                                                     _>                 ,'j ..ffli-r (o tfltw fthiSul-Jrtc^j
r >' - ^ "»l              t*'S                         s -vf                             ; t*               / .       ■    > ,(                  ’i r i "            ' "it <*>n j U y v « v J                                  p>ds*!«j^’
f.f                       ! " * -i                             t>                                                   •           ‘ ,                    ij L r ^ ' s                    i                                 t o H* a gyni
t o Uin-Jti- Fr                                                                                                                 *• <‘|rl '               I ’l, Vft.« A s t s b l f sh?d t h slt , i i l
                                                                                           .l i- i ■                                                                                    ■'ifi „-'4c                                            r :«




                                                                                                            r-.V
                                                                                                                          J               t jri                  ■» <^r 1ti ri .* 85tl                                                         tf»
  V'           nua : 1 <>- '                                            •'
                       ■«** *■                                                    ‘
                                                                       }'ri-               ■n:                            wi                                                   a8* 1 could frank
„K ’“'vn 'n i ~1 k *■                                                                                                                                                                   t think at tlmt
on v^r.j-Ci “ «'.i »•>                                               *                                      ,      :*{           fs        1:*% bAfc*
1iww                                                                  :“• *' 1'                             , ,j<: J * iUs i‘    j<y_JStdiv.s! T*aws
tnv^n if'*1-'     o *                                                                                   •c v*' *■^                L _ . , I&tic^
v;f5v^4\t*4 •*                                                                                            I u\‘ ' ‘ ;-     ’*a- t*        Mr
                                                                J    J ..,
                                                                                                                       .,t, ’ .^ -^vii tau t fU^y
the cx !                                                                                                    > 'o .11- ; .
                                                                                                                .                                ttv* lino
Vi'fy n«. );»'!( Hv'.'                                                    ~                 *
                                                                                                           , ' Kc. ■              •'■•hifle         fy                                                f & i ' u - 4
-f            4 ’t " '*                                                                                             ,                •,                         ,*    '                           T        v O ’   9 - . i o , ‘; < ? d
•7*a>lJ 1ti t'--' i’ ‘                                                                                      _>                                                             - Ji l - ’ o r                              ~ v * a t               to
                                                                                                                    ,,                                 J '*»*-■’ >" if%
  U** •«■ St-                             " ' ‘‘‘                                 ' ’*’ “            i  > ■*’ («' sI <“ j 5/ ‘Ui, vlrh « C<
                                                                                                  ;■ • , * \*r, A* ’              ’«'wj bl ic,:‘ ■
                                                                                                                if,, . t ,              i^nt, < l
                                                                                                               |       |.:to;.':         ■'t4 m x: ■
  <W." h / 1}                                             l{.

  .< ■’ *■           -1■ - ■                                                                                                                                                                            -.v.‘
           1.         ■ ■> L                               '         ‘‘ 1 ''                                                     ,, ’,~ *-, <■ . n*d’
           !    ,   , V< -            ,          ’         -             *'
                                                                                                                         t           ^             1                   V ' '!f'*                                     i^v'
                                          *      ,l             '•
                                                                                                                             4, , ;,                                 r , ...s^ ' .'.f.u-if 1 va ‘
■ip- xnk4 ■■     '■                                                                                                           Y s»f,                                    , >,h*‘ i,1(-  I
  ^ *1 ' i i .■ '                                     i                                                                                                              Is «up t! ,e* ’" h* ‘
         y > *
             *:• ■                                                                                                                        <» '• •-•• s 'Mi1 i'-'                                                                  ‘’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *y’
                                                                                                                         , 1                       ; ‘ ">£, > ’“tt*■'l'.''?S *'“
 ''p.e
                                  '       :'v-
                                                                                                       j,       ,                    , -•                                      ,'e‘ t» ^‘‘5                                                •"
                                                                                                                              , ■*         i           !»('   ( (. _ , l         ' 1'   ' 3 ^ !                                       ’ ft       •*, 1

                                                                                                                                                              • .* '1 A                               ' .'
     •‘•,"•'                 ’''* *
                                                                                                                                                   ,   ; f'jr.    'r-' 1 ?'•''■
                                                                                                                                               , ' >1          ,n -u i ,
     t©   g y is       c a tv   p .& rk :                                      V‘'^. ■':
                                                                                                                                                -/» ^ ! '
                                                                                                                                                        ‘h-v 'C,
                                                                                                                                     ,             • *, t                      <Jr      ,             »•                                  T     Vc"
                                                                                                                                               j                           _                f fS               L   ’ !              1     l*


                                                                                                                                            ' '\ , I'■ *
                                                                                                                         in’/■■J: t -:m- -I At&t bxta&v.:

                                                                                                                                                               :Hojikifssi                                         <, • ,fi i’
   ■2306
A       SYrtfW        4        l/rf'&l H          CdK7//ii4 7 *



                                      Ale.              £*<rrib.t. A\-%ctr**

        I&jLMl.                                                                      «*■*«             %4^0ao                              o* ^ e td '    ^v-V «f
        e jfe e                                                   />£*.■&' ttZ e *fc c i&                                               &C,*~ras&(sb*



3T.      6*7 ett^ et-nr f t          4*J                    L                                                                   &>                       /^ -* f 4uJL^~ <~
                                                             J                      C <s* *
                                                                                          v

    £      Aa/#.<£         fa A /t          -   .........                                                           (~u<M.uscusi {cvC+s<r\

                                                                                                                                                             (s*0**.

    $   • C/<{?/f{</?4________                                   ._ „ ■         .




                                                                                                                              M /UJluu^            fu d '/fr z ( tfU jfa .

                      Cv/tSffro             ___           ______                      _______ _

                       //6**«Ai       ...                                                     _




              Hitc(c<K^                                       /A t/c 5 T                      <f^ JJSl. *r-                                    .      . .

              IL cjU c - ^     C
                               m cJ ^                   Se^                     J ^ ^ c ~
                                                                                        l 4 y *                                                * /Z



                                            Cu/X ^jki                      V*                              __

                       -              t M M A c t A / &*£(*.                                                    .                   _




        ^c<64^/icc4              'I         /la l'to 'i                 c\likr*<rX>^

        <.911<J904               _________                                                                               .....

        Sa/ic^                                    -   _______________________          _      ................................ ..




         C|1'( CoufjLiu                                                                                                     . '... .


          C       £        w     *          r                                                                                               ....



          ClLtT ArtJ



                                                            /%<**< *h & C ..
             /                                 .

         /           SAfe   rv          c f f ir ,       f 4 71?



             °4se4i/AiK>M j

                           4)      & 04                                  j'                fu .x c te   C **y L £ &            4 U & /P        <-*L

                                  e J lriC ts^       9    y C ta a e u * ^/»t, d C j/C U sb x y                                                ^C C *< *6 l0 / ,




                            &?         4 u « **s C           C te 4 ^ rc *4 r         &■ '.**■ /^ > u e ^                               u o ^ L u ^ z^ ,

                                   d u ^ L f'/e ^ L fia . C f                    fy /c u £         a *a J *& *c p la -£ i     <T fc^^X- <s~

                                       4/./.                                                      ■


                                                                                       V
                                (:',                 t* ^ U t •■'         ^ (t>



                                                                                                                     / ?$”         s3         kOctiLj#*-} { [
                                                                                                                   ’/ •
                 t4.iliH i **j


                                                                                                             ijuccs       T- / I          zz 4 ~
                        °i")       Pi4i) At J               <!&'4£ti£ri'l
                                                                              -'                  X          S.       SO f t Q. /3«j
                                        ifcuujia^jL             S4«^?                                    '            7^ ^s, ^            |




Ct>i<t Itf& i'C                                          u s z to jiff        A M u & d }a .G i                       7       ^ .*??

         t        u fb A                                 e jA te fc           o u st, > ^ * w w y                 $U {{ *t ^ ^ v -

                                                                                               P /^»



                        6/       fh/Lli        4i*
 /r^ T X e r / H / 9 n T £ <           A     /L ^ U ^

 ^ U S fw ttK & W              f r ilA V X y * -


        jL £'A -Q ^ iV Z < ~   CQ4A a s £<£2__     "-T -       A         o *rf      /rs S S u ^ h /t T O *
pwflga-
                                                  ^7       ^ v r      /te z ^ 7 o t^ L ^
          /h ^ & te & t'P y          7&    y£ ^         ~     €^sT T 4-3T7'sz A y
X. am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health Authority
(TRHA)      the Authority responsible                        for the management of South
Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) in connection
with their involvement in the Hillsborough Disaster.                                            I have
previously            advised         th&    t    TRHA     should    seek        formal    rights     of
representation at the .inquiry which is due to commence on 15th
May 1989 and I have approved a letter dated 3rd May 1989 which my
instructing Solicitors wrote to the Secretary of the jnquiry.


I have been asked by Lord Justice Taylor and am pleased to expand
upon each of the points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of
the 3rd^jfay 1989.                In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the
letter:


1.     The evidence which SYMAS will produce to the Jjiquiry will
       include:


        (a)      The observations of officers who were present in the
                 ground from prior to 3.00 p.m.

                                 /
        (b)      The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the
                 time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
                 prior to the fateful opening of that gate
(c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the ground as
      the incident developed.             This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue and difficulties which
      were encountered in gaining access to the ground and in
      manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto the
      pitch.


(d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer and of/
      another      Senior    Officer    (now with           another   service)
      relating to SYMAS desire to have its officers (and in
      appropriate cases and ambulance) present at trhire the
      ground at matches at Hillsborough, and the difficulties
                                                      'jb
      presented by the club in relation                       that,      Chief
      Ambulance      Officers     evidence     will         be   critical   of
      Sheffield Wednesday                  d /u .b   . /    xU & M
      To        HWflW

(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a major incident plan.


(f ) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages                     to
      and   from    SYMAS     Control and    transcripts              of those
      messages.      These    are relevant to the timing of events
      as they unfolded        but- also     to the manner inwhich the
      police reacted.         A number      of messages from thepolice
      are recorded.




                                   -2
(g)   Evidence    of         difficulties       encountered              by        SYMAS
      ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
      the fact that some vehicles including the SYMAS Major
      Incident   Vehicle           were    directed     by     police         to      the
      Leppings   Lane end of              the ground when the plan and
      instructions to these in the vehicles required that
      they should report to the entrance neftt the gymnasium
      on Penistone Road North.


2.    The statements, documents and tapes together reveal the
      considerable      extent       of     SYMAS1 involvement                in      the
      planning    for        and     reaction     to     the       disaster            at
      Hillsborough.           If    West    Midlands         Police      have       been
      briefed to investigate the role played by the emergency
      services that in itself warrants SYMAS its officers and
      staff having representation

                                                              f o u l <*. & .P .
3.    Criticism of SYMAS by a community physician/who woa-
                                                ksid le,(y                (
      present at the disaster were wildly reported in the
      press in the days immediately after the disaster.                                In
      particular -fee/is reported to have said                                     Jh xfc.



                 < £-. P .




      SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the



                                      3
           inquiry in order to be in a position to assist in
           responding to the issues                raised and to refute the
           allegations,        I understand that the Community physician
           has published in the British Radical Journal of 29th
           April   1989    a    request     for    "medical       accounts        of the
           Hillsborough         disaster"              which    he    says       will    be
           "collated      and    presented        to    the     inquiry      into       the
           disaster". Having reported the criticisms which he ha<f
           already made it is possible that if his own or collated
           evidence is presented it will be critical of SYMAS.
           The Ambulance Service should have legal representation ~io
           enable it to refute that criticism


4.   (a)   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
           comments or criticism will be made during the course of
           an inquiry.          More important however it is not only
           imperative that advance notice of criticisms should                           be
           given so that the individual (s) criticise*/can respond,
           it may be the case that the nature of the criticism
           will be such that Counsel will wish to establish facts
            ~fu.
           reporting that criticism from other witnesses before
           the witnesses are called


     (b)   West Midlands        Police have requested                statements         from
           SYMAS   some    of    which especially              that   of    the chief
           ambulance      officer     and    other        officers         are    highly
           critical    of       Sheffield     Wednesday           Football         Clubs
     management#.        Pursuant     to    Lord   Justice   Taylor’s
     direction   and    the usual    practice^ advance notice of
     those criticisms will be given to the people concerned.
     Inevitably they will give evidence anticipating such
     criticism and will seek to answer di-geet or refute this
     and may well in so doing         attack the author of these
     criticisms.        It   would   be    invidious
     ambulance officer and other officers or staff were not
     able to put these to theater”witnesses through Counsel
     and   test the replies -&srby cross examination, and also
     may   result in unfairness to the SYMAS officers if they
     give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
     representatives of those witnesses without having the
     benefit of being represented themselves


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and
crew, in the ground^ before the match started f              As stated
above their evidence is relevant to what happens                as the
incident   developed.        It is   also highly relevant to the
dealings between SYMAS and the club relating to involvement
of the ambulance service at matches.          They will for example
give evidence that the season tickets' normally provided to
them by the Club were withdrawn for the F A Cup semi-final
and in consequence they had to make arrangements to view
the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point
of view of monitoring events).        Furthermore the ^lub had in
the 1986/1987 season provided 1&an with free passes giving
access to any part of the ground.               £    1987/1988 and onwards
those free passes were withdrawn.


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of
the inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more
cogent representations        if it has had            the opportunity to
participate       in    the Xiquiry       by        legal    representation,
allowing cross examination and such representation                  may well
influence SYMAS1 submissions            involvement         throughout      the
Xnquiry will save duplication and the questions which SYMAS
will wish to put as to what should happen in the future
should be put 4e*m in the first part of the Inquiry.                      There
will also thereby be a saving of expense.


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Jfpn and Major
Incident   Plan    above.        I     have     also    referred     to    the
difficulties created by the police in their direction of
SYMAS vehicles away from their intended destinations.


I am instructed on behalf of all those persons from who/lt
statements have been taken.             ThaJb   all wish to have legal
representation         if   required     to     give    evidence.         That
representation will be more meaningful                  if    I am able to
represent SYMAS        officers and staff throughout the inquiry
and in my respectful submission the SYMAS evidence could not
and should not be in isolation from all the evidence given
          at the W i r y .


FAIRNESS
II'.- ,     mi




Each of the SYMAS officers                  and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the .Inquiry.                             Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitor^ but
each of the officers and staff wish to be legally represented if
they are to be called.                Each of them is an important witness as
to          fact as regard either one or more of the following:-


                  (a)   the events leading up to the incident
                                                             «




                  (b)   the    way    the    incident      was   dealt   with    by   the
                        ambulance service


                  (c)   *^he broader        issues   of    crowd   safety   at   sports
                        stadiwhsr-.


As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
                                 O uakf'
the ambulance service              &pt     to be legally represented.            in any
event I respectfully submit that it ha^ an equal if not greater
contribution to make than the fire service who have been granted
representation.               understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the       fire service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence          to   the   sports    stadium.       The    ambulance    service      has




                                                     7
IN THE MUTTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

LEADING COUNSEL'S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


A.   I am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health Authority
     (TRHA)   which is responsible       for the management of South
     Yorkshire      Metropolitan      Ambulance   Service    (SYMAS)    in
     connection     with   their    involvement   in   the   Hillsborough
     Disaster.


B.   An application for the grant of the right to representation
     was made by my Instructing Solicitors at the preliminary
     hearing on the 28th April and was refused, but you indicated
     that any party whose application was refused could make a
     further application.          I am instructed to make a further
     application.      TRHA seeks     representation on      a number of
     grounds which are set out in a letter from my Instructing
     Solicitors and in written representations from me.            I shall
     merely summarize those representations.


1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
The evidence which SYMAS       is able    to produce    to   the   Inquiry
includes:
     (a)    The observations of on duty officers who were present
            in the ground prior to 3.00 p.m.
(b) The evidence of two ambulancemen who were off duty at
      the    time     but     who   attended         the   match,   one   as    a
      spectator       and   one     in his       capacity as a part time
      caterer.


(c) Evidence         of   Senior    Officers         and   ambulancemen     who
      attended the ground as the incident developed.                        This
      will include evidence relating to the crush and rescue,
      and the difficulties which were encountered in gaining
      access     to   the     ground     and     in manoeuvering     vehicles
      within the ground and onto the pitch.


(d) The      evidence       of   the     Chief      Ambulance   Officer,       of
      another Senior Officer (now with another service), and
      of two other officers,              relating to SYMAS' desire to
      have     its    officers         (and    in    appropriate    cases      an
      ambulance) present at the ground.


(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


(f ) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to
      and    from     SYMAS      Control      and    transcripts    of    those
      messages.       These are relevant to the timing of events

                                     2
    «
*




                    as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
                    and others in authority reacted.   A number of messages
                    from the police are recorded.   The tapes are already in
                    the possession of the Police.




        2.   CRITICISM OF SYMAS


        Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
        present at the disaster were widely reported in the press in the
        days immediately after the disaster.    In particular the Community
        Physician    is reported to have said there was a lack of control,
        incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
        have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
        particular    defibrillators.     Similar   complaints   continue   to
        receive mention in the press.


        Given the criticisms which have already been made, it is highly
        probable that evidence if presented will be critical of SYMAS.
        The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to enable
        it to refute any such criticism, and give it the opportunity to
        establish the accurate position through all relevant witnesses.


        3. ADVANCE WARNING


             (a)    It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse

                                          3
comments or criticism will be made during the course of
such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance notice may
not always be possible.          However it is often the case
that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
Counsel and that the nature of such criticism is                  such
that    Counsel      can    establish      facts    refuting      that
criticism      from other witnesses         before    the critical
witnesses themselves are called.


West Midlands        Police have       requested,   and have been
supplied with, statements from SYMAS some of which are
critical       of   Sheffield    Wednesday       Football    Club's
management.          Pursuant     to    Lord    Justice    Taylor's
direction and the usual practice,               advance notice of
those criticisms will be given to the people concerned.
Inevitably they will give evidence anticipating such
criticism and will seek to answer deflect or refute
this and may well in so doing               attack the author of
these criticisms.          It would be invidious if the Chief
Ambulance Officer and other officers or staff were not
able    to   put    these criticisms       to those        witnesses
through their own Counsel who can              test the replies by
cross examination. Further,             unfairness may result to
the    SYMAS   officers     if   they give      evidence    and   are
themselves cross examined by the representatives of
           those witnesses without having the benefit of being
           represented themselves.


5. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


SYMAS will be in a position to make more cogent representations
to the second part of the Inquiry if it has had the opportunity
to participate     in the Inquiry by full legal representation.
Involvement    throughout   the    Inquiry will   save   duplication.
Furthermore   the questions which SYMAS will wish to put, so as to
establish its recommendations as to what should happen in the
future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings, but will if
put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it unnecessary for
such witnesses to return.


C.
I    am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
have been taken.    They all wish to have legal representation if
required to give evidence.        That representation will be more
meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS1 officers and staff
throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the
evidence given at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS
Each of the SYMAS officers           and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.                     Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.        Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of the following;


             (a)   the events leading up to the incident


             (b)   the   way   the    incident was     dealt    with   by   the
                   ambulance service


             (c)   the   broader     issues   of crowd   safety   at   sports
                   stadia.


As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.                 In any
event I respectfully submit that it has at least as great a
contribution to make as the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence   to   the   sports    stadium.       The   ambulance   service     has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted.
1   respectfully   submit    that   for     th©     reasons   which   I have
outlined   SYMAS   ought    to have       full   representation before the
Inquiry,


Michel Kallipetis QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4
15 May 1989




                                      7
5/> c />'/(?/</   W   q   cI n   e s c /a y    F,   C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          •           ' • • • ' * > ?'   i   v   ;

    H i / / s b o r o u g h          G ro u n d                 •

                                                                                                                       mST'AIO



                                                                                                       Gymasslua



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vy*
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ill*
                                                                                                   NOtiTH &TANO


                                                                                                                                                    i       I*   Si !i/!i IIII■•v




                                              Z7AN&

                                                                        1                                 .                                                          ‘M      l .C• * - ^ V A ^        V                    **S
  A w * y TANA
  . 4»V& £NCt6Sor?€S
                                                            ■ L t L ™ ,                             J _                            ,            i           m        f   i   j   r


                                                    -   r   ^       c       ^   —          ::^         8         f                                                           T        m       S   M   ^       ^                X
                                                                                F    / ?       I       M      jr u   x rjv a           •                \        %   '# ^ \ \ \ \ \ \ ^   •                           k         \ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ;.;\V \ \
                                                                                a ia ^ h s
                                                                                 o rn c iM .
                                   /•    com oi


                                                                                                                                                                                                              ■   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      - si'■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                           o m c m 's .
                                                                                           LMTfiAHCe
                                                                                                                               *   •       *■                                    .*   ■
            TlWtSTILES                  C 2 37
t




        inouffieiant points to make in relation to why it too should be
        consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
        give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
        and in my instructing Solicitors letter of the 3rd May 1989

                                                        /n
        1 shall be please to elaborate further any pointy this submission
        should Lord Justice Taylor wish me to do so.


                         7*?s
        Michael Kallipei'fe» QC
        2 Crown Office Row
    •   Temple
        EC4
        5 May 1989
I s / IH ^ r                01^ A       P uJt U Ic.

           '7 tf£   f H L U Q * t l+ u 6 r t t & iU &



                       (Z & U N 'Z & Z ^ 'S     S M & /w S g * o A T S       /s S                       O F

    /f a s ' A < ° fU .C -ft-^ o r y / 3 * 7   77@ & v7-~ / l £ € r ? o o J f t L ^ t + & K J 7 +    /f r & h & l/T y

       /j/Z-                                    —     ~                                                ------------------------—


  I am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health Authority
  (TRHA)       the Authority responsible for the management of South
  Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) in connection
  with their involvement in the Hillsborough Disaster.                                              I have
  previously           advised        that     TRHA       should      seek     formal       rights             of
  representation at the Inquiry which is due to commence on 15th
  May 1989 and I have approved a letter dated 3rd May 1989 which ray
  instructing Solicitors wrote to the Secretary of the Inquiry.


  I have been asked by Lord Justice Taylor and am pleased to expand
  upon each of the points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of
  the 3rd May 1989.               In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the
  letter:


  1.       The evidence which SYMAS will produce to the Inquiry will
           include:


           (a)      The observations of officers who were present in the
                    ground from prior to 3.00 p.m.


           (b)      The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the
                    time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
                    prior to the fateful opening of that gate
         (c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the ground as
               the incident developed.           This will include evidence
               relating to the crush and rescue and difficulties which
               were encountered in gaining access to the ground and in
               manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto the
               pitch.


         (d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer and of
               another       Senior   Officer    (now with     another    service)
               relating to SYMAS desire to have its officers (and in
               appropriate cases and ambulance) present at the ground
               at    matches    at    Hillsborough,    and     the    difficulties
               presented by the Club in relation to that.                The Chief
               Ambulance       Officers    evidence    will     be    critical    of
X
               Sheffield Wednesday        Football     Club.         I shall   refer

    AJ         further to this below *


         (e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
               the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
               and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


         (f)   The criginal tapes of radio and telephone messages                 to
               and    from    SYMAS    Control   and   transcripts       of    those
               messages.       These are relevant to the timing of events
               as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police

                                          2
          reacted.      A number of messages from the police are
          recorded.




     (g) Evidence      of     difficulties         encountered by           SYMAS
          ambulances on       approaching the ground - in particular
          the fact that sane vehicles including the SYMAS Major
          Incident     Vehicle      were    directed    by   police     to    the
          Leppings Lane end of            the ground when the plan and
          instructions to these in the vehicles required that
                                                              t"h>
          they should report to the entrance nea-tr^the gymnasium
)0
          on Penistone Road North.


     2.   The statements, documents and tapes together               reveal the
          considerableextent         of    SYMAS * involvement        in     the
          planning      for   and     reaction     to   the     disaster       at
          Hillsborough.        If    West    Midlands    Police      have    been
          briefed to investigate the role played by the emergency
          services that in itself warrants SYMAS its officers and
          staff having representation



X    3.   Criticism of SYMAS by a             unity physician and a G.P.
          who were present at the disaster were widely reported
          in   the    press   in    the    days   immediately        after    the
          disaster.     In particular the Community Physician                  is
          reported to have said there was               a leek of control

                                      3
                  incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is
                  reported to have said that there was a lack of life
                  saving equipment and in particular defibrillators.


                  SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the
                  Inquiry in order to be in a position to assist in
                  responding to the issues              raised and to refute the
                  allegations.     I understand that the Community Physician
                  has published in the British Medical Journal of 29th
                  April   1989    a request      for    "medical       accounts of    the
                  Hillsborough         disaster”        which     he    says   will    be
                  "collated      and    presented      to   the   Inquiry      into   the
                                                 'bo
y )    x          disaster". Having seperted the criticisms which he ha#.^
                  already made it is possible that if his own or collated
                  evidence is presented it will be critical of SYMAS.
                  The Ambulance Service should have legal representation
                  to enable it to refute that criticism


      4.   (a )   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
                  comments or criticism will be made during the course of
                  an Inquiry.          More important however it is not only
                  imperative that advance notice of criticisms should                 be
                  given so that the individuals) criticised can respond,
                  it may be the case that the nature of the criticism
                  will be such that Counsel will wish to establish facts
                  refuting that criticism           from other witnesses before

                                             4
      the witnesses are called


(b)   West Midlands Police have requested              statements         from
      SYMAS   some    of    which   especially     that   of      the    Chief
      Ambulance      Officer    and    other   officers        are      highly
      critical    of       Sheffield   Wednesday       Football         Club*s
      management.          Pursuant    to   Lord    Justice        Taylor's
      direction and        the usual   practice^ advance notice of
      those criticisms will be given to the people concerned.
      Inevitably they will give evidence anticipating such
                                                   c fe f/e c r
      criticism and will seek to answer defflect or refute
      this and may well in so doing              attack the author of
      these criticisms.        It would be invidious if the Chief
      Ambulance Officer and other officers or staff were not
      able to put these to their witnesses through Counsel
      and test the replies by cross examination, and also may
      result in unfairness to the SYMAS officers if they
      give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
      representatives of those witnesses without having the
      benefit of being represented themselves


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and
crew, in the ground before the match started#                     As stated
above their evidence is relevant to what happen®^ as the
incident developed.          It is also highly relevant              to the
dealings between SYMAS and the Club relating to involvement
of the ambulance service at matches.           They will for example
give evidence that the season ticketS normally provided to
them by the Club were withdrawn for the F A Cup semi-final
and in consequence they had to make arrangements to view
the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point
of view of monitoring events).          Furthermore the Club had in
the 1986/1987 season provided them with free passes giving
access to any part of the ground.            In 1987/1988 and onwards
those free passes were withdrawn.


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of
the Inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more
cogent representations if it has had the opportunity to
participate       in   the   Inquiry    by    legal   representation,
allowing cross examination and such representation             may well
influence SYMAS' submissions.          Involvement throughout       the
Inquiry will save duplication and the questions which SYMAS
will wish to put as to what should happen in the future
should be put in the first part of the Inquiry.            There will
also thereby be a saving of expense.


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Plan and Major
Incident   Plan    above.      I   have      also   referred   to   the
difficulties created by the police in their direction of
SYMAS vehicles away from their intended destinations.
     I am instructed on behalf of all those persons from who
     statements have been taken.            They all wish to have legal
     representation        if    required     to    give   evidence.          That
     representation will be more meaningful                 if   I am able to
     represent SYMAS* officers and staff throughout the Inquiry
     and in my respectful submission the SYMAS evidence could not
     and should not be in isolation from all the evidence given
     at the Inquiry.


FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers          and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.                     Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
each of the officers and staff wish to be legally represented if
they are to be called.          Each of them is an important witness as
to fact as regards either one or more of the following:-


           (a)   the events leading up to the incident


           (b)   the way    the    incident        was   dealt   with    by    the
                 ambulance service


           (c)   the broader      issues    of     crowd   safety   at   sports
                 stadia.
As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.               In any
event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if not greater
contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the   fire service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence     to   the   sports   stadium.    The   ambulance   service     has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
and in my instructing Solicitors letter of the 3rd May 1989


1   shall   be   please   to    elaborate   further   any   point   in   this
submission should Lord Justice Taylor wish me to do so.


Michael Kallipetis QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4
5 May 1989
■4




     IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
     INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

     LEADING COUNSEL'S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
     TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION



 A   I am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health Authority
     (TRHA)      thir f”V
                             i   S
                                  1 ty    responsible        for the management of South
     Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS)                           in connection
     with their involvement in the Hillsborough Disaster.                                  I have
     p££seate£EE^r advised               that   TRHA       should   seek    formal   rights    of
     representation at the Inquiry which is due to commence on 15th
     May 1989# and     i-   hove approved -a letter datod 3rd May 1989 which—my
     jjftgfegtteting- Solici'tors wrote -
                                        to tho-Sect-
                                                   setary of tho Inquiry.

        A *
     I tovo- boon ooked by Lord Justice Taylor^and- am -pleased to oitpand
     upo» -eaeh of tho points— in my Instructing Soltoi tore-1— lottor of                           ^
      'p-Z.             AS-y                                  1            <n          f
     tbo 3rd May-     1939.
                          .        In so doing I shall adopt tne numbering of the
     letter:

               -------------                       IS CiAiSL Jo
              The evidence which SYMAS              sgsb3^ produce     to the Inquiry       J&g&k

              includejSJ £


              (a)   The observations of officers who were present in the
                    ground £E0Hi prior to 3.00 p.m.


              (b)   The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the

                                                       1
          .time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
                        /HiS^y        „ /5U_ a<si&L            cx-«-J
          prior--to thc-fotef-ul-oponing of That gato             .
                           /^ sj er~
          /tl& A re .                  '^ o S /h *^ f   fs\jyiA ~4fij                 '

    (c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the ground as
          the incident developed.    This will include evidence
                                             Cor­
          relating to the crush and rescue^and^difficulties which
          were encountered in gaining access to the ground and in
          manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto the
          pitch.


    (d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer^sm S i of
           another         Senior         Officer         (now with            another     service),
           relating to SYMAS * desire to have its officers (and in
           appropriate cases an^ ambulance) present at the ground #
              — matches— a^fe— Hilloborough-;— and— ■the— dif ficultlea
A
X         prooonted~ by— fche Club in relation to-^fchat^
          Ambulance           Officer's             evidence            will    be
                                                                                          The Chief
                                                                                      critical    of
          Sheffield          Wednesday             Football         Club.           I shall    refer
           further to this b e l o w                    Aa^ o m l              (•



    (e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
          the event of a major                      incident at Sheffield Wednesday
          and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


    (f)   The original tapes of radio and telephone messages                                      to
          and       from     SYMAS         Control          and         transcripts       of   those

                                                  2
           messages.            These are relevant to the timing of events
           as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
     ^     reacted.            A number of messages                                  from the police are
           recorded.




     (g)   Evidence            of    difficulties                       encountered                         by    SYMAS
           ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
           the fact that some vehicles including the SYMAS Major
                                                                '           /n e rra < ~
           Incident        Vehicle, were directed //by police^ to                                                      the            At
                                  J                     -r—
           Leppings       Lane end of the ground. idMar ihe                                                            and
                                              d J i\K r i t f f
           instructions a to           -fcfeftse- - jrfir       th^ft vehicles required that
                                                                                                   n&Jct      ~h>
           they    should            report       to        the           entrance                               jgp the
           gymnasium on Penistone Road North.


           The statements, documents and tapes together reveal the
           considerable              extent       of        SYMAS’ involvement                                   in    the
<r
           planning  f o r - a n d .reaction to the disaster at
                          ft °I               t W -
           HijLL^orough. yj££y|West Midlands Police have been
£          Kjsjm      to investigate the role played by the emergency                                                                 ^
                      .   |   "**•                    /[/L A f r e p f i& c f f iu   P u /fY U A -rt trt—             /fa s c iB & fa g 'S -
           services* ■fhat in itself                                            YMAS its officers and
                                                            s                          _
           staff, hnviftn represent


                                                         ommunity Physician and a G.P.
           who were present at the disaster were widely reported
           in   the       press       in     the        days             immediately                        after      the
                 disaster.          In particular the Community Physician                                          is

 e               reported        to have       said there was                 a lack of control
                 incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is
                 reported to have said that there was a lack of life
                 savina equipment and in particular defibrillators.


  <fr            SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the
                 Inquiry in order to be in a position to assist in
                                                                                      f v U tl^ ^ c d s ltJ b & C 0 f S U c J \
v/j              responding, to the issues                     raised and. to .refute                            M m -/
XJ                                               fr                                     /      4                    n
                 allegations^          I understand that the Community Physician
                 has published in the British Medical Journal of 29th
                 April      1989     a request          for    "medical                 accounts          of     the
                 Hillsborough               disaster"          which              he        says       will        be
                 "collated         and      presented         to     the          Inquiry             into       the
                 disaster". Having rcgard-irbo the criticisms which he has
                 already made.it is porcofplo that                            his own er -collated
                            tr
                 evidence iis! presented                   will be critical of SYMAS.
                 The Ambulance Service should have legal representation
                                            SucA              - ..
                 to enable it to refute •waeat criticism           ,
                                 k r e& z


                 it   i i   difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
                 comments or criticism will be made during the course of
             a   an Inquiry-             Mo^e— important— however— anfe— 3bs— nort                             onLy
                 f-fzrut£AJ*As                     CO^OL           S>UcJ~.
                 ippej
                 imps%a%4ve
                      saferlve thax adv-e
                                    advance
                                        moo noti-ee-of
                                                 co of criticiomE
                                                       criticisms should ,be
                                                                          pcs
                 tyu C&LAjiAjUiA               C fW )                        <0   i   T2ju ^                         i
c H l/lA r       gjazen so fetiat tho individual(o ) or-i-osicised can rosporai,
   "              L ^ U tU L e^ Ou-^d M y C t \A>/y  CezcK
                 irt~ may -be ttw— lamacri that the nature of Jsbgr criticism
1




                              / JT
                                      such that Counsel                mi.
                                                                         fa1X   W'tTlli Iu establish facts
                     refuting that criticism                          from other witnesses before
                     C S ih < *U
                     the/witnesses.are called ^
                          K                  a


              (b)    West Midlands                  Police have requested               statements        from
                     SYMAS           some      of    which          especially      that   of    the    Chief
                     Ambulance              Officer         and       other      officers       are    h-iqhl-y
                     critical             of     Sheffield            Wednesday        Football        Club's
                     management.                     Pursuant          to   Lord     Justice       Taylor's
                     direction and the usual practice,                              advance      notice of
                     those criticisms will be given to the people concerned.
                      Inevitably they will give evidence anticipating such
                     criticism and will seek to answer deflect or refute
                     this and may                   well in so doing             attack the author of
                     these criticisms.                  It would be invidious if the Chief
                     Ambulance Officer and other officers or staff were not
                                    Cnh'c)r/KS fUjyu;
                     able to put these A to          witnesses through *Counsel
                    A£aafl
                                                       71
                              test the replies by cross examination*
                                                                                            f^ A
                                                                                                   -"aAao way
                                            unfairness^to              the SYMAS officers             if they
                     give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
                     representatives of those witnesses without having the
                     benefit of being represented themselves

    5     "   S                       i                     1
    Jr$       Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and
              crew, in the ground before the match started.                                        As stated
              above their evidence is relevant to what happened as the

                                                                5
  incident   developed.           It is also highly                         relevant            to the
  dealings between SYMAS and the Club relating to involvement
  of the ambulance service at matches.                           They will for example
  give evidence that*the season tickets negmally provided to
  them by the Club were- wi^hdrawa -^Esae- the F A Cup semi-final                                               .
 .a SOfirJZvJ'              TT?c4ce/5' r ° P*-
                   aZecjbry&X . _ .           /* £ (J
 .and in /consequence they had to make arrangementsto view
A                                                       A
  the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
  point than their normal seats in the stand                                 (   fyom the point
  of view of monitoring events).                    Furthermore the Club had in
  the 1986/1987 season provided them with free passes giving
  access to any part of the ground.                        In 1987/1988 and onwards
  those free passes were withdrawn.


  This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of
  the Inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more
  cogent representations           if it has had the opportunity to
  participate        in     the    Inquiry           b             fal       representation,
  a,
   3lowing cFoop-exami4*a-friofl- and' ouqh reyrooontaftion                                    ma^ w^ll^
  influence— BYMAG t aubmisslon^. Invol^meftit throughout
                                                                      l~uSjAS~tAj .
  Inquiry will save duplicationVsBKpthe questions which SYMAS
                          -Po       £ A f a j k l L y l ^ it=T r^ C o /w w 2 ~ ^ W ? < 3 --p
  will wish to put,»as to what— ohould happcrv- in the ±utur& /TY
  should■be- ptrt in the first part of the Inquiry-                                     /Thoro will
            t^\A .C XL<L^ 4 /j          lV;/^r>ey                                                ^
  adrse-£hereb y -ke ar-gavireg of expense.                                                     /          /,
 y U /l U              ^        <0
              2^ U   JW     S jL f h A ' JU S                                           /U

  I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Plan and Major
  Incident    Plan    above.           I     have          also          referred              to    the
     difficulties created by the police in their direction of
     SYMAS vehicles away from their intended destinations.


^ — t- I am instructed on behalf of              those persons from who/J^
     statements have been taken.          They all wish to have legal
     representation      if    required    to    give   evidence.         That
     representation will be more meaningful             if    I am able to
     represent SYMAS' officers and staff throughout the Inquiry
     and in my respectful submission the SYMAS evidence could not
     and should not be in isolation from all the evidence given
     at the Inquiry*


FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers          and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.                     Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
oart L m — nrir officers and staff wish to be legally represented if
they are to be called.        Each of them is an important witness as
to fact as regards either one or more of the following


           (a)   the events leading up to the incident


           (b)   the   way    the   incident    was   dealt   with   by    the
                 ambulance service
                      (c)      the   broader   issues   of    crowd   safety   at   sports
                               stadia.


     As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
     the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.                         In any
     event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if not greater
     contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
     representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
     the    ^Tre ^ervice             argued that they should have representation
     since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
     licence        to   the     sports    stadium.     The    ambulance   service    has
     significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
     consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
     give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
     and in my instructing Solicitors*letter of the 3rd May 1989
ft


           shai:               Cefese tc
             isioi       lould Loi       Jus

                   JkryC uSt
     Michael Kallipetis QC
     2 Crown Office Row
     Temple
     EC4
     ^ May 1989




                                                  8
?-v.'V *'




        IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
        INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

        LEADING COUNSEL'S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
        TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


        A.    I am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health ‘authority
              (TRHA) which is responsible for the management of South
              Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service                                                {SYMAS)       in
              connection with their involvement in the Hillsborough
              Disaster.             -i— have advi3ed LlidL TKHA sKould gUUli Itumal
             rights of— representation ~gt the— Trnnlrv vhinh In flue to
             .eommenoe on 15th May 198ft.

                                                            "TffiV"\V\ ■                   W                 rep.
                              •rnntari ■■1phn1~                 . Tn n - U nn       Tny,.1nr    hac      roqnocfoH
                              \ V-    -    f® -                           s#    “N u     r.= A ^   -£>
             ur-f-H-ar. «T»gf]fflftTTf;p
                           •gnmentg -ir. onppr>r--h
                                         ^ " r ”r                    »
                                                                     *■*M>■«*- iirr1
                                                                                ippl f‘
                                                                                      “■nti ««
                                                                                            "n               ___
                                                                                                             For_____
                                                                                                                  oace
             of. ref e rence^ uiopjg'6~~ rgr atfal In turn wiLh each of— the
             ,pnints In uij IxistiuuLlTig~Solimtois' letim ur 3rd way ^989-.
             o^-j                   O W      o^pWv^-V»*~      >->Q=. r aJ[We3          ce>u^3   vno^- <=*-
              Tn «8n HniinA T s h all             arinpt thft n u m b e r i n g n-f t h p          lattor,*
                          .     \         % ^SA^tvoCc\iO
             *T(U-A                                             a-    -         ^                        J           ijW X ^

        1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
                          ”fW«. ^aa^jCt<5rV-3w,.            —
        The evidence which SYMAS is able to produce to the Inquiry
        includes:
             (a)      The observations of ^officers who were present in the
                      ground prior to 3.00 p.m.

                                    ~K.o
                                                              o«-c.
             (b)      The evidence of jit # ambul ancem^n who yt»£~ off duty at the
                      orKtv^sfi^ "fVa-    J ■o'—a- <>-=» a-
       time but who was admitted to tha ground through C -gate
                                 w
       tn n a fc h a r wi t h      m any     o t h r r T ? r — ml      jT r -      im *r   t h nn   ir h u t    n n ii

                    ^ r j mr t m   i ■ 4- » ,.   1f ] f *      ■    , ■ ■, | L|i     ' ii' i i i n h i H h     hmra

      -requited in this Inquiry.


(c)   Evidence of Senior Officersjjwho attended the tjround as
      the incident developed.                               This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue, and the difficulties
      which were encountered in gaining access to the ground
      and in manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto
      the pitch.


(d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer, of another
      Senior Officer (now with another service), and of two
      other officers, relating to SYMAS' desire to have its
      officers          (and in appropriate cases an ambulance)
      present at the ground.                            -Tho Chi of Ambttlanoo Officer'a
      evidence— wil-ft— be critical— of— Sheffield— Wednesday
      TEw^v^], frjufr— i frhfjll. nafar fnrthnr tin this                                                        ir»
      nwvrn rle-h^-fl




(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


(f ) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to

                                                       2
            and   from SYMAS Control and transcripts of those
            messages.   These are relevant to the timing of events
            as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
            and others in authority reacted.      A number of messages
            from the police are recorded. '^-a-              °^€SX^    w




         — Evitrmice    o f— diTf leal ties— annoantorod by 0YMjhC
            ambulances on approaching the ground - in rajpdcular
            the fact that some vehicles, includincj^Cfve SfYMAS Major
            Incident Vehicle, were directejjx'ln error by police to
            the Leppings Lane end         ground. The Control Action
            Plan and instruct^erfis given to the drivers of      those
            vehicles required       that they should repox£ to the
            entrance next to     the gymnasium on Penistone Road




2m   FORWARD PLANNING


The statements,      documents    and tapes togejfcfe^r reveal        the
considerable extent of SYMAS’ involvem^jyt^in the planning for and
reaction to the disaster at Hi^3rfi5orough.    I understand that West
Midlands Police have b^prr'asked to investigate the role played by
the emergency > m v i c e s .    That in itself in my respectful
submission^nt^kes it desirable that SYMAS its officers and staff
should^be     represented, not least because in view of the high
 degree of public criticism of^fehe police to date it is essepfbial
 that    the e v i d e n c e ^ e a t h e   ambulance        service       s hould     be
 independentl^^fjfesented to the Inquiry.


        CRITICISM OF SYMAS


 Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
 present at the disaster were widely reported in the press in the
 days immediately after the disaster.               In particular the Community
 Physician      is reported to have said there was a lack of control,
 incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
particular defibrillators.                 Similar complaints continue to
receive mention in the press.


3YMAS wish— to be leyally "TtSjprtiMeiiLed— throughout— the inquiry m
-^rrtfir •hr> Hq <r> a rnrH*lt"11 m 'IJIIll6^ r 4 W luutuiniHl»J^ tha
raifnrfl ainfi-r— further be ablo to reflate any— suoh alleyaLluns
againg-t- ^YHAfi-      3E* understand that the Community Physician has
p u b lia h e d In Clitt H r l i m n Medical" Journal o t 29th Aflril 1969 a
^Pifni00*-      —ILm edioal aeoounto o f t h e -f f llls b o iu u y li d i s a s t e r "
.which ho aays will be "collated and presented to the Inquiry Into
.the di pastor". Given the criticisms which he has-alreadyjjnade, it
is highly probable that evidence if presented will be critical of
SYMAS.       The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to
enable it to refute any such criticism,                         and give it the
opportunity to establish the accurate position through all
relevant witnesses.


  ADVANCE WARNING


     (a)   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
           comments or criticism will be made during the course of
           such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance jaotd.ce may
           not always be possible.    However it is often "the case
           that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
           the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
           Counsel and ft itT Yrry nftrn tha nnnr that the nature
           of such criticism is    such that Counsel can establish
           facts refuting that criticism from other witnesses
           before the critical witnesses themselves are called.


    (b)    West Midlands Police have requested^ jstatements from
           SYMAS some of which^»g»paclal3.y-that o f— fefee— Chief
           tohni anna nff-j cer and other- nffirnw are   critical of

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's management.
           Pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's direction and the
           usual practice, advance notice of those criticisms will
           be given to the people concerned.   Inevitably they will
           give evidence anticipating such criticism and will seek
           to answer deflect or refute this and may well in so
           doing   attack the author of these criticisms.   It would
                     be invidious if the Chief Ambulance Officer and other
                    officers or staff were not able to put these criticisms
                     to those             witnesses through their own Counsel who can
                    test the replies by cross examination.                                                     Further,
                    unfairness may result to the SYMAS officers if they
                    give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
                    representatives of those witnesses without having the
                    benefit of being represented themselves.


/•      STATION OFFICERS' PRESENCE


  Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and crew, in
  the ground before the match started.                                         As stated above their
  evidence is relevant to what happened as the incident developed.
  It is also highly relevant to the dealings between SYMAS and the
 Club relating to involvement of the ambulance service at matches.
 They will for example give evidence that because the season
 tickets provided to them by the Club did not cover the F A Cup
 semi-final a request was made for tickets to be provided for
 their normal                 seats,              but this request was declined and in
 consequence they had to make arrangements through the police to
 view the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
 point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point of
 view of monitoring events and effective communication with
 Control ).           g iiT - h tu M w n ttM rn   t- h p   P ln h   haH          t he      1    OOfi/ 1 0   0 7      .1    .1   ",TTI't
/-p rfra irin ri   i-hmm             —fv-m m      pmmmmm      jJ irln rf   m n n n >    I ...    m.ry   p jmr - *-   rtf        » h n
ground;-—        5m —   1-907/19813— and— onwards— those— frri— p nn ri warr
jfcLtehdrawrn—


6. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS
                                          “to   -fw       Q_CiQvO    0^1



Tllvlg pa-raqfnph         ma y / h r   llllII   Irll UIII11 III [111! ,1HTilill [iil'T T 11r— the
Inquiry bu-fr     SYMMS       will be in a position to make more cogent
representations'if it has had the opportunity to participate                                  in
the Inquiry by full legal representation. Mr»rar.Trpr                             wy           «
£u>ll— part— ta— the— inquiry;—                 symaS     is inevitaoj.y “fcn— a-
position to put forward tactical— submlsaiono on tho oooond- part
of the— 11'iqurti.y*         Involvement throughout                 the Inquiry will save
duplication.           Furthermore          the questions which SYMAS will wish to
put, so as to establish its recommendations as to what should
happen in the future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings,
but will if put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it
unnecessary for such witnesses to return.                           jnhoyo t.hii
•faa a catHpg     nf    rf7rpfrngr     lint -til mini1 lihffiYA n ...         u   ittnnnnrn irl11
ha gpa-rori tho nrrianl nf rrH-Hng tha mvnnt tifirr mrrr


   SYMAS CUNTRUL ACT 1UN ~EJBtN


I have re


                                                                             vehicles away



                                                      7
c.
I am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
have been taken.    They all wish to have legal representation if
required to give evidence.       That representation will be more
meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS' officers and staff
throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the
evidence given at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers     and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.      Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.     Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of,*


          (a)   the events leading up to the incident


          (b)   the way the incident was dealt with by the
                ambulance service


          (c)   the broader issues of crowd safety at sports
                stadia.

                                    8
       As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
       the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.               In any
       event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if not greater
       contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
       representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
       the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
       since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
       licence to the sports stadium.                 The ambulance service has
      significant points to make in relation to why it too sbould be
      consul ted „mad £iir*:hnnnn-rn   M - h^r   nnngl Hprahlv greater twrldence to

                  in ralat-lmn   +~KP [Tinny               "***'
                                                               "
      •and in my inotrueting Solicitors-'— Intrtrrr nf -frhr flrrt Mnj       .


      I respectfully submit that for the                   reasons j^SYMAS ought to
      have full representation before the Inquiry.


      Michel Kallipetis QC
      2 Crown Office Row
      Temple
      EC4
15   ^ 0 ^ M ay   1989




                                                  9
IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

LEADING COUNSEL’S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


A.   I am instructed on behalf of          Trent Regional Health Authority
     (TRHA) which is responsible             for the management of South
      i

     Yorkshire      Metropolitan      Ambulance       Service    (SYMAS)   in
     connection     with    their   involvement       in   the   Hillsborough
     Disaster.     I have                   advised that TRHA should seek
     formal rights of representation at the Inquiry which is due
     to commence on 15th May 1989.             — 1— hava approved a— le-
                                                                       ttor
     datod^3r<T~May 1989 which luy Ixmlmerteing Solioitora wrote U»
     Jfcha Ccore Laiy uf'Tl'
                           ifcS Inquiry..


B.   I am    instructed     that    Lord    Justice   Taylor has requested
     written arguments in support           of this application. For ease
     of reference I propose to deal in turn with each of the
     points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of 3rd May 1989.
     In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the letter:


1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
The evidence which SYMAS        is able      to produce     to the    Inquiry
includes:
     (a)    The observations of officers who were present in the
            ground prior to 3.00 p.m.

                                      1
(b) The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the
      time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
      together with many others.          The gate was then shut and
      opened again later with the consequences which have
      resulted in this Inquiry.


(c) Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the ground as
      the incident developed.        This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue, and the difficulties
      which were encountered in gaining access to the ground
      and in manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto
      the pitch.


(d) The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer, of another
      Senior Officer (now with another service), and of two
      other officers, relating to SYMAS' desire to have its
      officers     (and   in   appropriate      cases   an   ambulance)
      present at the ground.       The Chief Ambulance Officer's
      evidence     will   be   critical    of   Sheffield    Wednesday
      Football Club.      I shall refer further to this below in
      more detail.


(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.
      (f ) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to
            and   from    SYMAS Control      and      transcripts of        those
            messages.     These are relevant         to the timing of events
            as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
            and others in authority reacted.              A number of messages
            from the police are recorded.




      (g)   Evidence      of    difficulties          encountered by     SYMAS
            ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
            the fact that some vehicles, including the SYMAS Major
            Incident Vehicle, were directed in error by police to
            the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The Control Action
            Plan and instructions given to the drivers of                those
            vehicles     required    that    they     should   report   to    the
            entrance     next   to   the gymnasium         on Penistone Road
            North.


2. FORWARD PLANNING


The   statements,       documents    and     tapes    together     reveal    the
considerable extent of SYMAS1 involvement in the planning for and
reaction to the disaster at Hillsborough.             I understand that West
Midlands Police have been asked to investigate the role played by
theemergency      services.      That       in   itself    in my   respectful
submission makes it desirable that SYMAS its officers and staff
should be        represented, not least because in view of the high
degree of public criticism of the police to date it is essemtial
that     the     evidence    of   the    ambulance      service    should    be
independently presented to the Inquiry.


3*     CRITICISM OF SYMAS


Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
present at the disaster were widely reported in the press in the
days immediately after the disaster.           In particular the Community
Physician      is reported to have said there was a lack of control
incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
particular       defibrillators.         Similar     complaints   continue   to
receive mention in the press.


SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the Inquiry in
order to be in a position to assist in responding to the issues
raised    and,    further be      able   to refute     any   such allegations
against SYMAS.        I understand that the Community Physician has
published in the British Medical Journal of 29th April 1989 a
request    for    "medical   accounts     of   the    Hillsborough disaster"
which he says will be "collated and presented to the Inquiry into
the disaster". Given the criticisms which he has already made, it
is highly probable that evidence if presented will be critical of
SYMAS.     The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to
enable     it    to       refute    any   such       criticism,     and    give    it   the
opportunity       to       establish      the       accurate    position   through      all
relevant witnesses.


4. ADVANCE WARNING


     (a)    It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
             comments or criticism will be made during the course of
             such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance notice may
            not always be possible.                   However it is often the case
             that         such     criticism         can   be   anticipated
             a        b      y       Counsel from the cross examination of
                                              c3_^We.v'
                            /    witnesses by g /te fe /Counsel and it is very
             often the case that the nature of such criticism is
             such that Counsel can establish facts refuting that
             criticism           from other witnesses            before ^critical^th^
            witnesses themselves are called.


     (b)    West Midlands Police have requested statements                              from
            SYMAS         some     of   which especially          that    of    the Chief
            Ambulance Officer and other officers are                           critical of
            Sheffield            Wednesday          Football     Club's    management.
            Pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's direction and the
            usual practice, advance notice of those criticisms will
            be given to the people concerned.                    Inevitably they will

                                                5
            give evidence anticipating such criticism and will seek
            to answer deflect or refute this and may well in so
            doing    attack the author of these criticisms.             It would
            be invidious if the Chief Ambulance Officer and other
            officers or staff were not able to put these criticisms
            to those       witnesses through their own Counsel who can
            test     the     replies   by   cross     examination.      Further,
            unfairness may result to the SYMAS officers if they
            give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
            representatives of those witnesses without having the
            benefit of being represented themselves.


5. STATION OFFICERS' PRESENCE


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and crew, in
the ground before the match started.                  As stated above their
evidence is relevant to what happened as the incident developed.
It is also highly relevant to the dealings between SYMAS and the
Club relating to involvement of the ambulance service at matches.
They will    for example give evidence that because                the    season
tickets provided to them by the Club did not cover the F A Cup
semi-final a request was made for tickets to be provided for
their   normal      seats,    but   this    request    was   declined    and   in
consequence they had to make arrangements through the police to
view the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point of
view    of    monitoring      events       and     effective       communication with
Control).         Furthermore the Club             had in     the    1986/1987   season
provided them with free passes giving access to any part of the
ground.        In    1987/1988       and     onwards       those    free   passes   were
withdrawn.


6. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of the
Inquiry but SYMAS will             be in a position            to make more cogent
representations if it has had the opportunity to participate                          in
the Inquiry by full legal representation. Moreover, by taking a
full    part    in    the    Inquiry,      SYMAS      is   inevitably      in a better
                                           c<x\
position to put forward                           submissions on the second part of
the    Inquiry.        Involvement      throughout          the     Inquiry will    save
duplication.         Furthermore     the questions which SYMAS will wish to
put,   so as to establish its recommendation^ as to what should
happen in the future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings,
but will       if put       in the   first part of the              Inquiry,   make it
unnecessary       for such witnesses toreturn.                 There will therefore
be a saving       of expense, but, in more human              terms, witnesses will
be spared the ordeal of reliving the event twice over.


7. SYMAS CONTROL ACTION PLAN


I have       referred    to the SYMAS Control               Action Plan      and Major
Incident Plan above.             I have also referred to the difficulties
created by the police in their direction of SYMAS vehicles away
from their intended destinations.


      I   am    instructed       on   behalf     of    those    persons   from whom
      statements have been taken.                They all wish to have legal
      representation         if       required    to    give     evidence.         That
      representation will be more meaningful                     if    I am able to
      represent SYMAS' officers and staff throughout the Inquiry
      and in my respectful submission the SYMAS evidence could not
      and should not be in isolation from all the evidence given
      at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers               and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.                              Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.          Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of the following:-


               (a)   the events leading up to the incident


               (b)   the   way    the    incident      was     dealt   with   by    the
                     ambulance service

                                           8
             (c)   the   broader   issues   of    crowd   safety   at   sports
                   stadia.


As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.                  In any
event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if not greater
contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence   to   the   sports   stadium.      The    ambulance   service has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
and in my instructing Solicitors' letter of the 3rd May 1989


1 respectfully submit that for the above reasons SYMAS ought to
have full representation before the Inquiry.


Michel Kallipetis QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4
8 May 1989
IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

LEADING COUNSEL'S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


A.   I am instructed on behalf of   Trent Regional Health ‘Authority
     (TRHA) which is responsible for the management of South
     Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service {SYMAS)            in
     connection with their involvement in the Hillsborough
     Disaster.      I have advised that TRHA should seek formal
     rights of representation at the Inquiry which is due to
     commence on 15th May 1989.


B.   I am instructed that Lord      Justice Taylor has xequested
     written arguments in support of this application.     For ease
     of reference I propose to deal in turn with each of the
     points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of 3rd May 1989.
     In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the letter:


1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
The evidence which SYMAS is able to produce to the Inquiry
includes:
     (a)    The observations of officers who were present in the
            ground prior to 3.00 p.m.


     (b)    The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the
      time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
      together with many others.      The gate was then shut and
      opened again later with the consequences which have
      resulted in this Inquiry.


(c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the gxuund as
      the incident developed.       This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue, and the difficulties
      which were encountered in gaining access to the ground
      and in manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto
      the pitch.


(d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer, of another
      Senior Officer (now with another service), and of two
      other officers, relating to SYMAS' desire to have its
      officers (and in appropriate cases an ambulance)
      present at the ground.      The Chief Ambulance Officer's
      evidence will be critical of Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club.   I shall refer further to this below in
      more detail.


(©)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


(f)   The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to

                                2
            and    from SYMAS Control      and transcripts of those
            messages.       These are relevant to the timing   of   events
            as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
            and others in authority reacted.       A number     messages
            from the police are recorded.




     (g)    Evi d e n c e   of   difficulties   encountered by SYMAS
            ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
            the fact that some vehicles, including the SYMAS Major
            Incident Vehicle, were directed in error by police to
            the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The Control Action
            Plan and instructions given to the drivers of           those
            vehicles required that they should report; to the
            entrance next to         the gymnasium on Penistone Road
            North.


2, FORWARD PLANNING


The statements,        documents and tapes      together reveal       the
considerable extent of SYMAS' involvement in the planning for and
reaction to the disaster at Hillsborough.        I understand that West
Midlands Police have been asked to investigate the role played by
the emergency services.             That in itself in my respectful
submission makes it desirable that SYMAS its officers and staff
should be     represented, not least because in view of the high
degree of public criticism of the police to date it is essemtial
that     the evidence   of   the   ambulance   serv i c e   s hould   be
independently presented to the Inquiry.


3.     CRITICISM OF SYMAS


Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
present at the disaster were widely reported in the pcress in the
days immediately after the disaster.    In particular the Community
Physician    is reported to have said there was a lack of control
incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
particular defibrillators.         Similar complaints continue to
receive mention in the press.


SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the Inquiry in
order- to be in a position to assist in responding to the issues
raised and,    further be able to refute any such allegations
against SYMAS.    I understand that the Community Physician has
published in the British Medical Journal of 29th April 1989 a
request for "medical accounts of the Hillsborough disaster"
which he says will be "collated and presented to the Inquiry into
the disaster". Given the criticisms which he has already made, it
is highly probable that evidence if presented will be critical of
SYMAS.   The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to
enable it to refute any such criticism,           and give it the
opportunity to establish the accurate position through all
relevant witnesses.


4. ADVANCE WARNING


     (a)   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
           comments or criticism will be made during the course of
           such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance jaotd.ce may
           not always be possible.    However it is often "the case
           that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
           the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
           Counsel and it is very often the case that the nature
           of such criticism is    such that Counsel can establish
           facts refuting that criticism from other witnesses
           before the critical witnesses themselves are called.


    (b)    West Midlands Police have requested statements from
           SYMAS some of which especially that of the Chief
           Ambulance Officer and other officers are     critical of
           Sheffield Wednesday Football C l u b ’s management.
           Pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's direction and the
           usual practice, advance notice of those criticisms will
           be given to the people concerned.   Inevitably they will
           give evidence anticipating such criticism and will seek
           to answer deflect or refute this and may well in so
           doing   attack the author of these criticisms.   It would
            be invidious if the Chief Ambulance Officer and other
            officers or staff were not able to put these criticisms
            to those   witnesses through their own Counsel who can
            test the replies by cross examination.       Further,
            unfairness may result to the SYMAS officers if they
            give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
            representatives of those witnesses without having the
            benefit of being represented themselves.


5. STATION OFFICERS * PRESENCE


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and crew, in
the ground before the match started.       As stated above their
evidence is relevant to what happened as the incident developed.
It is also highly relevant to the dealings between SYMAS and the
Club relating to involvement of the ambulance service at matches.
They will for example give evidence that because the season
tickets provided to them by the Club did not cover the F A Cup
semi-final a request was made for tickets to be provided for
their normal     seats,   but this request was declined and in
consequence they had to make arrangements through the police to
view the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point of
view of monitoring events and effective communication with
Control).    Furthermore the Club had in the 1986/1987 season
provided them with free passes giving access to any part of the
ground.      In 1987/1988 and onwards those free passes were
withdrawn.


6. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of the
Inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more cogent
representations if it has had the opportunity to participate     in
the Inquiry by full legal representation. Moreover, by -taking a
full part in the Inquiry,       SYMAS is inevitably in a better
position to put forward tactical submissions on the second part
of the Inquiry.    Involvement throughout    the Inquiry will save
duplication.   Furthermore   the questions which SYMAS will wish to
put, so as to establish its recommendations as to what should
happen in the future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings,
but will if put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it
unnecessary for such witnesses to return.     There will therefore
be a saving of expense, but, in more human terms, witnesses will
be spared the ordeal of reliving the event twice over.


7. SYMAS CONTROL ACTION PLAN


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Plan and Major
Incident Plan above.   I have also referred to the difficulties
created by the police in their direction of SYMAS vehicles away
from their intended destinations.
    c.
    I am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
    have been taken.    They all wish to have legal representation if
    required to give evidence.       That representation will be more
    meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS' officers and staff
    throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
    evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the


•
    evidence given at the Inquiry.


    0. FAIRNESS


    Each of the SYMAS officers     and staff involved in the disaster
    have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.      Those
    statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
    the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
    are to be called.     Each of them is an important witness as to
    fact as regards either one or more of the following:-


              (a)   the events leading up to the incident


              (b)   the way the incident was dealt with by the
                    ambulance service


              (c)   the broader issues of crowd safety at sports
                    stadia.

                                        8
    As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
    the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.    In any
    event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if not greater
    contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
    representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
    the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
    since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
    licence to the sports stadium.        The ambulance service has
^   significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
    consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
    give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
    and in my instructing Solicitors' letter of the 3rd May 1989.


    1 respectfully submit that for the above reasons SYMAS ought to
    have full representation before the Inquiry.


    Michel Kallipetis QC
    2 Crown Office Row
•   Temple
    EC4
    8 May 1989




                                      9
     IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
     INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

     LEADING COUNSEL'S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
     TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


     A.   I am instructed on behalf of    Trent Regional Healtft "Authority
          (TRHA) which is responsible for the management of South
          Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service            {SYMAS)   in
          connection with their involvement in the Hillsborough
ft
v         Disaster.      I have advised   that TRHA should seek formal
          rights of representation at the Inquiry which is due to
          commence on 15th May 1989.


     B.   I am instructed that Lord       Justice Taylor has requested
          written arguments in support of this application.       For ease
          of reference I propose to deal in turn with each of the
          points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of 3rd May 1989.
          In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the letter:


     1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
     The evidence which SYMAS is able to produce to the Inquiry
     includes:
          (a)    The observations of officers who were present in the
                 ground prior to 3.00 p.m.


          (b)    The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the

                                             1
      time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
      together with many others.      The gate was -hhtsn shut and
      opened again later with the consequences which have
      resulted in this Inquiry.


(c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the giuund as
      the incident developed.       This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue, and the difficulties
      which were encountered in gaining access to the ground
      and in manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto
      the pitch.


(d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer,    of   another
      Senior Officer (now with another service), and of two
      other officers, relating to SYMAS' desire to have its
      officers (and in appropriate cases an ambulance)
      present at the ground.      The Chief Ambulance Officer's
      evidence will be critical of Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club.   I shall refer further to this below in
      more detail.


(e ) Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


(f)   The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to

                                2
            and   from SYMAS Control and transcripts of those
            messages.   These are relevant to the timing of events
            as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
            and others in authority reacted.   A number   v f m essages

            from the police are recorded.




     (g)    Evidence    of   difficulties   encountered by SYMAS
            ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
            the fact that some vehicles, including the SYMAS Major
            Incident Vehicle, were directed in error by police to
            the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The Control Action
            Plan and instructions given to the drivers of       those
            vehicles    required that they should repoxt to the
            entrance next to     the gymnasium on Penistone Road
            North.


2. FORWARD PLANNING


The statements,      documents and tapes together reveal           the
considerable extent of SYMAS’ involvement in the planning for and
reaction to the disaster at Hillsborough.    I understand that West
Midlands Police have been asked to investigate the role played by
the emergency services.         That in itself in my respectful
submission makes it desirable that SYMAS its officers and staff
should be     represented, not least because in view of the high
degree of public criticism of the police to date it is essemtial
that     the evidence   of   the   ambulance   service   s hould   be
independently presented to the Inquiry.


3.     CRITICISM OF SYMAS


Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
present at the disaster were widely reported in the press in the
days immediately after the disaster.    In particular the Community
Physician    is reported to have said there was a lack of control
incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
particular defibrillators.         Similar complaints continue to
receive mention in the press.


SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the Inquiry in
order to be in a position to assist in responding to the issues
raised and,    further be able to refute any such allegations
against SYMAS.    I understand that the Community Physician has
published in the British Medical Journal of 29th April 1989 a
request for "medical accounts of the Hillsborough disaster"
which he says will be "collated and presented to the Inquiry into
the disaster". Given the criticisms which he has already made, it
is highly probable that evidence if presented will be critical of
SYMAS.   The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to
enable it to refute any such criticism,          and give it the
opportunity to establish the accurate position through all
relevant witnesses.


4. ADVANCE WARNING


     (a)   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
           comments or criticism will be made during the course of
           such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance .notice may
           not always be possible.    However it is often "the case
           that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
           the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
           Counsel and it is very often the case that the nature
           of such criticism is    such that Counsel can establish
           facts refuting that criticism from other witnesses
           before the critical witnesses themselves are called.


    (b)    West Midlands Police have requested statements from
           SYMAS some of which especially that of the Chief
           Ambulance Officer and other officers are     critical of
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's management.
           Pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's direction and the
           usual practice, advance notice of those criticisms will
           be given to the people concerned.   Inevitably they will
           give evidence anticipating such criticism and will seek
           to answer deflect or refute this and may well in so
           doing   attack the author of these criticisms.   It would
            be invidious if the Chief Ambulance Officer and other
            officers or staff were not able to put these criticisms
            to those   witnesses through their own Counsel who can
            test the replies by cross examination.       Further,
            unfairness may result to the SYMAS officers if they
            give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
            representatives of those witnesses without having the
            benefit of being represented themselves.


5. STATION OFFICERS1 PRESENCE


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and crew, in
the ground before the match started.       As stated above their
evidence is relevant to what happened as the incident developed.
It is also highly relevant to the dealings between SYMAS and the
Club relating to involvement of the ambulance service at matches.
They will for example give evidence that because the season
tickets provided to them by the Club did not cover the F A Cup
semi-final a request was made for tickets to be provided for
their normal     seats,   but this request was declined and in
consequence they had to make arrangements through the police to
view the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point of
view of monitoring events and effective communication with
Control).    Furthermore the Club had in the 1986/1987 season
provided them with free passes giving access to any part of the

                                    6
ground.      In 1987/1988 and onwards those free passes were
withdrawn.


6. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of the
Inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more cogent
representations if it has had the opportunity to participate     in
the Inquiry by full legal representation. Moreover, by taking a
full part in the Inquiry,       SYMAS is inevitably in a "better
position to put forward tactical submissions on the second part
of the Inquiry.    Involvement throughout    the Inquiry will save
duplication.   Furthermore   the questions which SYMAS will wish to
put,   so as to establish its recommendations as to what should
happen in the future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings,
but will if put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it
unnecessary for such witnesses to return.     There will therefore
be a saving of expense, but, in more human terms, witnesses will
be spared the ordeal of reliving the event twice over.


7. SYMAS CONTROL ACTION PLAN


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Plan and Major
Incident Plan above.   I have also referred to the difficulties
created by the police in their direction of SYMAS vehicles away
from their intended destinations.
c.
I am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
have been taken.    They all wish to have legal representation if
required to give evidence.       That representation will be more
meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS' officers and staff
throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the
evidence given at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers     and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.      Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.     Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of the following:-


          (a)   the events leading up to the incident


          (b)   the way the incident was dealt with by the
                ambulance service


          (c)   the broader issues of crowd safety at sports
                stadia.

                                    8
As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.     In any
event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if ncrt greater
contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence to the sports stadium.      The ambulance service has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
and in my instructing Solicitors' letter of the 3rd May 1989.


1 respectfully submit that for the above reasons SYMAS ought to
have full representation before the Inquiry.


Michel Kallipetis QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4
8 May 1989
IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

LEADING COUNSEL *S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


A.   I am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health "Authority
     (TRHA) which is responsible for the management of South
     Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service {SYMAS) in
     connection with their involvement in the HillstJOfough
     Disaster.      I have advised that TRHA should seek formal
     rights of representation at the Inquiry which is due to
     commence on 15th May 1989.


B.   I am instructed that Lord      Justice Taylor has xequested
     written arguments in support of this application.     For ease
     of reference I propose to deal in turn with each of the
     points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of 3rd May 1989.
     In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the letter:


1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
The evidence which SYMAS is able to produce to the Inquiry
includes:
     (a)    The observations of officers who were present in the
            ground prior to 3.00 p.m.


     (b)    The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the
      ■time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
      together with many others.     The gate was then shut and
      opened again later with the consequences which have
      resulted in this Inquiry.


(c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended    ttm   tjiuund as
      the incident developed.       This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue, and the difficulties
      which were encountered in gaining access to "the ground
      and in manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto
      the pitch.


(d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer, of another
      Senior Officer (now with another service), and of two
      other officers, relating to SYMAS' desire to have its
      officers     (and in appropriate cases    an ambulance)
      present at the ground.      The Chief Ambulance Officer's
      evidence will be critical of Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club.    I shall refer further to this below in
      more detail.


(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major incident Plan.


(f) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to

                                2
            and from SYMAS Control          and transcripts of those
            messages.        These are relevant to the timing of events
            as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
            and others in authority reacted.       A number wt messages
            from the police are recorded.




     (g)    Ev i d e n c e   of   difficulties   encountered by SYMAS
            ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
            the fact that some vehicles, including the SYMAS TOajor
            Incident Vehicle, were directed in error by police to
            the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The Control Action
            Plan and instructions given to the drivers of         those
            vehicles         required that they should repoxi to the
            entrance next to          the gymnasium on Penistone Road
            North.


2. FORWARD PLANNING


The statements,         documents     and tapes together reveal the
considerable extent of SYMAS' involvement in the planning for and
reaction to the disaster at Hillsborough.         I understand that West
Midlands Police have been asked to investigate the role played by
the emergency services.              That in itself in my respectful
submission makes it desirable that SYMAS its officers and staff
should be      represented, not least because in view of the high
degree of public criticism of the police to date it is essemtial
that     the evidence   of   the   a m b u lance   service   should   be
independently presented to the Inquiry.


3.     CRITICISM OF SYMAS


Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
present at the disaster were widely reported in the press in the
days immediately after the disaster.       In particular the Community
Physician    is reported to have said there was a lack of control
incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
particular defibrillators.         Similar complaints continue to
receive mention in the press.


SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the Inquiry in
order to be in a position to assist in responding to the issues
raised and,    further be able to refute any such allegations
against SYMAS.    I understand that the Community Physician has
published in the British Medical Journal of 29th April 1989 a
request for "medical accounts of the Hillsborough disaster"
which he says will be "collated and presented to the Inquiry into
the disaster”. Given the criticisms which he has already made, it
is highly probable that evidence if presented will be critical of
SYMAS.    The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to
enable it to refute any such criticism,               and give it the
opportunity to establish the accurate position through all
relevant witnesses.


4. ADVANCE WARNING


     (a)   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
           comments or criticism will be made during the course of
           such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance oaotJ.ce may
           not always be possible.    However it is often "the case
           that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
           the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
           Counsel and it is very often the case that the nature
           of such criticism is    such that Counsel can establish
           facts refuting that criticism from other witnesses
           before the critical witnesses themselves are called.


     (b)   West Midlands Police have requested statements from
           SYMAS some of which especially that of the Chief
           Ambulance Officer and other officers are     critical of
           Sheffield Wednesday Football C l u b ’s management.
           Pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's direction and the
           usual practice, advance notice of those criticisms will
           be given to the people concerned.   Inevitably they will
           give evidence anticipating such criticism and will seek
           to answer deflect or refute this and may well in so
           doing   attack the author of these criticisms.   It would
            be invidious if the Chief Ambulance Officer and other
            officers or staff were not able to put these criticisms
            to those   witnesses through their own Counsel who can
            test the replies by cross examination.       Further,
            unfairness may result to the SYMAS officers if they
            give evidence and are themselves cross examined try the
            representatives of those witnesses without having the
            benefit of being represented themselves.

                                                                 y

5. STATION OFFICERS' PRESENCE


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and crew, in
the ground before the match started.       As stated above their
evidence is relevant to what happened as the incident developed.
It is also highly relevant to the dealings between SYMAS and the
Club relating to involvement of the ambulance service at matches.
They will for example give evidence that because the season
tickets provided to them by the Club did not cover the F A Cup
semi-final a request was made for tickets to be provided for
their normal     seats,   but this request was declined and in
consequence they had to make arrangements through the police to
view the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point of
view of monitoring events and effective communication with
Control).    Furthermore the Club had in the 1986/1987 season
provided them with free passes giving access to any part of the
ground.      In 1987/1988 and onwards those free passes were
withdrawn.


6. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of the
Inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more cogent
representations if it has had the opportunity to participate     in
the Inquiry by full legal representation. Moreover, by -taking a
full part in the Inquiry,       SYMAS is inevitably in a “better
position to put forward tactical submissions on the second part
of the Inquiry.    Involvement throughout    the Inquiry will save
duplication.   Furthermore   the questions which SYMAS will wish to
put,   so as to establish its recommendations as to what should
happen in the future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings,
but will if put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it
unnecessary for such witnesses to return.     There will therefore
be a saving of expense, but, in more human terms, witnesses will
be spared the ordeal of reliving the event twice over.


7. SYMAS CONTROL ACTION PLAN


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Plan and Major
Incident Plan above.   I have also referred to the difficulties
created by the police in their direction of SYMAS vehicles away
from their intended destinations.
c.
I am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
have been taken.    They all wish to have legal representation if
required to give evidence.       That representation    l be more
meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS' officers and staff
throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the
evidence given at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers    and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.      Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.     Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of the following:-


          (a)   the events leading up to the incident


          (b)   the way the incident was dealt with by the
                ambulance service


          (c)   the broader issues of crowd safety at sports
                stadia.

                                    8
As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.    In any
event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if W t greater
contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence to the sports stadium.      The ambulance service has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
and in my instructing Solicitors' letter of the 3rd May 1989.


1 respectfully submit that for the above reasons SYMAS ought to
have full representation before the Inquiry.


Michel Kallipetis QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4
8 May 1989
D R A F T 5T H M A Y 1989



I am     instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health Authority
(TRHA)    the Authority        responsible    for the management      of South
Yorkshire     Metropolitan Ambulance Service           (SYMAS)   in connection
with their involvement           in the Hillsborough Disaster.             I have
previously       advised      thJt   TRHA   should   seek   formal   rights    of
representation at the .Inquiry which is due to commence on 15th
May 1989 and I have approved a letter dated 3rd May 1989 which my
instructing Solicitors wrote to the Secretary of thej£nquiry.


I have been asked by Lord Justice Taylor and am pleased to expand

upon each of the points in my ^instructing Solicitors                letter of

the 3rd/ljay 1989.          In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the

letter:


1.     The evidence which SYMAS will produce to the Jjnquiry will

       include:

                                                                       f


       (a)    The observations of officers who were present in the

              ground from prior to 3.00 p.m.


       (b)    The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the
              time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
              prior to the fateful opening of that gate
#»




      (c) Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the ground as
          the incident developed.          This will     include evidence
          relating to the crush and rescue and difficulties which
          were encountered in gaining access to the ground and in
          manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto the
          pitch.


      (d) The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer and of/
          another      Senior   Officer   (now with      another    service)
          relating to SYMAS desire to have its officers (and in
          appropriate cases and ambulance) present at '
                                                      fefeLe the
          ground at matches at Hillsborough, and the difficulties
                            A                 "/o      ~T
          presented by the \club in relation >£» that*      Chief
 )0
          Ambulance      Officers   evidence    will     be   critical     of
          Sheffield Wednesday               (Z/u-h . /
          To

      (e ) Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
          the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
          and the implementation of a ^ajor j.ncident ^Lan.

                                                                    I
      (f) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to
          and   from    SYMAS   Control   and   transcripts        of   those
          messages.     These are relevant to the timing of events
          as they unfolded kmt -al-so to the manner in which the
          police reacted.       A number of messages from the police
          are recorded.




                                     2
) Evidence              of       difficulties                        encountered         by       SYMAS
  ambulances on approaching the ground - in particular
  the fact that some vehicles including the SYMAS Major
  Incident             Vehicle                 were        directed          by    police        to    the
  Leppings             Lane end of                     the ground when              the plan and
  instructions               to these in the vehicles required that
  they should report to the entrance ne#t the gymnasium
  on Penistone Road North.


  The statements, documents and tapes together reveal the
  considerable                   extent             of      SYMAS 1         involvement          in    the
  planning              for         and           reaction             to    the    disaster           at
  Hillsborough.                       If         West           Midlands        Police   have         been
  briefed to investigate the role played by the emergency
  services that in itself warrants SYMAS its officers and
  staff having representation


 Criticism of SYMAS by a community physician^who was-
                                                                     ks/efe/y            (
 present at the disaster were w-i-3rdly' reported in the
                                                                                             f


 press in the days immediately after the disaster.                                                     In
            ■/Ua.                          it. ,a.s\
 particular -keyis reported to have said                                                     o- Jbck.
                m            .                 J@ ss.o4t b j^

  ■'£11^'                                 'L
              f& Ji-             .si< i                         fv                           ( ft& e


             b n U c K .tc rs


 SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the
* *
//



            inquiry in order to be in a position to assist in
            responding to the issues                raised and to refute the
            allegations.      I understand that the Community physician
            has published in the British ^edical Journal of 29th
            April   1989     a request       for    "medical       accounts        of    the
            Hillsborough         disaster"              which    he    says       will    be
            "collated      and    presented        to    the     inquiry      into       the
            disaster". Having reported the criticisms which he ha$*
            already made it is possible that if his own or collated
            evidence is presented it will be critical of SYMAS.
            The Ambulance Service should have legal representation To
            enable it to refute that criticism


      (a)   It is difficult        to anticipate precisely when adverse

            comments or criticism will be made during the course of
            an Inquiry.          More important however it is not only
            imperative that advance notice of criticisms should                           be
            given so that the individual|f>j(^) criticises/can respond,
            it may be the case that the nature of the criticism
            will be such that Counsel will wish to establish facts
              '/u
            reporting that criticism from other witnesses before
            the witnesses are called


      (b)   West Midlands        Police have requested                statements        from
            SYMAS   some    of    which   especially            that   of    the (chief
             mbulance QefiLeer         and    other          officers       are    highly
            critical    of       Sheffield     Wednesday           Football         Clubs




                                                         *
     management#.        Pursuant       to     Lord    Justice    Taylor's

     direction    and   the    usual    practice^ advance        notice    of

     those criticisms will be given to the people concerned.

     Inevitably    they will     give       evidence   anticipating      such

     criticism and will seek to answer crereot or refute this

     and may well in so doing            attack the author of these

     criticisms.        It    would    be    invidious           the    Chief
    L          h
    f^mbulance Vjafficer and other officers or staff were not
                                 *
     able to put these to thetf^f’witnesses through Counsel
     and test the replies Jber by cross examination, and also
     may result in unfairness to the SYMAS officers if they
     give evidence and are themselves cross examined by the
     representatives of those witnesses without having the
     benefit of being represented themselves


Two •Station
    Station Qffii
             (officers were present with an ambulance and
crew, in the ground# before the match started?                   As stated
above their evidence is relevant to what happens as the
incident developed.          It is also highly         relevant        to the
dealings between SYMAS and the (glub relating to involvement
of the ambulance service at matches.             They will for .example
give evidence that the season tickets* normally provided to
them by the Club were withdrawn for the F A Cup semi-final
and in consequence they had to make arrangements to view
the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point
of view of monitoring events).          Furthermore the /plub had in
the 1986/1987 season provided than with free passes giving
access to any part of the ground.              1987/1988 and onwards
those free passes were withdrawn.


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second part of
the inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more
cogent representations        if it has had the opportunity to
participate       in    the            by    legal      representation,
allowing cross examination and such representation             may well
influence SYMAS'       submissions* Involvement      throughout        the
Tnquiry will save duplication and the questions which SYMAS
will wish to put as to what should happen in the future
should be put dews in the first part of the Inquiry.                 There
will also thereby be a saving of expense.


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action ^ n               and Major
Incident   Plan    above.       I   have    also   referred     to    the
difficulties created by the police in their direction of
SYMAS vehicles away from their intended destinations.

                                                                I
I am instructed on behalf of all those persons from who/li
statements have been taken.         Thais all wish to have legal
representation     if    required    to     give   evidence.         That
representation will be more meaningful             if    I am able to
represent SYMAS '<9 officers and staff throughout the Inquiry
and in my respectful submission the SYMAS evidence could not
and should not be in isolation from all the evidence given
                r~*
      at the inquiry.
             ir


FAIRNESS
      "




Each of the SYMAS officers                 and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.                                     Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitor^ but
each of the officers and staff wish to be legally represented if
they are to be called.              Each of them is an important witness as
to        fact as regard^either one or more of the following:-


             (a)      the events leading up to the incident
                                                                 m




             (b)      the   way     the    incident         was      dealt   with    by    the
                      ambulance service


            (c)       ^he   broader       issues   of       crowd      safety   at   sports
                      stadi»H*a-.


As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already bepn made
                              OUdkf~
the ambulance service                  to be legally represented.                    ^n any
                                                        $
event I respectfully submit that it ha# an equal if not greater
contribution to make than the fire Service who have been granted
representation. X understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the   fire service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence    to   the     sports      stadium.       The       ambulance       service      has




                                                   7         4
insAJ-ificterrt points to make in relation to why it too should be

consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to

give in relation to the many points set out in this submission

and in my instructing Solicitors letter of the 3rd May 1989#


                                                in
1 shall be please to elaborate further any point.this submission

should Lord Justice Taylor wish me to do so.


                 h%
Michael Kallipei-fes- QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4

5 May 1989
IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

LEADING COUNSEL’S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AM APPLICATION BY
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


A.   I an instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health Authority
     (TRHA)   which ±8 responsible       for the management of South
     Yorkshire    Metropolitan        Ambulance   Service    (SYMAS)   in
     connection     with   their    involvement   in   the   Hillsborough
     Disaster.


B.   An application for the grant of the right to representation
     was made by my Instructing Solicitors at the preliminary
     hearing on the 28th April and was refused, but you indicated
     that any party whose application was refused could make a
     further application.          I am instructed to make a further
     application.      TRHA seeks representation on          a number of
     grounds which are set out in a letter from my Instructing
     Solicitors and in written representations from me.           I shall
     merely summarize those representations.


1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
The evidence which SYMAS       is able to produce       to the    Inquiry
includes:
     (a)    The observations of on duty officers who were present
            in the ground prior to 3.00 p.m.
(b)   The evidence of two ambulancemen who were off duty at
      the    time     but    who    attended        the   match,   one   as    a
      spectator       and one      in his       capacity   as a part       time
      caterer.


(c)   Evidence       of   Senior    Officers        and   ambulancemen     who
      attended the ground as the incident developed.                       This
      will include evidence relating to the crush and rescue,
      and the difficulties which were encountered in gaining
      access    to    the ground        and     in manoeuvering     vehicles
      within the ground and onto the pitch.


(d)   The    evidence       of   the    Chief      Ambulance   Officer,       of
      another Senior Officer (now with another service), and
      of two other officers,             relating to SYMAS' desire to
      have     its    officers      (and      in   appropriate     cases      an
      ambulance) present at the ground.


(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


(f)   The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to
      and    from    SYMAS       Control   and      transcripts    of    those
      messages.       These are relevant to the timing of events

                                    2
1




                as they unfolded and to the manner In which the police
                and others in authority reacted.   A number of messages
                from the police are recorded.   The tapes are already in
                the possession of the Police.




    2.   CRITICISM OF SYMAS


    Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.P. who were
    present at the disaster were widely reported in the press in the
    days immediately after the disaster.    In particular the Community
    Physician    is reported to have said there was a lack of control,
    incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
    have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
    particular    defibrillators.     Similar   complaints   continue   to
    receive mention in the press.


    Given the criticisms which have already been made, it is highly
    probable that evidence if presented will be critical of SYMAS.
    The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to enable
    it to refute any such criticism, and give it the opportunity to
    establish the accurate position through all relevant witnesses.


    3. ADVANCE WARNING


         (a)    It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse

                                     3
      comments or criticism will be made during the course of
      such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance notice may
      not always be possible.             However it is often the case
      that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
      the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
      Counsel and that the nature of such criticism is                    such
      that    Counsel      can     establish        facts    refuting     that
      criticism      from other witnesses            before       the critical
      witnesses themselves are called.


(b)   West    Midlands Police           have    requested,    and    have been
      supplied with, statements from SYMAS some of which are
      critical       of   Sheffield       Wednesday        Football    Club's
      management.          Pursuant        to    Lord     Justice    Taylor’s
      direction and the usual practice,                   advance notice of
      those criticisms will be given to the people concerned.
      Inevitably they will give evidence anticipating such
      criticism and will seek to answer deflect or refute
      this and may well in so doing                  attack the author of
      these criticisms.           It would be invidious if the Chief
      Ambulance Officer and other officers or staff were not
      able    to   put    these    criticisms       to    those      witnesses
      through their own Counsel who can                  test the replies by
      cross examination. Further,                unfairness may result to
      the    SYMAS   officers      if     they give       evidence    and are
      themselves cross examined by the                   representatives of

                                    4
          those witnesses without having the benefit of being
          represented themselves.


5. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


SYMAS will be in a position to sake more cogent representations
to the second part of the Inquiry if it has had the opportunity
to participate     in the Inquiry by full legal representation.
Involvement   throughout    the    Inquiry will   save   duplication.
Furthermore   the questions which SYMAS will wish to put, so as to
establish its recommendations as to what should happen in the
future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings, but will if
put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it unnecessary for
such witnesses to return.



c«
I am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
have been taken.   They all wish to have legal representation if
required to give evidence.        That representation will be more
meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS’ officers and staff
throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the
evidence given at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS
Each of the SYMAS officers           and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.                     Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the   officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.        Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of the following;


             (a)   the events leading up to the incident


             (b)   the   way   the    incident was     dealt    with   by   the
                   ambulance service


             (c)   the   broader     issues   of crowd   safety   at   sports
                   stadia.


As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.                 In any
event I respectfully submit that it has at least as great a
contribution to make as the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence   to   the   sports    stadium.       The   ambulance   service     has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted.
    1   respectfully   submit    that   for     the     reasons   which   I have
    outlined   SYMAS   ought    to have       full   representation before the
    Inquiry.


    Michel Kallipetis QC
    2 Crown Office Row
    Temple
    EC4
    15 May 1989




O




                                          7
                                                                                                       sfiSS    SMI
                                                       ilMlisilMi                 :iWiW      ^     i t    l l l l i l
                        jpllpffig                                   wm m       BSffi
      ssmssi
                                             ■
                                             "
                                             ■
                                             —           ■
                       ■MR                                                                                                                    4i$i§i§
MmB0Mi.

                                                                                                                                                 'lljl
                                                                          FAIRFIELD, MOOteAT[8 ROAD.
                             ]»©K@'.i                                         mmmHAM &
                                                                    TELEPHONE; ROTHERHAM (070S) 828020

                                                                                                                                                 |p|^S§|5
                                        OURREF                                                             Mr.A.PAG!
                                        YOURWi                                                                 il!pfetef»«aps»«p;
                                        ifSSfci|®5»!                                                            AMBUl/
                                                                                                                                                 i».,,„,l4«,g



          liiS iS iiS iliS llS ti


          |l f : i |l f |f              mw&Mg&M

          Froiu
                                                                                                                                                        sill



                                           s a tir e f a t i^eam Kt t'roa the A ssociation o£ Chief
                                        iff. ac£ out? rrvt*»rit e o n v tstsa tio n .



                                              j o r i i u n i 'T : t e w i ,Jht.«‘t


                                                                                                                       SIlfilK
                                                                                                                                  $Sfa
                                                                                                               VMlvlviV.JvSfOeH/.iaAIWlllfi
                      §j!j|g|




S tlbau‘-’>yio n by
         #




  .iP
                                                                                             ISlSltt
                                                                                              k,->       *                      i , <.
sWftifcs?'                                                                        v                            .. ..
                                                                                                                       •’1 1 *.fi-v -' < l ?>*.                                    ' :;   • .■,


                                                                                       Xliifeh*.



                                                                                                                      h;:m.is




                                                                                 ■:'vV€
                                                                           r:«'l ■• H 'v



                                                    1:-'■ --;i •:'
                                                                                   •'f^.
                                                                                     sw**"           ;:'|«i^:;.^-1‘
                                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                                # '.$/   ft ‘p . 'i& ■ £r- iftiv




                                                                            '.ceft.§gf’
                                                                                      gJ-


                                                                                                                                          '              i"\




                                                                                                                      ia''M»»i6Sil ASi'tivlis




             A^r,'*!;   -i^' ;-;y   .^r.-^'"r   . » . . -i ~ " , « . . -




                                                                           If
;y       “^ u,‘,;0^ ^ V u ^ .           ■,■       .;'HiS:^;w,Hknc ‘" ‘ "                                                  >            ?pr ^         ^ z m . m                   le




      '**>9



                                        jitW'lS'jtfSlllsSli                                   "> 1 ' '•!          ' -        >. Ltygfipjam
                                                                                                                                 I, .- ;1




                                                                                            ^Pj'
                                                                                               ;S:r-^ [')''S5^'f
                                              idfilifl#lK#                   ^M‘*':^'IS^:5’^.1-'itasi {|4?i>“|^         c|y:i-J:i!tt? ylajitfii-f:" i# S - 1.^?' i-h   i ?‘i'5;;:WV<■ff? ‘::x
                                                        ^<:,:y--;
                                                        f6xp.r*              W arn'd:
                                              ■
                                              ;!:v;:i': ]Q:..yj{■'
                                               .■
                                                .                ■
                                              |:
                                               f^.'!'-!

                                                       ■:;.'■;JvV■•V'i
                                              •'"'■''X:'
                                                       ;
                                                       '             /';.v
                                                        iWn<a^rS^lltfS.:LRS-t':
                                                                              3BifelW|Stt,,,,,.»,»
                                                                                         )£i©^pV   Ji6c ,r..t»-«(f sj»,v|!S;^':.:r ;..'-;:.;,.-V'':V->:. ■. .i.' S/<:-::'^

                                                                                                             CS^ytl^tSlfy;' ■fetr.l^ifilSf,i#;i-
                                                                                                                            ,:i»^^Eia;5M’@':;.:
                                                                                                                         ■■■ ■■.■ ■■. ,■■■■■■




                                                                                                                                                                                                !;WK‘



              £5?*t';X:iK^Vv!
                            ;i;
                              ttte?£3PfftS:0t-&iY(&||fi



                                                                                                                                 ■          '‘I.,k    ,




                              J('v"’,'-),-; '■■■'"•‘•v •'l
                                                         ,*'’•' ’ 'i
                                                               !                                            • i,6 "„■,\ ,,-a!
              §:®i:^lflfSfIitM

lit                   M lSitfsfciQ

                      tx m ^ :
,/wp ,.*><?? ^.Pi.;:a 5.0:04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SgBgg
                                                                                                                                                                                             ■-0?oq g^gp,             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
        wrnmrn mKW1
                iiSm,t;   4                                                 3i                                                         wrnms.
        ms                                                                                                                                                                                     )69 P04/0T 22.B..39 IE:35
    iSisii&i
      saw                                                                                                                                                                                                                       liiili
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IliiB


    S$®i?                                                                                                                                                                                                                        iS t# ii
                                                1        "            1 ‘               •         >■                               >'i ...Cl' t'r.:                            U&Ui'LU;sy.                          is   ,,.,    .spsi1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                iSiii*
                                                                                                                                       ssi
                                                    i,'-> f                                  '
                                                                                             *                                                                      4h;, ;-,i; Vv5 f,nJ fir-
                                                                           r ; ■ U i ’ ^ » w.f'.'l 'vi<?v*r m ck                                                           i •; l, v, ^ n ; , ^ o l
                                      ' > V                       ‘              ' *™r: ■”                                     pj^rmir.v .mu o,uit j.vnit, .v; ivd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                               ;'         ' * h U-                         ' - < ■ ' ' ■ - ■ % <'                                       M                  :-:.c                    j X ' b r e » tK j 11 ir:
                                  *.-. > < - T i S            V . ‘ ill           i',                       t ■ u o*V 'I'             ! /    "'Vi ” , i.      w v' \ ' -
                                                                                                                                                                                       .                 Uu:i, '
                                      ’                  '•'•'■                  ‘ft,, -       •',| t s--vij                          o; ] .
                                                                                                                                           *                   •, j/

                                                                                                          '■ '•(,                       .a'^-r; i;, I-, ;n « >,<<.}
                                  v >'u ■ ‘ ‘•*i ••• ■'                                     '•’* 1                                                                                           i ,*NV.*(
                                                                                        \ 1'r * ' •f*
                                                                                        «
                                                                                                    •\L,r! t*-»01’r1?N*1 . *
                                                                                                                         ( s            ^* } *         >. v     i   «.         i,



                              ’i ! J ■“ ■'                            ■ ’ ■'            sl' (; ' 1 1 • ‘N “ .’ 5',V. i-*> '! ;.v , \ (w                                                           ,;,K * .
                              ^                     ’‘                 r ‘ ■                       1    ■            i    'V ‘u,.'r                   f.'
                                                                                                                                                        ,                                          'il'r f\
                                                                                                                                                                                       .     11 .'.ui.ir



ftf::
                                          ib^                          ■
                                                                                            >< * 1 ' :* 1 ' v't'111,
                                                                                                                   ’r                                                      !
mt                                        \         '        fi




                                                         ” ' !- ’
                                                                •                                       ■ s’.
                                                                                                            ’
                                                                                                            t                        i*,tk                    fj*j• ,1
                                                                                                  VHHt'     :T%y*:

                                                              ■‘'u!‘ ’ '* ■                                                             :r v's .->!» I,-,--,,' i*1.v’,1
                                       '                     ’ I'-'                     '*r «!
                                                                                             .

                                     1                 ’
                                                       ■ -•                                                                        vy ''-"Vi          f1
                                                                                                                                                       .-. .» -t (cu; :cwi :
                               'l> • ' - f*r” ‘ ^ '"'i'"*:',                                                                   1            rx.iASj;:.',. .>'^'un^'s^.,%
                                     *'r '"•"J'-'.v ”p tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ' j. <■ I 6 -1 I
                                                                                                                                                                                     ;si«.
                              I Aw-1                    !^        1 ' ’"A "J in' i‘




                              1;'                             fS1                                      -,-*‘.'v ^ **.fJ Ji-                                                                   l‘hy„ t.'.*.
                              y               1                                         ,W»v V:'
                                                    ’* :                                                - l i i ; ; ; . , , >'M J-.^'UVC, U K / .                                                J. .I^a >
                                  I
                                                        •'Vt           , , , ‘v               1        r ‘ '-'V iA J           : j i >, **: i ' X i ,                i ;
is




s a iS iii
SMtOMB
i';'H;   11: bu ■<-rf i ^ri£"   ^   ',(;
                                       -
                                       : ‘
                                         v/>i



■v-fe
  o        {/ N         <




                                            O     kj^     Qa ^     slJ c ^        '.    S   Y   AA/VS


                                                                               A ^xy                   ccwxr^ ^ o-^, cto^r o^
b U tf ^        S fM A i Cr\                                       '6v U-JL ■^^VC^4?o<^L0jC^ (r*J?^Asy. 6v/€^ ^cuue^

                    (JO rrt^y^-^ cfssA ^                iaj \X51^                      C/0/XC£^'>v<_^\^ <X_                    r-Q /jU K ^ O -'

< k * J < -o t X Q ^ ^ a n ^ t 1 % ^ W yvJH£>( £ y t& L                                         /^oec©>6v/00- CJ^
C^LQJU^                         ^ ^ O O r^ j,

                                                                                  O us- qA a & J ^ o 4^Kr^_            '"VCW     & rX K ^ jh fo

 OvS' oM jZsdjvOs\ yav~u ~                                                                           ^ 0 "Ctj^                           c tc U ^ p L

 S                                ACJjLjnc^               \*Di. ^                                      —
                                                                                                       7 - W j2Xxv<i Us0s^sOvbr<«^M<^

                        oC^W^o                                                          ^ rv ^ s ^ r-Z y o re ^ a ~ ^ J b c J b \& ^

 ~& JL j                    j   OsS*^ Os-*-~ QsOrvCSLTK^SLci. iS t^ jt y ^ / c L o s L r ^ ftj 0 & A O J l-j O r 'Q ^ ^

                 OvfetJvjlX>,                                ®U/" OCu2^vta                                >0
                                        ,   C r\ ^<&~4j\XAsJ^Si*^-y US&, ^^-vt>C C/fc                                       rU?V|^
     Ac^                                                                                         — '£w'<La_U2_ ^ ^ tA S L *—               vD^tvfj^
                'vd't eeeo              ^ d tn ^ u u s i o ff y ° ^ s ~ (s ^ 6o'-v6u^v^?                                ^r/vv^
      y^^soL                    yo < jr~ s & tjL ' c o i/o /^ ^ o ^ e -^ e o tr                                    vtjav^a            oJLX.

                  / I v ^ c a X       ^ O       ^ C      ^   U 2 -A       C /”V   (J~JL> U saJ-Z j C                             '


                                                                                                  "fro   "y&A*s~

      4$~ 0.s~ *s& X *rtS l,         v L slau      (?6o C o ~ 4 x ^ \ O V L -                            ^6wo
       t^ C ^ C ^ ^ T X jC A J 2 -< o       l u > i« n l! ^ « il ’T T_ o £ -   M X > X c (.                                              <(j^/gq_j

       'iho 4xJzJi_                                                       -/o      cX jR -/~t^y' _



       &    ~    3 -            ✓ 9 A mu            mu, ^            J X ^ 6 w -n                             ^9-~-v      ^yw H "

                     <*Jztgu^S&JLcL~             C^3\jdsL.^ft~Q ^                 ^ C iL fo ^ O ^ -x S ^ l^ ^ Ax£)6cot-—             .. ^ / 5 ^
                      ^^''V'C                         (xto^S j c*njfl~^ O ^ J Z -^ n X j                             4 f*\J Z /^ < ^ C s y r

                       y fJ -^ z X jL                        2-                                           ,   /4                               LirsJb

                      Q s*~is^ fis^ sy           v^-^vcoGZ^                    0-r(M U ^ Cs~^A^s 0-JQ^o C y \, *Z>fxA~r~<hby p jtj

                      fajj&tiU^SUsvO vtA. A ~ U ks(&~xo                            ■J56cJ^Wy^          C*AxxJ-^ (so O ys^d’x isys& sf^/y

                       1\Jk L P CA.                   fsQr*~\r\ ^tt^O^OA)U( ^                                                   CH»<tA«-cHl'^l.
                       t>Q-€,        ^— ■        <^Mca_              ^pv-^cv' "to T^L                    Ci3V^vMi> l4,»w^                      v-^tc!uVi

       Po^TV 1H -                7 L ^ Z S O cjh^y c ffitG i^                               cto n sL ^ ^t c s u & U & fc -

                                                                                                                        i* j( X y /y & j   ^-cu^€_
<-A/C£«tXjo*j6£_i7t.                              oOxL sfjotAAsft,            o l ^ ocK^JUi—      rQsa^u&s^

 o fi G s*y&oU je uoc€^3 oCb V tr^ tu o J J jy                                ^~& -‘ <^>Our^SU                   OuO O r\B _ ^            tXyJL

S ’bccbi&s^ O^tcc^s. ^ a tX ^ A jz t                                                    c o ^ tr o      ( A si& 0b ^o <s~t& rs

 ~ttsL.                           A^c^vv^e^- O ^ Ca^30Xv66-^0 ,                                06       to   1 2 -S u ^ ^ rJ^ ^ * + S '

     iro •soovy th>Jv ✓vvc^c£{^3a/6uv\ £oefe ycCag.^, cuo ck reouJjfc                                                                cl

     O O r^klt^o C fasvy 6 ^ & JLO & '16lajO j^ u & Q tn ,



      $ *S ^ js -0 y d L      tQ 0Q &O            CVv^C?         QC<JZ0tbO<\ K
                                                                             sA         j i&   J L *’                   ^ a X tu s 4 _ .,fQ

                       0 ^ \ <X^J»uJjk^UL^ •OrFCUls- cn t&su y#3iX<JL~ C o ^ b y^ C . S o x &A>

       ^jdLo^QrCfi^d^ rwzsy ^O^L- hor^AujOytOpSZ^^ S'*rfhlCuoojfc\s3/\ q ^                                                           & L

          IS       A p r^ X , Ck/iT' CsOuisvCo QsQ, '^ rrv iJ s y                       0^     CZjL ^9<avoa               4skjK^T (SLjl^

          yo~ZsXsvJU              Cv'V 'S ^ /J L r - C/v (tJ L G&-Mny<^ ^Q>C UrOx*A&L                                                  ^J^dL
           *VO h%J2*r%S^                    its L    € a -€ ^ v € o    o ^     (M l                           d £j(^ Z £*b p *f f a l h   i>li   (y,




           j rtfe S h a ^ s v y h rn j^ k o ^ '-Q l u>

                                                                                                                  cw>C 6^e^.
               V                  t          (p l il ^        o J ^ U i^ i^ Y    < t^ r" €/'V 3«G C ■&                      ^ n < ^ w -y ’ .

                                                                          tP L 2.<S6vJ 6u&-v~ ^ ^ fX J L s \             <^€v-c
               6q&k£&joL <^voC©Gl ifeb{J^<s~r<G L} O ^ J U v ^ fesL sy ^L Z JsifL cC ^^y)

               C < y^ K ^ t                                       S> vqA ^ Cw 'h^yO^SL C # U sL & U 6 q . Q jX o J jL y

                   <^c^^^ax3^a_oC , /Lsts*^ ob cl^>o /6?1^
               its u                      C Q /^fcrvi^ b o x OJOsz r v f f r r % £ > jjs y                   ij^ r ^ _      €^vO^/^
                   cxcw/^^oCftj^c^v <L^v^c^Cft^vce_^ c^^ejm^,




                       * l^Jtu is \^ A A fy              to    cLo jl -         Ae_                             </■>'          ^Z jPv -
       V.rC,           >oL c?6 Jk>         o jk                                  '4jLs>jfc L jo ^ oC ^ y s itu L .           lq ^

O J tU L A y i& < L <k L L <
                           v ^ ts ^ s o fe s L                                    ^
/'£< ^ Q !^ V V \e/^                                '& *-> ^ b ^ J K s r ^ . (jJ< L (Aa XA* b z * ' c L /T & ^^b \s\A ^

 r    y        Q        r   f s       :   q^\     io A t> J £         c ^ / ^ f / 4 S^          < *j£dU L (s a X JL t < £c

 W L - d x G C u A & is L                         o ^         cA asutJ    ^     o^ cL   < s \p te J L p (




                            6s/t      (sjqiaJ j iL ^ o r^ y o ^ L , '(sl^ ) ^ \^             y^J        ^ v c                             dw-'
            a^^-etwLc               ^ £ *!L                             ^ Ccvw^^v-t^v^ &~^ &»_
/OO^r^CL^ h sL & sQ -'                 ^0~&TA*~*foojfoKs$nr\ "fa                                      ^
o y ^ ^ e ^ o ."tv c^x e^vu^vjey-vCC^
yOvy    o Jso U ¥*> SVK&JkSL 4&L~ C S U & W tjU sy cJ^ A syr^ llL S L o L             W~-<?c*aA_
/          *                                          cvc^                             *-   ^
 ( Q U /V ^X ve ^? ^                                              *-<srvuAAj <r\xyi^SLrx^A.
 &s^r$SU>^4s<£>        ^ M C ’-                           <£V\   s^XJQiW sv^.—                         ^
  b ^ y ? 4 & * j0S-QsXs-i&&SiL       A)       L o ^ gL                 'T & ^ y L & S '

                         CKSKoC <J^?L sL£LqL ^tZSL




                                              P is L & s iS L ^ ijJ -

   vvewb                      vpk/x^uo        s v y jd & s ^   ^ tK ^ v z jif-- t/y   ^Jlo»   O lJ j& s z


                                               %
108.   Statement of Sergeant Robert Bums.

109.   Statement of W.P.C. Helen Kay Pearson.

110.   Statement of P.C. Alexander Aitken.

111.   Statement of Sergeant Paul Burman.

112.   Statement of P.C. Steven Andrew Shearwood.

113.   Statement of Sergeant Edward S. Higgins.

114.   Statement of Sergeant Peter Chapman.

115.   Statement of P.C. Peter Edward Staith.

116.   Statement of P.C. Gerard Finnegan.

117.   Statement of P.C. David Alfred Illingworth

118.   Statement of W. P. C. Fiona Richardson.



DAY 18 - FRIDAY 9th JUNE, 1989


119.   Statement of P.C. James Oscar Packer.

120.   Statement of P.C. Michael Buxton.

121.   Statement of D.S. Paul Morton.

122.   Statement of D.S. David Gutcher.

123.   Statement of P.C. Michael Ryan.

124.   Statement of Sergeant Michael Goddard.


DAY 19 - MONDAY 12th JUNE 1989


125.   Statement of Peter Wells.

126.   Bundle of photographs "DB17" South Yorkshire Police.

127.   Statement of P.C. Trevor Bichard.

128A. Transcript of Track 9 radio traffic. ) SYMAS I
                                            )
128B. Transcript of Track 11 radiotraffic.)   SYMASII

129. Transcript of Snig Hill radio traffic - "SA6". - SNIG HILL II.

130.   Statement of John Towler.

131. Statement of Frank Godley.

132. Statement of Philip Saxton.
