                                  I N D E X

Section


A               SYMAS Abbreviations


B               Relevant SYMAS and other staff


C               DHSS Circular HC(78)45


D           y   SYMAS Major Incident Plan


E               Agenda for seminar to have been held on 19th April
                with second draft         of an u p d a t e d M a j o r    Incident
                Plan


F               Control Incident Plans         for the football Grounds          of
                Doncaster       Rovers,    Rotherham        United,       Barnsley,
                Sheffield United, and Sheffield Wednesday


G           y   SYMAS Control Log for 15th April 1989


H               SYMAS Special Incident         Log for 15th April 1989


                Co n t r o l   "Pink Cards"     re l a t i n g   to   Hillsborough
     v /        Disaster


J               Relevant Vehicle Logs for 15th April 1989


K               Major Incident Vehicle - Inventory


L               Photographs


M          i/   Correspondence


N               Removal of Fatalities to Medico Legal Centre
                                        ROTHERHAM -
                                        HEALTH AUTHORITY
                   BARNSLEY HEALTH*.
                   AUTHORITY
SHEFFIELD
HEALTH AUTHORITY



                                                                                                              ■•Gainsborough                                                           •Louth
                                                                                     BASSETLAW                                                                                                  la tM io rp e » i
                                                                                     HEALTH AUTHORITY                                                NORTH L iC O L M iE
                                                                                                                                                     HEALTH AUTHORITY
                                                                                             •E ast Retford
 sNewMilis                                                                       Worksop

                     NORTH DERBYSHIRE
                     HEALTH AUTHORITY          @ Chesterfield                                                                             LINCOLN
       ►Buxton                                                                 CENTRAL NOTTINGHAMSHIRE                                                                                                         Skegness*
                          •B akew ell                                          HEALTH AUTHORITY
                                                                          •Mansfield

                                                                                                         Newark*


                                        Belper •                                                                                                                                   Boston®
                       •Ashbourne                      Hkeston*                                                                                     SOUTH LINCOLNSHIRE
                                                                                                                                                    HEALTH AUTHORITY
                                                                                   NOTTINGHAM
                     SOUTHERN DERBYSHIRE
                     HEALTH AUTHORITY                                                                                              •Grantham
                                               *     'ncpDy                   NOTTINGHAM
                                                                          HEALTHAUTHORITY
                                                                                                                                                                           Spalding®
                                                                                                                                                       Bourne*
                                                                 Loughborough*                                •M elton Mowbray
                                                                                  LEICESTERSHIRE
                                                   Coaiville ,                    HEALTH AUTHORITY

                                                                                    ^0            LEICESTER
                                                                                                                               • Oakham




                                                                  »Hinckley                                                                   District Health Autlioriliee
                                                                                          Market Harborough«i                         within the Trent Region at 1-4-82
                                                                                 .L utterw orth
                                                                                                  Main Police Access


 Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                              Police          v\   I
                                                                                  \ \   R o o m ^       ''I 'i v X
   Hillsborough Ground                                          Rrst-Aid Roomv' \             lJP \y / > ' & \ v
                                                                                                                 -<*»\ vy^A
                                                                                                                                         H
                                                                  Gymnasium
                                                                                                                              7 7 -8 8
   ''    \\C-           <?•'


                                                             NORTH STAND




                                                                                                   16

                               1-16                                                                15
                                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                   >4              3
                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                   13              o
                                                                                                                   •o
                                                             P layer's                             12
                                                             Tunnel ■
Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures


           Police Control                                  SOUTH STAND
                                                  BUBUB
                                      O fficial                                     2 9 -3 2 3 3 -3 6
                                                                              J         Car
                                                                         □
        KEY

        TU R N STILES.... ZZZZZ1                  Directors Entrance
SYMAS Abbreviations
                                SOOTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

C   4LL                                      Abbreviations in Common Use.

Trent         Amb   1                               CMAO A Page.
Trent         Amb   2                               DCMAO A Hopkins.
Trent         Amb   6                               ACMAO R Morley.
Trent         Amb   7                               ACMAO D Jones.
Alpha         2                                     Supt T Dale.
Alpha         3                                     S/0 P Higgins A             5WTi*/»   o P -fr c * # .* *
Alpha         4                                     S/0 P Eason. J U<A,0,J
Alpha         7                                     S/0

Slxx      '$ tt£ « C 4 '                           Ambulance   based   at   Middlewood Station.
S2xx                                               Ambulance   based   at   Parkway Station.
S3xx                                               Ambulance   based   at   Batemoor Station.
S4xx                                               Ambulance   based   at   Longley Station.
R5xx                        -            m         Ambulance   based   at   Rotherham Station.
R6xx                                               Ambulance   based   at   Maltby Station.
R7 x x                                             Ambulance   based   at   Wath Station.
D8xx                    '                          Ambulance   based   at   Doncaster Station.
D9xx                                               Ambulance   based   at   Bentley Station.
DIOxx                                              Ambulance   based   at   Thorne Station.
Bllxx                           z     t . n 't     Ambulance   based   at   Barnsley Station.
B12xx                                              Ambulance   based   at   Hoyland Station.
Bl3xx                                              Ambulance   based   at   Penistone Station.

Base                                               A vehicles' own permanent station.

Control                                            The Central Control Unit.
C                                                  The Central Control Unit.-Transcript Abbr

Out                                                Normally used by Control to signify the
                                                   end of a series of messages making up a
                                                   transaction.
+                                                  Transcript abbreviation.

Roger\                                             Message received and understood.
R°g       J                                        Message received and understood.-Tran Abbr

Over                                               End of message.
K                                                  End of message.-Transcript abbreviation.

CPR                                                Coronary Pulmonary Resuscitation.
                                                                                     7    H AU AC c

                                                               C hun   vs/job      . rtg d tc A -7 0 *')
Relevant SYMAS and other staff
          STAFF FROM SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


PARKWAY                 LONGLEY                  BATEMOOR

J Flack (L/A)

                                               v 'k   Edwards




Div Supt T Dale         S/O P Eason              S/O P Higgins



MIDDLEWOOD              maltby                   BARNSLEY




                                                L Yoxhall




                        S/O




HOYLAND                 DONCASTER               ROTHERHAM




                        S/O


BENTLEY
                         STAFF FROM OTHER AUTHORITIES




DERBYSHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICE

CHESTERFIELD STATION -


HEATH STATION -


ECKINGTON STATION -




HOTHHGHAMSHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICE

WORKSOP STATION -




RETFORD STATION -




WEST YORKSHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICE

HALIFAX STATION -


WAKEFIELD STATION -




HONLEY STATION -


HUDDERSFIELD STATION -
DHSS Circular HC(78)45
     See, in particular, paragraph 28
KtiALTH CIRCULAR                                                                                                 HC(78)45
                                                                             I

                                                                                                 T it . I        h;ir;j.,.i

                                                                                                KEALUI AL'-r. ny
      DHSS                      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY



To:   Regional Health Authorities    )                                                     Reg::!crcJ   !',q .
      Area Health Authorities                                                                    file i.: k         , l.;: e
                                     | • for action
      Boards o f Governors
      Family Practitioner Committees )

      Com m unity Health Councils                    - fo r information                            Decerr>Eer~T978



                                           HEALTH SERVICES MANAGEMENT

                         AMBULANCE SERVICES: OPERATIONAL CONTROL AND USE


SUMMARY
This Circular summarises and updates advice and practice about the control and use of
ambulance transport.
GENERAL

1.     Section 3{1)(c) o f the National Health Service A c t 1977 places a d u ty on the Secretary of State to
provide ambulance services to such e x te n t as he considers necessary to meet alt reasonable requirements. This
d u ty has been devolved to Area Health Authorities except in m etropolitan counties where the provision of
ambulance services is the direct responsibility of Regional Health Authorities; South West Thames RHA is
administratively responsible for the L ondon Ambulance Service.

2.     Ambulance services are required to provide or arrange the provision of suitable transport, free of charge,
normally to th e nearest hospital o r treatm ent centre with hospital based facilities where the necessary
tre atm en t can be obtained, to NHS convalescent homes, dentists' surgeries or Artificial Limb Appliance and
Assessment Centres for any patient (emergency or non-emergency) who is considered by a doctor, dentist* or
midwife* to be medically u n fit to travel by other means (see also paragraph 4). It may also be appropriate to
provide transport for the perm anent removal of patients from one address to another. Ambulance transport
should n o t be provided for patients whose medical condition does n ot prevent them from travelling by other
means ie on foot, by public o r private transport (either their own transport or transport provided by relatives,
friends or voluntary services). Nor should it be used to convey a person on holiday or on recreational journeys
where the need is based on social or economic grounds rather than medical (other than journeys made under
joint transport arrangements - see paragraphs 5 and 27). Transport should n o t be provided for patients merely
because they cannot afford public transport fares (see also paragraph 30).

3.    Responsibility for determining which treatm ent centre is most appropriate for each patient for whom
ambulance transport is ordered rests with the doctor, dentist or midwife concerned, but bearing in mind the
high cost of transport practitioners should, as far as is practicable, ask the service to convey a patient to the
nearest suitable hospital or centre. Where a patient is travelling to a distant hospital for prolonged out-patient
treatm ent eg physiotherapy, careful consideration should be given to the possibility of arranging for this to be
provided at a suitable hospital nearer th e patient's home.

SPECIAL PROBLEMS IN RURAL AREAS

4.     In recent years the decline of public transport services, especially in rural areas, has made it more
difficult for patients w ith o u t access to private transport to travel to hospitals. In such areas a more flexible
interpretation of "medical need" for transport may be justified. Nevertheless, Authorities should seek to
ensure that demand is limited to the essential and to this end should discuss with public transport operators
the practicability of adjusting bus timetables to meet the needs of patients. Timetable adjustments may lead to
the availability of public transport for at least one stage of the journey. The possibility of making more


 *on!y for patients of thsir particular specialty.
        extensive use of the hospital car seivioe, opeiatw i as an integral part of the ambulance service for patients who
    ’   do not require skilled am biiljnce aid, should be exploied. The use of the hospital car service for this purpose
        should be co-ordinated at ambulance control.

        JOINT TRANSPORT ARRANGEMENTS

        5.     Another possibility is to make arrangements to share transport facilities for certain journeys with local
        education authorities and personal social services departm ents; in such cases, financial arrangements equitable
        to both authorities should be made. County Councils have been given a public transport co-ordinating role by
        the Transport A ct 1978 (separate guidance is being issued on this Act) and Authorities should maintain close
        liiison to ensure th a t future transport plans take into account the needs of the Health Service.

        DAY HOSPITALS

        6.     The development o f day hospitals for elderly and handicapped patients has increased the demand on
        ambulance services for additional transport a t peak periods when existing vehicles and manpower are already
        fully committed. In planning the development of day hospitals. Authorities should ensure that the Chief
        Ambulance Officer is involved at th e earliest possible stage so th a t proper consideration can be given to the
        resources likely to be required to m eet the additional transport demands. As further day hospitals are opened.
        A uthorities should review the catchm ent areas of existing day hospitals and wherever practicable, in
        consultation with medical, nursing, social work and ambulance staff concerned, ensure the allocation of
        patients to the day hospitals nearest to their homes, in order both to shorten the time patients spend in
        travelling and to assist th e ambulance service to improve punctuality, (see also paragraph 24).

    ^ ^ R I V A T E PATIENTS
         Priv at e pa tients are required to meet, the -full costs o-f n on —emergency
 ambul anc e transport. They should be identified by the medical practitioner
 a u t h o r i s i n g the transport. Private patient s being moved to or -From a private
 hospital should be included as well as those who have given an undertaking
 to pay charges to the health authority for accommodation or services received
 at a NHS hospital for private inpatient or outpatient diagnosis or treatment.
 A charge should be raised under Section 58 covering the -full costs (including
 ov e r h e a d s and 18.9% -For capital) of the service provided.
        ORDERING AMBULANCE TRANSPORT -

        Emergency Calls

        8.    Any person may request an ambulance (usually by making a '9 9 9 ' call) for accidents anywhere or
        sudden illness in public places. An ambulance must be despatched immediately in response to such a call;
        medical authority is not necessary. If an emergency call is received due to sudden illness at home, the
        ambulance controller should, give advice and help avi obtain details of the patient's doctor (or midwife if
        appropriate). If the circumstances so indicate, an ambulance should be despatched to the home forthwith.
        A ttem pts should otherwise be made by ambulance control to contact the patient's doctor and request his
        attendance. If the doctor cannot be contacted or is delayed in responding the patient may be removed as
        necessary, w ithout medical authority, to the nearest hospital w ith an accident and emergency department. The
        patient's doctor should be advised by the ambulance control of the action taken as soon as possible.

 ^ ^ N o n Emergency Requests

        9.     Requests for non-emergency ambulance transport are only met where authorised by a doctor, dentist or
        midwife. In making decisions involving the use of the ambulance service it is im portant to ensure th at patients
        have a genuine need for transport because they are medically unfit to travel by other means, rather than it
        being merely cheaper or more convenient. A t the same time a medical decision is needed on w hether or not
        the patient is a sitting/walking case or should be carried by stretcher, transported in his own wheelchair,
        requires 2 people to assist him to and from the vehicle, or needs an escort in addition to the ambulance crew.
        None of these decisions should be delegated by general medical practitioners to receptionists nor by hospital
        d o ctors to nurses or hospital clerical staff except under clearly defined rules.

         10. Authorities should ensure th a t the procedure for ordering transport is as simple and time saving as
         possible and th a t doctors and all others concerned are informed of current arrangements. It may also be
         helpful for those responsible for ordering transport to be made aware regularly of the current costs involved.

. -     11. It is particularly im portant th a t if patients attend hospital for a course of treatm ent, eg physiotherapy, a
        regular review (recommended at m onthly intervals) of the necessity for the provision of transport should be
^       made in the light of the patient's progress (see also paragraph 3). After the first journey of an outpatient to
        hospital by ambulance transport it is the hospital doctor's responsibility to review the need for transport in
        consultation, as necessary, with other hospital staff. Where however there is a long period between hospital
        appointm ents, the patient's general medical practitioner may be in a better position to assess the need in the
        I yht of the patient's current condition. Administrative procedures should be established to see that each
        patient's need, including re-classification, eg from a stretcher to a sitting/walking case, is reviewed regularly.




                                                                2
W' n it is ri?cided th at a patient no longer noeds am buljncc transport it is im portant to ensure that any
st.r .ding order is cancelled and the patient informed.

12. Wherever passibln sufficient notice of the need for non urgent transport should be given, preferably at
least 24 hours notice for hospital discharges and transfers and 4 8 hours in other instances.

AMBULANCE SERVICE PROCEDURES

13. Ambulance transport should be provided by the A uthority in whose area the patient is at the time,
unless agreed otherwise with an other Authority. The same A uthority is also responsible for transporting
patients w ho return on th e same day, subject to local arrangements.

14. Where the hospital or tre atm en t centre to which the patient has to be taken is in another Area or Region
the ambulance driver concerned should report to th a t A uthority's control and/or the Ambulance Liaison
Officer of th e receiving hospital. With th e consent of the parent service, the ALO and his control may,
whenever feasible, use an ambulance from another area on local journeys while it is waiting to return. It is
im portant th a t the local am bulance control and others along the route should be notified when an ambulance
returning to another area has spare capacity.

TYPE OF TRANSPORT
                                                 i
15. The ambulance service is responsible for deciding the form o f transport most suitable for each patient's
needs taking into account any recommendations made by the patient's doctor and, where clinical
considerations do n o t dictate th e form of transport to be used, th e cost. Medical advice may be sought, if
necessary, from the Regional Medical Officer (in respect of metropolitan ambulance services) or the Area
Medical Officer. Medical guidance on th e air transport of patients has been issued separately. It is particularly
im po rtan t th a t th e patient's d o c to r should confirm th a t th e patient's medical condition does not preclude the
use of air transport.

RAIL TRANSPORT FOR LONG JOURNEYS

16. Travel by rail, in addition to being more economical than ambulance transport in m ost cases ensures
greater com fort for patients travelling long distances and the use of this form of transport should be
considered subject to medical advice in individual cases. Because of the design of many of the coaches now in
use, it is n o t usually possible for stretcher cases to be transported by rail though use of the facilities of sleeping
car trains may sometimes be practicable. Special facilities are also available for people travelling with
wheelchairs. The General Manager of th e relevant British Rail Region will provide full information a b o u t the
services available. Ambulance tran sp ort to and from the railway station will usually be required.

 PROVISION O F RAIL WARRANTS

 17. When the ambulance service is responsible for providing transport (in accordance with the criteria
 outlined in paragraph 2), and rail travel is used, the service in whose area the journey begins should provide rail
 warrants for patients and any necessary escorts. Normally return warrants should be issued for patients and
 escorts whose return directly home, by rail, can be predicted within 3 m onths; other patients and escorts
 should be given single warrants. Where a doctor certifies th a t on medical grounds both parents should
 accompany a child-patient, both should be given warrants. It may also be necessary exceptionally to provide
 warrants in respect of other non-patient children. An escorting parent receiving a return w arrant may be
 distressed by the issue of a single one for the child; it is im portant th a t in such circumstances verbal
 reassurance of th e reason for such action, namely th a t the child's date and mode of return cannot be
 accurately predicted, is given.

 ESCORTS

 18. Generally the ambulance a tte n d a n t is able to care for the patient during the journey. However, wherever
 possible, children being conveyed by the ambulance service should be accompanied by a parent or guardian. A
 friend or relative should n o t normally accompany an adult patient to hospital unless clearly desirable eg in the
 case of the elderly, emergency admissions, mentally confused patients or where a doctor (or midwife in the
 case of m aternity patients) considers it desirable; in these circumstances prior notification should be given
 when possible to the ambulance service. In the case of maternity patients travelling to hospital in early labour
 it may be helpful if they are accompanied by a relative or friend. The ambulance service is not responsible for
 returning a friend or relative hom e after the patient has been adm itted, although where the ambulance is not
 required to wait and is returning in the same direction transport may be provided to the nearest point on the
 return route.

 19. When a doctor has certified th a t an escort other than a patient's friend or relative is medically necessary
 the ambulance service, in consultation with the doctor or nursing staff, is responsible for ensuring th a t a
 suitably qualified one is provided. The hospital will be responsible for providing a suitably qualified escort
 where a patient is being transferred by ambulance transport from one hospital to another. In cases of
 emergency admission of m aternity patients the com m unity midwife would be a suitable person to accompany
   the patient. Wherever possible sui.li escorts should be returned to their normal ploce of duty by the ambulance
   sorvioe otherwise proper arrangements should ho made for the return journey and the escort informed in
   advance.

   CARRIAGE OF WHEELCHAIRS IN AMBULANCES

   20. When ordering ambulance transport it is normal practice for a doctor, dentist or midwife to indicate any
   special needs o f the patient, provision being made on the ambulance request form for such instructions. When
   it is essential for a patient's own wheelchair (or walking frame) to be carried in the ambulance for use on
   arrival a t hospital or dental surgery, an indication of this need by the d o cto r when ordering the transport will
   enable the ambulance service to plan to m eet it. Every effort should be made to comply with such a request. A
   wheelchair user is normally more self-mobile, physically more comfortable, and more at ease in his own
   wheelchair than he could be in a wheelchair borrowed from a hospital's stock. These considerations are
   particularly im portant if th e patient is likely to have to spend a large p art of th e day a t hospital, or to have to
   move a b o u t from one departm ent to another. The overriding consideration, however, must be to ensure th a t a
   wheelchair can be safely stowed and secured in tF e ambulance and carried w ithout undue inconvenience to. or
   ganger to the satety of, other patients'!

   21. It m ay sometimes be desirable for a patient to be transported seated in his own wheelchair. This may be
   medically necessary where the wheelchair incorporates special adaptations or supports or where it may be
   advisable because of risks of pressure sores or discomfort due to dislodgement of catheters or other devices. In
   such cases the ambulance service should ensure th a t the vehicle provided has anchorage points and th a t both
   patients and wheelchairs are securely carried.

^ A R R A N G E M E N T S FOR DEALING WITH MAJOR ACCIDENTS

   22. HC(77)1 advised A uthorities o f health service arrangements for dealing with major accidents. Authorities
   are rem inded th a t they are required to ensure th a t each ambulance service has a plan for mobilization in such
   an event and th a t installations of special risk are identified.

   AMBULANCE LIAISON OFFICERS

   23. As far as practicable Authorities should appoint Ambulance Liaison Officers, normally on the staff of
   the ambulance service, a t any hospital or group of hospitals generating a large volume of ambulance traffic.
   T he role of these officers is to prom ote co-operation and understanding between hospital and ambulance staff,
   to deai w ith any problems relating to requests for patient transport, to ensure th at there is no undue waiting or
   travelling by patients and generally to act as a focal point for all communications between the hospital and
   am bulance control. Such appointm ents have normally led to a more economic use of the service and reduced
   waiting times for patients.

    HOSPITAL APPOINTMENTS

   24. Hospital out-patient appointm ents and attendance at day hospital should pay due regard to the
   availability of public transport and, where ambulance transport is required, take account of the problems of
   the ambulance service, in particular the considerable growth in day hospital journeys the incidence of which
   usually coincides with the peak time for out-patient appointments. Every effort should be made to phase
   o u t p atient appointm ents requiring ambulance transport throughout the day and throughout the week to


•
   avoid the peak load of day patients on the ambulance service. Whenever possible, particularly at the beginning
   of the day, block appointm ents should be avoided since these not only result in uneconomic use of ambulance
   resources b ut are a potential source of inconvenience and irritation to those patients who have to wait for
   lengthy periods either before they are seen or after treatm ent. The zoning of patients' appointm ents should be
   considered to enable patients from the same locality to be collected and returned together. Consideration
   should be given to hospitals providing a suitably staffed reception area for the delivery and collection of
   patients by ambulance staff.

    INFORMING THE PATIENT

    25. It is im portant th a t patients should fully understand the arrangements regarding ambulance transport
    and be notified of any change. Although it may not always be possible to advise patients of delays when for
    instance emergency calls or other unforeseen circumstances disrupt planned services, all reasonable efforts
    should be made by the ambulance service to avoid misunderstanding and anxiety (eg liaison with local
    hospitals, com m unity nursing services, press, radio and television). When a request for transport cannot be met
    or undue delay seems likely, the ambulance service should make every effort to inform the patient and the
    hospital departm ent involved.




                                                              4
GENERAL MEDICAL I im C T IT IO N fc R SERVICES

26. Health Authorities should n o t provide transport, rail warrants or escorts or pay travelling expenses, for
patients visiting general medical practitioners including those w ith surgeries in health centres. A general
medical practitioner is required to visit his patient if, on the inform ation available to him, the patient's
condition necessitates it. Alternatively the patient's relatives, friends or a charitable body may provide
transport to the surgery.

SCHOOL HEALTH CLINICS AND SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENTS

27. There is no obligation to provide free ambulance transport to convey children to school health clinics
except whore a patient is considered by a doctor to be medically unfit to travel by other means. Similarly
there is no obligation to provide free ambulance transpoit to convey persons being provided w ith services by
local authority social services departm ents. However, where resources perm it, transport may be provided at th e
request of education authorities o r local authorities subject to reim bursem ent of the full costs involved, as
covered by Section 27(4} of th e National Health Service Act 1977 (unless joint transport arrangements have
been agreed - see paragraph 5). A ny areas of dispute should be discussed informally eg a t Jo in t Consultative
C om m ittee meetings held between Area Health Authorities and Local Authorities.

SPORTING AND OTHER PUBLIC EVENTS

28. Alth gygh the voluntary aid societies usually provide first aid cover a t sporting a n d other public events
where                                             '& m , NHS ambulances m ay b e provided j f appropriate. In such
circumstance^ a w ritten undertaking should be obtained In advance from organisers to meet th e cost o f
providing special standby Cover though no charges should be made fo r conveying any patient to hospital. I t
m ay be inappropriate to m ake a charge when ambulances are provided a t public shows as a public relations
exercise t o benefit th e ambulance service. This is a m atter for the discretion of Authorities.

CHARGES

29. Charges to patients and other's as envisaged in paragraphs 7, 2 7 and 28 should be based on th e full costs
of providing the service including an element in respect of purchase of vehicles. Where rates per mile are agreed
annually in advance they should anticipate increases in costs as reflected in the A uthority's cash limit. .

HELP WITH TRAVELLING EXPENSES

30. Patients able to travel to hospital by public or private transport w ho are in receipt of supplementary
benefit or family income supplem ent can be helped with their travelling expenses. Paym ent should be made a t
the hospital in accordance with current advice. Any patient w ho has no supplementary benefit or family
income supplement order book and to w hom the paym ent of travelling expenses involves hardship should be
given explanatory leaflet H 1 1 (with part 1 completed) and advised to apply on part 2 of the form to the local
social security office w ho will determ ine entitlement. Authorities should ensure th at adequate publicity is
given to the scheme eg by enclosing information when advising patients of appointm ents, and exhibiting
posters in out-patient departm ents.

 PUBLICITY

 31. Authorities are encouraged to explore ways of drawing the atten tio n of the public to the proper use of
 the ambulance service eg by the use of the enclosed poster (the te x t of which is shown at the Appendix), or
 other suitable posters produced locally. Publicity through the local press, radio and television may also be
 effective. Posters should be displayed in all hospital out-patient departm ents. Family Practitioner Committees
 are asked to invite general medical practitioners to display posters in their surgeries.

 PATIENTS FROM OTHER COUNTRIES

 32. Persons coming from abroad w ho require ambulance transport on arrival are eligible to receive NHS
 ambulance transport, when a do cto r confirms th a t it is medically necessary, if they are:

             ordinarily resident in the UK and returning from a tem porary stay abroad;

             coming to the UK to stay for an indefinite period (whether or not they were previously resident
             here);

              nationals of other countries who are referred to the UK for NHS treatm ent under the terms of the
              reciprocal agreements described in paragraph 33;

              nationals of EEC countries authorised under EEC Regulations to com e to the UK specifically for
              NHS treatm ent, as explained in paragraph 34.
33. Under agreements with Malta, Gibraltar, the Channel Islands and the USSR, nationals of those countries
ccn be referred to the UK for treatm ent under the NHS. The referral requires the authorisation of the health
authorities of the country conctrnt-d and appropriate prior arrangements must be made in this country,

34. On the basis of £EC Regulations, nationals of any EEC country residing in another country of the EEC
                                                                                                                     \   \
w ho are workers or pensioners may be perm itted under certain circumstances to com e to this country                        \
specifically for treatm ent under the NHS. The UK does n o t accept such patients for NHS treatm ent unless
appropriate prior arrangements have been m ade with a hospital and it has been established th a t the patient is
entitled under EEC Regulations.

35.     Free ambulance transport should be provided if required where a visitor to this country has an accident
o r is taken suddenly ill.

CIRCULARS/NOTICES CANCELLED

36.    T he following circulars are cancelled:

       Circular 66/4 7 -        NHS A ct 1946. Health Services to be provided by LHAs
                                under part 3 of th e Act.

       Circular 109/47 -        Ambulance Service: (1) Combination with Fire Service
                                                   (2) Police'Ambulances.

       Circular 2 6 /5 0 -      NHS (Amendment) Act 1949. Effect on LHA Services.

       Circular 30/51 •         Control of Use o f th e Ambulance Service
       (RHB (51) 68
       (HMC (51) 63
       (BG (51) 67

       Circular    4 /54        Ambulance Service: Carriage of Patients within
                                Hospital Premises. Indemnities to LHAs.

       Circular    7/54         Use o f Ambulance Service.

       Circular    5/56         Control of Use of the Ambulance Service.

       Circular   12/57         NHS (Amendment) A ct 1957

       Circular    5 /59        Use of Rail Transport.

The following LHALs are cancelled:

       LAHL 9 /4 8              (1) T ransport o f Persons fo r out-patients at hospitals
                                within the area of other LHAs
                                (2) Hospital Car Service
                                (3) Com bination with Fire Services

        LHAL 11/66               Sudden Illness in the Home

        LHAL 8 /69               Conveyance of Stretcher Cases by Rail

        LHAL 33/72               Ambulance Service: Sudden Illness in the Home.

 ACTION

 37.    i.    Health Authorities will already have drawn up written procedures on the use of the ambulance
              service and will wish to revise them as necessary in the light of this guidance. Any revision should
              be brought to the attention of all staff concerned.

        ii.   Authorities are asked to arrange for the display of copies of the enclosed poster (or locally
              produced publicity) in hospital out-patient departm ents.




                                                             6
        iii.   Family Practitioner Coti'rnittf’f's are ar>ked:

                     a.    to send copies of this circular to the local Medical and Dental Committees;

                     b.    to send a copy of this circular to all general medical practitioners and dentists drawing
                     their attention in particular to paragraphs 9-12; and

                     c.    to send 2 copies of the poster to all general modical practitioners with a view to
                     display in their surgeries.




Fiom:

Health Services Division 2C
Hannibal House
Elephant and Castle
London SE1 6TE

Tel: 01-703 6380 Ext 3515                                                                            E/A169/111


Further copies of this Circular may be obtained (by written request wherever possible plaase) from DHSS Store, Scholefield
Mill, Brunswick Street, Nelson, Lancs BB9 OHU. Tel Nelson (0282) 62411/2 Ext 17, quoting code and serial number
appearing at top right-hand corner.




                                                                                                             APPENDIX
                                                                                                            to HC (78)45


                      TEXT OF THE POSTER FOR DISPLAY IN HOSPITAL OUT-PATIENT
                    DEPARTMENTS AND GENERAL MEDICAL PRACTITIONER SURGERIES

                                                       AMBULANCES


 Most patients should make their own way to hospital.

 The Ambulance Service is under heavy pressure and should not be used unless essential.

 If your doctor has ordered transport and you cannot use it, please tell him or the Ambulance Service.




                                                             7
D   SYMAS Major Incident Plan
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN
           AMBULANCE SERVICE

          MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN


February 1985


                 ja                                                m §ik'
                      v       .     '■ >-f % t „tj«~ <             V.   .




                          -                              , |   ■
                                   v *-v*r       .Wf Lf«w ‘ T,
                                  " ^        y «. JF' *f <*■;» 4
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                     MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN


 Introduction

A major incident is a situation that we can never predict, it can occur
at any place at any time. The object of this plan is to enable us to
deal with any incident in an organised professional way, by each and
every member sticking to their own job and knowing exactly what their
role is.

The Ambulance Service has more problems regarding manning levels than
the other two Emergency Services especially at night, the weekends and
Bank Holidays. This problem alone makes the construction of a plan
such as this a major task due to the difficulties that can occur in
contacting off duty personnel. Ibe plan has been designed to be simple,
easy to read and each duty itemized so individuals can concentrate on
tile areas that concern than and all unnecessary information left out.

Attention most be drawn to the following factors

The colour of Safety Helmets will denote the duties and rank of the
wearer i.e.

1.   Antoulance Personnel transport         *   White
     Leading Antoulance Person              *   White with Black Band
     Emergency Support Team (Foot Squads)   *   Yellow
     Ambulance Officers                     *   Blue

2.   All personnel must ensure that their H. V. jacket and suitable
     footwear are taken to the scene of any major incident with other
     items of personal safety equipment.

It is most important that the Incident Officer remains in or close to
the Cannunications Vehicle, this being the centre for directing and
monitoring the whole operation. He must also ensure that a V.H.F. R/T
Handset (which will be marked) is given to the first available crew
that depart for the designated hospital so it can be handed over to the
Liaison Officer who will be on duty.

Antoulance crews must remain with their vehicles at all times, their
role at a major incident is transportation and Ambulance Nursing whilst
mobile, all rescue and treatment duties will be performed by the
Emergency support team which are Ambulance Personnel without antoulances.

Delegated officers will be issued with a U.H.F. R/T Handset to enable
ccmmunications to be made via the mobile Control.

Hie support and caimunication vehicle will be based at Headquarters, this
vehicle will contain all the necessary equipment and drivers will be
allocated by Control.

To enable the plan to run efficiently, it is essential that all personnel
concentrate on the objectives and Check list of their individual role.




                                2.
MAJOR INCIDENT/CATASTROPHE PLAN




Definition


A Major Incident/Catastrophe is any situation whereby the normal
day to day running of the service is impeded due to the number
of casualties requiring treatment and transportation, creating the
need for extra operational resources frcm our own or other services.


Objective

To instigate a methodical plan of action, and to organise the
ambulance service resources to provide:-


     a)   Sufficient resources for the effective handling, treatment
          and transportation of casualties.


    b)    To provide and set up an efficient control and caimunications
          system.


    c)    To ensure a minimum disruption of the normal day to day service.


    d)    Establish a close liaison with other emergency services.
DUTIES OF FIRST CREW ON SCENE


Objective

The anbulance attendant or L/A who is first on scene of an incident will
assune the responsibilities for:-

1.   The initial assessment of the situation.


2.   The instigation of the ambulance service major incident plan.


3.   The management and organisation of the ambulance personnel until
     relieved by a more senior officer.


NOTE:-

This antoulance is to remain a ccrnnunications vehicle, the rear doors
should be closed and secured to prevent any unauthorised patient loading
until released for operational duties by the incident officer.




                           Check List

           H.V. JACKETS AN5 SAFETY HELMETS MUST BE TOON


             Driver                                         Attendant


1.   Radio arrival on scene and                  1.   Go forward, assess nunber
     confirm exact location.                          of casualties.

2.   Locate and infoim control of:-              2.   Identify priority hazards.
     a) Best approach/access.
     b) Other services present or                3.   Report findings to control.
         required.
     c) Request permission for                   4.   Establish sights for:-
         E.R.C. Channel.
                                                      a)   Antoulance parking area.
3.   Switch off:-                                     b)   Control/Ccmmmications
                                                           vehicle parking area.
     a)   Engine                                      c)   Casualty clearing post.
     b)   Lights                                      d)   Antoulance loading
     c)   Heaters                                          point.

4.   Switch on:-                                 5.   T.iai.cion with other services.

     Blue rotating roof beacon.

5.   Secure rear doors.

6.   Remain with the vehcile.
 INCIDENT OFFICER



 Objective


 Organise ambulance personnel into setting up working groups, monitoring
 their effectiveness and to liaise with other services.


 Check List


 1.   Liaise with the temporary Incident Officer and evaluate the present
      situation.

 2.   Establish

      a)   Casualty clearing post.

      b)   Ambulance parking area.

      c)   Ambulance loading point.

      d)   First aid equipment point.

 3.   Delegate ambulance officers to manage the established posts.

 4.   Establish ccranunications with the on site control vehicle.

 5.   Ensure that R/T handsets are distributed to the appointed officers.

 6.   Liaise with the police and fire service Incident Officers.

 7.   Supervise and co-ordinate the an±>ulance service operations frcm
      mobile control.

8.    Close down the ambulance operations at the completion of the incident.

9.    Supervise the collection and re-distribution of equipment.

10.. Supply a written report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer of
     all relevant points raised during the incident.




                                        5
EMERGENCY SUPPORT TEAM OFFICER


Organise, manage and despatch the team as required, to diagnose, treat
and advise on the extraction of injured casualties.



Check List


1.   Ensure support /caimunications vehicle is mobile frem Headquarters.


2.   Collect R/T Handset frem Ccmnunications Vehicle.


3.   Muster the team and issue protective clothing frcm the support
     vehicle.


4.   Liaise with the Incident Officer and report ready for operations.


5.   Liaise with other Energency Services.


6.   Ensure the safety of his team at all times.


7.   Manage the using of specialised ambulance rescue equipment.


8.   Obey instructions given by senior Fire Officers in dangerous
     situations.


9.   Ensure all support team equipment is accounted for, after the
     termination of the major incident.
EMERGENCY SUPPORT TEAM WILL:


At the scene of a major incident carry out efficiently the principles
of Airbulance Aid and assist with lifting and handling as directed
by the Emergency Support Team Officer.



CHECK LIST


1.   On notification of a major incident proceed to scene by one
     of the following methods (ensure suitable footwear and H.V.
     jacket is taken with you).


     a)   Home to scene via own transport, or other methods.

     b)   Station to scene via own transport or antoulance vehicle.

     c)   Mobile, ambulance vehicle. Control to be informed as to
          method of travel.

2.   Report to Emergency Support Team Officer where you will be issued
     with a yellow helmet and boilersuit (major incident clothing).

3.   Ensure major incident clothing is worn with H. V. jacket on top.

4.   Carry out instruction as deligated by Emergency Support Team Officer.
CASUALTY CLEARING POST OFFICER


Triage and nurse casualties, arranging for their hospital transportation.


CHECK LIST


1.   Ensure collection of R/T Handset and triage labels from support/
     cannunications vehicle.


2.   Survey location for suitability - in conjunction with Incident Officer.


3.   Liaise with Mobile Antoulance Team Support Officer and Ambulance
     Loading Point Officer.


4.   Identify and label triage casualties.


5.   Ensure specialised equipment is released and casualties are placed
     on green sheets.


6.   Check, nurse and reassure casualties.


7.   Ensure economical distribution of Antoulance First Aid equipment.


8.   Record casualties on relevant forms.
AMBULANCE LOADING POINT OFFICER


Objective


Organise and control the flow of antoulance vehicles, between the
parking and loading points, supervising the handling, loading of
patients, and establish a record system of patients and their
destinations.


CHECK LIST


1.   Ensure that a R/T Handset is issued from the support/cannunication
     vehicle.

2.   Survey the Ambulance Loading Point site for suitability and
     hardstanding, in conjunction with Incident Officer.

3.   Establish R/T contact with Casualty Clearing Point and Antoulance
     Parking Point officers.

4.   Act on the request of Casualty Clearing Point officer for
     antoulance vehicles.

5.   Allocate patients to designated hospitals.

6.   Establish a record system of patient details and hospital
     destinations.

7.   Maintain up-to-date information via control of the hospital
     availability.

8.   Inform Incident Officer and record any changes in hospital
     availability.

9.   Remain in station until released by the Incident Officer.




                                    1
AMBULANCE PARKING OFFICER


To organise the orderly parking of airbulance vehicles and the
supervision of antoulance crews ensuring their availability as
and when requested.




CHECK LIST

1.   Ensure that R/T Handset is collected from support/conmunications
     vehicle.

2.   Survey the selected location for hard standing and manoeuvring
     area, in conjunction with Incident Officer.

3.   Organise the parking of airbulance vehicles in the order of
     arrival.

4.   Instruct drivers to turn off all electrics.

5.   Ensure all crews remain with their vehicles.

6.   Organise refreshments/meal breaks for crews during latentperiods.

7.   Ensure petrol tanks are at least \ full to enablejourneys to be
     completed and instruct crews to refill when the need arises.

8.   Order crews to proceed to Ambulance Loading Point dependant on
     type of vehicle that is requested by Antoulance Loading Point officer.

9.   Ranain in station keeping constant radio watch until instructed
     otherwise by the Incident Officer.
STATION OFFICER WILL:


At the notification of a major incident supervise the call out
procedures of station personnel ensuring the efficient turn out
of vehicles as directed by Control and to undertake any further
requests given by Control or Senior Officer. The Station Officer
will not proceed to the incident unless instructed to do so by
a Senior Officer in conjunction with the Control Superintendent.



CHECK LIST


1.   Call out an L/A.


2.   Proceed to station instigate and supervise call out procedures.


3.   Ensure efficient vehicle turn out.


4.   Ensure that the station closest to the incident is open for
     petrol, showers and other facilities.


5.   Undertake further instruction as given by Control or Senior
     Officer.




                                     n
M3BILE CONTROL OFFICERS


At the scene of a major incident ensure efficient ccranunications, record
relevant details on log sheets provided to produce a complete history of
all events at the scene. Maintain close liaison with Incident Officer
in order to carry out necessary request.




1.   Collect support/ccrnnunication vehicle from Headquarters.

2.   Proceed to scene and set up ccnrnunications vehicle on approved
     site, and next to or in line with police and Fire Service
     ccmnunications vehicle. Blue beacon to be switched on and left
     on throughout the incident.

3.   Issue R/T Handsets to appropriate officer.

4.   Ensure good ccxnnunications via mobile Control; R/T Handsets UHF
     and VHF; and base Control.

5.   Liaise with and constantly update Incident Officer.

6.   Record relevant details on log sheets provided.

7.   Issue batteries for R/T Handsets as required.
CONTROL OFFICER



The objective of Control in the event of a major incident is
to ensure the efficient call out and deployment of personnel,
the effective mobilisation of vehicles, good comnunications,
the accurate recording of all details, and to adhere to
procedures as dictated by Service Policy.



CHECK LIST


1.   Enter details on A.S.I.


2.   Deploy nearest available vehicle.


3.   Await stop message, although if obvious, instigate
     major incident plan.

     i.e.   Call out check list.
            Mobilisation of support/ccramunications vehicle with R6 Control.


4.   Deploy personnel and vehicles as required.


5.   Record all relevant details.


6.   Maintain ccranunications until mobile Control is set up and
     then only ccraiunicate to assist mobile Control as and when
     requested.
LIAISON OFFICER WILL:


At the notification of a major incident supervise the arrival and
departure of ambulances at the designated hospital ensuring
Control is constantly updated and relevant details are recorded.




CHECK LIST


1.   Proceed to designated hospital, contact Base Control on
     arrival via telephone.


2.   Liaise with Casualty Officer/Hospital Administrator.


3.   Assess approach, parking and exit for axrbulance vehicles
     at Hospital Departments.


4.   Ensure efficient unloading/loading and turn round of
     vehicles.


5.   Record patient No's, details on service form and update
     mobile Control on hospital state.


6.   On receipt of handset cornnunicate with Mobile Control.
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


              INCIDENT CALL OUT CHECK LIST




                                             Time   Remarks



   Officer I/C Control

   Hospital No. 1

^kHbspital No. 2


   One Station Officer - Call Out

   One ADO - Incident Officer

   One R6 Support Team Officer

   R6 Control -

   R5 Control -

   One R6 - Hospital Liaison

   One R6 Loading Officer

   One R6 Casualty Officer

^ O n e R6 Parking Officer
W                  "

   Duty Mechanic


  ACMAO


  CMAO
                                                                            r   .   .



  Other Antoulance Service




  If appropriate officer cannot be contacted, implement a substitute i.e.
  D. 0. C. C., L/A for R6 etc.




                                             15
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE



       INCIDENT LOG SHEET




TIME         MESSAGE                          ACTION    TIME




                                     it
               SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE



               MAJOR INCIDENT FORM




               Sex
    Fleet No            No. of Patients     Details of Injured Personnel
                        Per Vehicle         Other Remarks




I
E      Agenda for seminar to have been held on 19th April
       with second draft of   an u p d a t e d M a j o r   Inci d en t


Page
1      Agenda
5      Draft Plan
                 SOOTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                                ONE DAY SEMINAR




SUBJECT:   M A J O R    I I C I D E I T S   (DRAFT)



Overall Objectives

Describe the role of the Ambulance Service in response to a major incident.

Sub Objectives

1    Define the term 'Major Incident'.

2    State the purpose for which a major incident plan is designed.

3    State the action of the first crew at the scene of a major incident.

4    State the need for the firm control and command of the incident.

5    List the initial and subsequent information required by Control.

6    Describe the individual responsibilities of SYMAS Officers.

7    Identify the role of the major incident tender.

8    State the types of on site communications available.

9    List the other services who may be involved at a major incident and
     briefly describe their functions and responsibilities.

10   Demonstrate in a simulated classroom situation, his/her understanding
     of all aspects of the major incident plan.
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

DRAFT



0930    Assembly and introduction to the course (Directing staff)


0945    The SYMAS major incident plan
         "Major Incident”
         The First Crew (Control and Command)

1045    C O F F E E


1100    Officer's Roles


1145    The major incident tender and lighting unit.


1230    L U N C H


1300    On site control and communications


1345    The role of the fire service


1430    T E A

1445    The role of the Police


1530    'Table Top' exercise


1615    Forum


1630    Close of course




                                  rL
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

Points to be emphasized by lecturers:


1st Session

SYMAS Major Incident Plan

A   The need for all staff to constantly keep updated on its contents.

B   Flexibility




2nd Session

The First Crew

A   Must initiate effectively set tasks

B   No patient care!

C   Firm control    and command of situation

D   Relevant and    concise information to Control




3rd Session        QpP,c<Lr   rpig.

A   All Officer roles to be understood by all staff

B   The need at times to act persons into positions

C   Firm control and command of situation




4th Session

The major incident tender and lighting unit

A   Inventory and Signs

B   Operation of    stem light

C   Cold weather    heating (fuel)

D   .JraeWr lighting unit, safe and effective use
5th Session

On site control and communications

A   Frequencies available

B   Operating a major incident control system

C   Radio discipline

D   Vodaphone
                                MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN

Definition

A major incident is any situation whereby the normal day to day running of the
service is impeded due to the number of casualties requiring treatment and
transportation, creating the need for extra operational resources from our own or
other services.

Objective

To instigate a methodical plan of action, and to organise the ambulance service
resources to provide

(a)    sufficient resources for the effective handling, treatment and transportation
       of casualties;

(b)   an efficient control and communications system;

(c)   mininma disruption of the normal day to day service;

(d)   close liaison with other emergency services.
                              DUTIES OF FIRST CREW ON SCENE


The first ambulance crew on the scene of the incident will accept and remain
responsible for:-

(a)   the initial assessment of the situation;

(b)   the instigation of the ambulance service     major incident plan;

(c)    the management and organisation of ambulance personnel until relieved by a
       senior officer.

(d)   providing communications with control until arrival of the mobile control
      unit.

The Driver vill:-

1     Radio arrival on scene and confirm exact     location and type of incident.

2     Locate and inform Control of:-

      (a)   best approach/access;
      (b)   other services present or required;
      (c)   maintain radio watch.

3     Switch on:-

      (a)   blue rotating beacon

4     Lock rear doors.

6     Remain with the vehicle at all times.

The Attendant vill:-

1     Identify hazards and inform control.

2     Go forward with radio hand-set and assess number of casualties.      Do not treat
      any casualties at this stage.

3     Report findings to control.

4     Establish areas for:-

      (a)   ambulance parking;
      (b)    control and communications vehicle;
      (c)   casualty clearing post;
      (d)   ambulance loading point;
      (e)   equipment point;
      (f)   mortuary point.

5     If possible, liaise with other services.

6     At no time become involved with patient management until advised by a Senior
      Officer.

       Safety helmets and high visibility jackets must be worn at all times.
                     DUTY CONTROL OFFICER - CENTRAL CONTROL

1   On initial call deploy nearest available vehicle or vehicles, based on the
    information received.

2   Despatch Duty Officer to scent.

3   Inform Control Superintendent.

4   Await update from scene.

5   Maintain emergency cover for South Yorkshire.
                             DUTY SUPERINTENDENT - CENTRAL CONTROL


The 'Duty Superintendent - Central Control' will commence call out
procedure.


                                   INCIDENT CALL OUT CHECK LIST




                                                           TIME   REMARKS/NAMES


 Duty Officer .                                                   Despatched to Scene

 CMAO                                                             All Officers report to HQ

 DCMAO

 ACMAO - Control

 ACMAO - Training

 ACMAO - Support Services

 ADO     - Support Services

 Inform receiving hospital

 Inform neighbouring authorities

 Inform secondary hospital

 One Foot Squad Officer

 One Hospital S & E Officer

 One Loading Officer

 One Casualty Officer

 One Parking Officer

 On-site Liaison Officer

 Foot Squad Members

 Duty Mechanic
            - ..... -.....   -   .......................
                                 SITE OFFICER IN CHARGE

The "Site Officer in Charge" will establish and maintain contact with Police and
Fire Service "Officers in Charge" and manage ambulance resources on site.

CHECK LIST

1    Take responsibility upon arrival on scene for Ambulance Service.

2    Confirm: -

      (a)    casualty clearing post;
      (b)    Ambulance parking area;
      (c)    Ambulance loading point;
      (d)    Ambulance equipment point;
      (e)    mobile control unit point;
      (f)    mortuary.

3    Establish communications with the central control.

4    Liaise with Police and Fire "Incident Officers".

5    Supervise and co-ordinate ambulance service operations from   the mobile control
      unit upon its arrival.

6    Delegate Ambulance Officers to manage the established posts   in conjunction
      with the "Site Liaison Officer".

7    Ensure that radio telephone handsets are distributed to the appointed
      officers.

8    Appoint "Emergency Services Liaison Officer" when possible.

9    Supply a written post incident report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
      Officer to include; synopsis of incident, conclusions and recommendations.
                                SITE LIAISON OFFICER

The "Site Liaison Officer" will provide effective inter-service support, advice and
communications at the scene of a major incident on behalf of the Ambulance Service.

CHECK LIST

On notification of a major incident the Site Liaison Officer" will:-

1    Collect radio telephone handsets.

2    Be assigned to appropriate "Officer in Charge" (Police/Fire).

3    Provide effective liaison between the   emergency services.

4    Supply a written post incident report   to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
     Officer.




                               10
                             AMBULANCE PARKING OFFICER

The "Ambulance Parking Officer" will organise the orderly parking of ambulance
vehicles and the supervision of ambulance crews ensuring their availability as and
when requested and the security of their vehicles.

CHECK LIST

1     Collect radio telephone handset from the mobile control unit.

2    Manage parking area.

3    Ensure all crews remain with their vehicles, unless otherwise directed.

4    Ensure no blue lights are displayed on parking area.

5    If necessary, request workshop support.

7    Supply a written post incident report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
     Officer.




                              w
                            CASUALTY CLEARING POST OFFICER

                          (EXTENDED TRAINED WHERE AVAILABLE)


The "Casualty Clearing Post Officer11 will carry out triage and manage ambulance
personnel performing casualty nursing. Arrange for patient transportation as
priority dictates.

CHECK LIST

NB:   Ensure effective liaison with any on site aedical teans.

1     Collect radio telephone handset   andtriage labels   from mobile control   unit.

2     Manage Casualty Clearing Post.

4     Maintain records of casualties.

6     Supply a written post incident report   to theChief Metropolitan Ambulance
      Officer.
                          AMBULANCE LOADING POINT OFFICER

The "Ambulance Loading Point Officer" will organise and control the flow of
ambulance vehicles, between the parking and loading points supervising the handling
and loading of patients and establish a record system of patients and their
destinations.

CHECK LIST

1    Collect radio telephone handset from the mobile control unit.

2    Liaise with "Casualty Clearing Post Officer".

3    Allocate patients to designated hospitals, taking into account advised
      availability.

4    Maintain a record system of patient details and hospital destinations.

5    Inform "Site Liaison Officer" of changes in hospital availability. ,

6    Supply a written post incident report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
     Officer.
                                 FOOT SQUAD - LEADER


The "Foot Squad Leader" will manage and deploy the team as required to diagnose,
treat and advise on the extraction of injured casualties.

Check List

1    Proceed   to nominated rendezvous point.

2    Report to "Site Officer".

3    Collect   Radio telephone handset from mobile control unit.

4    Muster the team and issue protective clothing from the mobile control unit.

5    Ensure the safety of his team at all times, taking into account   advise given
     by officers from other services.

6    Manage the use of specialised ambulance rescue equipment.

7    Supply a written post incident report to the Chief Metropolitan   Ambulance
     Officer.
                                    FOOT SQUADS

The foot squad vill carry out instructions as designated by the "Site Officer in
Charge".

CHECK LIST

1    On notification of a major incident, proceed to the advisedrendezvous  point
     with suitable footwear, protective equipment, H.V jacket and identification
      card and await further instructions.

2    On arrival on scene you will be issued with additional clothing,   ie,yellow
     helmet and protective clothing.

3    Provide effective on-site patient treatment and care.
                            AMBULANCE OFFICER (HOSPITAL)

The Ambulance Officer" will manage the arrival and departure of ambulances at the
designated hospital ensuring that Control is constantly updated and relevant details
are recorded.

CHECK LIST

1    Proceed to the designated hospital and contact the Control Incident    Ro o b
      on arrival via telephone.

2    Liaise with Casualty Officer/Hospital Administrator/Police Liaison Officer.

3    Assess approach, parking and exit for ambulance vehicles at hospital
      departments.

4    Ensure efficient unloading/loading and turn round of vehicles.

5    Record patient numbers, details on service form and update mobile control unit
     on hospital state.

6    On receipt of handset communicate with mobile control unit.

7    Supply a written post incident report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
     Officer.
                      MOBILE CONTROL (MAJOR INCIDENT VEHICLE)

The mobile control unit will be:-

1    Manned by two (preferably Officers).

2    Obtain the best possible position on site in liaison with other   Services and
      Incident Officer.  (Test Effectiveness).

3    Issue radio telephone equipment to Officers on site.

4    Do not issue operational equipment located in the rear of themobile control
     unit. Equipment distribution is the responsibility of the "Incident Officer".

5    Maintain effective liaison with "Officer in Charge" and Central Control.

6    Maintain effective records of the incident and advise Central Control of
     progress.

7    Be prepared to assume full control responsibilities on site with approval of
     Central Control or due to communication failure.

8    Commence stand down when appropriate.

9    Supply a written post incident report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
     Officer.
       Control Incident Plans for the football Grounds of
       Doncaster    Rovers,    Rotherham   United,   B ar n s l e y ,
       Sheffield United, and Sheffield Wednesday
Page
1      General
4      Doncaster   Rovers
6      Rotherham   United
20     Barnsley
22     Sheffield   United
23     Sheffield   Wednesday
Evacuation of Sports Grounds - List of names/telephone numbers



Rotherham United             Inspector Woods (Mrs)       Roth 371121
                             (Sergeant France)           Ext: 2149

Barnsley United              Inspector Grant (Dick)      Barn 206161
                                                         Ext: 3169

Doncaster United             Inspector Brentnall (Ernie) Done 66744
                                                         Ext: 212

Sheffield United            Inspector Godwin             Shef 78522
                                                         Ext: 3126/3129

Sheffield Wednesday         Inspector Calvert (Clive)    Shef 343131
(Ollerton Sports Stadium)                                Ext: 3239

Police Headquarters                                      Shef 78522
                                                         Ext: 3600




                                  a
    ACTION TO BE TAKEN IN THE EVENT OF MAJOR INCIDENTS AT SPORTS STADIUMS




    1.    Despatch crew to location of incident to establish exact
          nature and location, establish links with Police and
          Fire Services.




    2.    Contact designated officer responsible for sports ground or
           second officer if unavailable.  If no individual specialised
           plans for incident, contact nearest Station Officer.
#
    3.    Inform Duty Officer.




    4.    Follow instructions in individual stadium plans.  If these are
          not available, take action as required in conjunction with incident
          officer at scene. This may require the implementation of the
          major incident plan.
CONTROL ACTION IN EVENT OF MAJOR INCIDENT AT                    .?OyERS.??,.BELLE.VUE



1.     Despatch crew to location to establish nature of incident,
       exact location, establish link with Police.


2.     Contact S y A _________ J.... (designated officer for incidents at
       .D.O.HCAS.TEA .FC.       if not available contact ??9.l        1 ..
       (second responsible officer).


3.     Despatch number of available crews to P9NCASTER.RJVERS.G M O N D .ENTRANCE (LEFT)
       (Parking Point). This area is kept clear of all traffic on
       match days.      There is available parking at this location for
       . .2..“. A ...... ambulances.


4.     Notify Duty Officer.


5.     On arrival at ground ?.*???.           ......... after consultation with
        Police, will establish patient treatment and loading point at
         CAR. P A R K ....... whlch is located at LEFT.OF. MAIN, GATE. 9 FF.BAWTRY ROAD



6.     Station Officer to update Control.


7.     Any extra crews that may be available should be stood by at
        DONCASTER AMBULANCE STATION             .            . ..



       The route to .. DONCASTER ROYAL INFIRMARY.... Hospital from ??**?.
                                       the Police will try to maintain will               *

                                                                                              •
       be . GRANDSTAND ROAD, TOWN MOOR AVENUE, THORNE ROAD

       This route will also be used by the Fire Brigade.




N.B.     If on arrival at the scene, the incident warrants special
         resources and manpower, the major incident plan will need to
         be considered.
               £   M£ftj3'£/Jcy                             .’ ^   5   '


                                                                           C   r ftz
                                            ( j n   u   y




  M /      j                            t
  /f s     ' F fX * ^ £ * !&
                             7"



                         /        MA?


                                  /l.



                        -i



v' '✓ v * ^ » / > - /
                   iSSST I SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

•/       1 :   —                             Rotherham United EC.
                            (PHt
                                                                                                              ^ 4 X*!




                                                                                    o   / a   T   4 ? '   ?   j



                                                         PentecOsu! Churcfv




                                             7
                                                                                         it-, I..:?,-

                                                                                                                        Shelter t-q T o w n C ffftrr< t
                       Coal f!ereh*nu Tard


                          8^Tr*v«H#f»f
                                          E3          10-131:
                                                                                                                                   Viccena
                                                                                                                                     HaU
                               Crane
                                                             The                                  23 -27 I J
                                                                                                              y
                                                            r >TIVOLI
                                                                 \ » v-
                                                              Ternccs




                                                                                                                         Millmoor W orks


                                                                                                                          Dividing Gate
                                                                                                                          Millmoor Lane Stand

                                                  M illm o o r F oo tb all G ro u n d

                                                                                                                               SUPPORTERS
                       I^
                                                                                                                          ROTHERHAM
                                                                                                                           (noinly)

                   U                                                                                                       VISITORS

                                                                                                                          29-32

     ">:mv;

 Police Control Room*
                                                                                         Txi
        Detention Room                                         ‘‘
                                                                .'n*11 s\~s                       !<$>
                                                    ^ R A IL W A Y ^ E N D ^ y S A ^

               J   ]   ______                                                                                           S o u rh T o rtih irfF o U c# { -
                                       Hiltmoor       Groimd
mi i»                                                                                                                    PLANS DEPT.         5 /7 6   j



                                                                                                                         CjvpfSCv-f'l
CONTROL ACTION IN EVENT OF MAJOR INCIDENT AT .MILLMOpR.................
                                          ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL STADIUM


1.     Despatch crew to location to establish nature of incident,
       exact location, establish link with Police.



2.     Contact .V.0.1.........        (designatedofficer                    for i n c i d e n t s   at
       .                    If not available contact                           .....
       (second responsible officer).


3.     Despatch number of available crews to ..            .........
       (Parking Point). This area is kept clear of all traffic on
       match days. There is available parking at this location for
       ...  ......... ambulances.
       ANY FIRE SERVICE VEHICLES HELDIN RESERVE WILL ALSO USE THEAREA

4.     Notify Duty Officer.


5.     On arrival at ground ..       J.    ¥ . ...... . after consultation     with
        Police, will establish patient treatment and loading point at
        .PLAYING .AREA .. .which is located at CORNER. OF. GROUND.NEAR.TURNgTiLE 1
                                                  m a i n ’ENTRANCE...............


6.     Station Officer to update        Control.


7.     Any extra crews that may be available should be stood by at
           ROTHERHAM AMBULANCE STATION



8.     The route to . . W . H.E. W . P?STRICT. GENERAL.... Hospital f r o m .......
        . m & m R P F i................  that the Police will try to maintain will
       be MASBRO. STREET.,. .CENTENARY. WAY,. SHEFFIELD. R O A D ,. O L D .SHEFFIELD .ROAD,
        .CANKLOW ROAK,; ALMA R O A D ^ MOORGATE* ROAD* * * * *.*  .**           .*. .*.*. * .*]
       This route will also be used by the Ambulances travelling to and
        from the ground from Rotherham Ambulance Station or Rotherham
        District General Hospital.




N.B.     If on arrival at tHe scene, the incident warrants special
         resources and manpower, the major incident plan will need to
         be considered.
                                                                                                    ‘•O'tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   / / / J v /^ rwtj0nkJlfm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L ' Vi ■ Ocpunt}




                                                                                                                                                                                           ^\^oVrnp
                                                                                                                                                                                           yS      oirovtjo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  nr       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                           «■


                                                                                                                   yy       $        mmt

                                                \fo r m       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             : ;
                                   r' A k


                                                                                                                                                               /ChiSCHctiocI


                                                                                                                   Mj&WPrm'j
                                                                                                                    Thornhill
                                                                                                                        Ground




             '0 ' jS ' ferham
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ^                        jP*S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '.'MarMemt,/
                    .
                    ""
                     ij
                     "Bwa
                        p>
                         t■
                          f■
                           lr^x
                            rHVjcgrTg HvSc/J^ r
                                              ;x1
                                                ’N
                                                 i4i


  Mtlli
                                                                                                                                    \ /
                                                                                                                                                      <5 s ^ S j * r

              r> | &■                                   ~~~ rfcf' holmes
              ^ S S T T—
3“fiW £7^£
 IVor/r j



                                                                                          £ / *'2B£




 ^ r ~ l~ s t e ^        iVorAs


                                                                                                                                     //    ,               /              .|   \ Boston %           V       >> Thomas
                                                                                                                                    // I I I                                    \Ctot/ej? ‘ ^^otheryn-tontyt
                     '„ (Var*j                                                                                                  iL        H            /                 g!        \        jZoStQTb X\J
                                                                                                                        »       ^         ,*,I        , r~~
                                                                                                                                                         b ® a r ^'                    \                     .,     ■
                                                                                                                         ' \>. I«^_ 3JSKE3r,^
                                                                                                                                                                                           ^ •;. / ' Reservoir
                                                                                                                        3-     I- T ^ ; ^
                                                                                                                                .'
                                                                                                                                           =B
                                                                                                                                               ’' -   /           C     I*S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                       • 'iattrTowef*\\
                                                                                                     \                                                                                          •■---.: : •*=-; V




                          \ 'r'- *                . 0 -------------                                                                                                                                         t i n--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ' \/*»\ '
                          \            R es         o
                              ’.   .    .        S d o r t s              G r o u n d           \


                                                                                                                         works                                                                               -:ff .:' \\           "r"cV- WT"
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^ !|V \         *• R °therham Ger
                                            ■       ^                     v ''                  ‘•           G
                                                          \       Soo.r‘t s   ^ r o ;jn r j     :
                                            j&VCIfff
                                                   •\\                                                       l i
                                            j   b c c u r ia \                                                                                                                              1   ■•.. _ J p y v
                                                                                                                                                                  ‘-.r ^..r-wjjc l                            o     wd
                                                                                              Mtigr
                                                                                                                                                                               W       O        O       D



                                                                     ;,->v \ T_ >031^ ■
                                MILLMOOR


At a meeting held at the South Yorkshire Police Headquarters, Rotherham
on 12 August 1986. Present Inspector Mrs Wood, Inspector Cook, South
Yorkshire Police, ADO Reilly, Station Officer           |
                                                        , South
Yorkshire Fire Service, Station Officer        Station Officer       j
SYMAS.

It was agreed that from SYMAS the initial response will be one vehicle
to the front gate by turnstiles 1 - 5 .

Other vehicles will park on Armour Street.

Vehicles will preceed to Millmoor or Armour Street via Moorgate Road,
Alma Road, Canklow Road, Old Sheffield Road, Sheffield Road and
Centenary Way. They will return to Rotherham District General Hospital
by the same route.

The entrance to the forecourt at Millmoor would be kept free of Fire
Service vehicles and Police vehicles to allow access and egress for
Ambulances. Ambulances would stay in the holding (parking) area until
the vehicle being loaded was ready to leave. This would ensure only
one Ambulance being on the forecourt at any one time.

The small passageway between Coronation Bridge^and the Terraces will be
kept clear of spectators etc for Fire and Ambulance Service use.
EVACUATION PLAN - MILLMOOR FOOTBALL GROUND


Millmoor Football Ground is situated at Masborough Street,
Rotherham.

It is the home of Rotherham United Football Club.

The Club Secretary is Normal Darnill.   His telephone number
is 562434.

The Chief Steward is

The ground capacity is 17,913.

A map of the ground and surrounding area is attached as
Appendix A.


Geography of the Ground

The. ground frontage is on Masbro' Street where turnstiles
1-5, 6-9, 10-13, 14-17, 18-22, 23-27 are situated from right
to left when entering the ground, together with the entrance
for Directors, Players and Officials which is below the
General Office.   Five sets of large wooden double gates are
set into the frontage between the blocks of turnstiles.    All
gates are manned by stewards on match days and open outwards.
They are unlocked prior to the crowd entering the ground and
are opened by swivelling a centre bar to the upright position.

Turnstiles 1-9 give access to the terrace and main grandstand
to the right of the ground when entering.  Turnstiles 10-27
give access to the Tivoli Terrace and the left of the ground.


The Tivoli Terrace

The Tivoli Terrace is a covered terrace which is immediately
inside the front of the ground and which extends the width of
the ground from right to le ft . It is of concrete and asbestos
construction and is not- considered a fire risk.  It is kept
solely for use by the home supporters (mainly young and
teenage) and accommodates 6034 standing fans.

Policing of the Tivoli Terrace is by Serial 5 and in the main
the same officers are present for all home matches.  The
relationship between police and fans is good and control of the
supporters in this area of the ground is excellent.


The Railway End Terrace

The Railway End Terrace is at the opposite end of the ground
to the Tivoli Terrace.   It is a covered area constructed of
asbestos and concrete and again poses no threat of fire.
The terrace is shallow and therefore the risk of crushing is
minimal.  This terrace accommodates the visiting fans and is
totally caged to prevent infiltration of the adjoin-ing sides
of the ground.  The Railway Terrace holds 5768 standing fans.

Access is via Millmoor Lane and in particular, turnstiles
29-30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37.  Egress is by way of a
large wooden double gate which opens onto Millmoor Lane,
allowing fans to turn right without restriction to where
visiting coaches are parked at the rear of the railway end
perimeter fence.  Such coaches and fans leave the area via
Armer Street onto the inner bypass - (Centenary Way), without
coming into conflict with the home fans.

The gate is manned by a regular steward on match days. Visiting
supporters wishing to turn left into Millmoor Lane are con­
trolled by Mounted Branch Police Officers to prevent the two
sets of fans coming into conflict at the point where Millmoor
Lane joins Masbro' Street.  It is generally visiting fans
travelling by rail who have to turn left into Millmoor Lane.

The Millmoor Lane side of the ground is the left side when
entering from the front and is split into three seperate
areas.

The Spion Kop.

The Home Terrace.

The Visitors' Terrace.

The Spion Kop is an open terrace of concrete construction
and is used by the home supporters.  It is an extension of
the Tivoli Terrace and accommodates standing fans.  It extends
about a third of the way along the length of the ground
towards the railway end and is parallel to Millmoor Lane. There
is no fire risk in this section of the ground and due to the
gentle slope of the terracing little chance of serious crushing.

Access to this part of the ground is via turnstiles 14-27 at
the front of the ground.   Egress is by two of the wooden gates
in the frontage wall.


The Home Terrace

This is a continuation of the Spion Kop and is a covered area
which seats 748 fans.  There is no standing facility in this
part of the ground and little risk of fire, the fabric of the
covered area being asbestos roofing on a concrete base with a
metal superstructure.

Access is by transfer from the Kop and via turnstile 28 in
Millmoor Lane. Egress is by way of the Spion Kop and also a
double gate into Millmoor Lane.


The Visitors' Terrace

Is for the visiting supporters and is identical to the Home
Terrace.  It holds 1288 seated supporters.  Access is via
turnstiles 29-37 and transfer from the Railway End Terrace.

Egress is identical to that of the Railway End Terrace.
The Grand Stand and Main Terrace

The Main Terrace is at the right hand side of the ground
when entering from thte front of the stadium.  It extends
from the Tivoli Terrace to the passageway which gives the
players and officials access to the playing pitch (players
tunnel).  The terrace holds 2704 standing supporters who are
in the main home supporters.   The terracing abutts the playing
area and the Grand Stand, is of concrete construction and
slopes gently  to the pitch.   There is no fire risk and only
minimal chance of serious crushing.   Gates are built in to the
playing pitch perimeter wall to give access to the playing
area from the Main Terrace.


The Grand Stand

This is a wooden stand and is considered the main area of
danger within the football ground.  Whilst it has undergone
much fire prevention - by treatment with chemicals, lining
with asbestos and other improvements, there is little doubt
that this is the area giving concern for safety.  Fire
extinguishers are placed in the following locationss-

2   fire extinguishers in each of the bars below the stand.

2 fire extinguishers on the mezanine floor alongside the
main girders at the back of the stand.

The stand is all seating and holds 1371.  It is quite steep
and is constructed high above the ground level. Supporters
of both favours use this stand.

There is no void beneath the wooden floor and no gaps in the
floorboards.  The underneath of the Grand Stand is open and
contains the various bars, changing rooms, toilets and
laundry facilities.  Access is through the front of the ground
- turnstiles 1-9,along the passageway at the rear of the
Main Terrace and through a mezanine floor down steps into the
bar area before similar steps into the Grandstand.

Egress from the stand in normal times is by way of the same
steps.  However, in the event of an emergency the stand would
be vacated through the egress gates which are built into the
front apron of the stand and which have steps leading down
onto the main terrace.

The Grandstand is fitted with a fire alarm which operates
an illuminated and audible warning system in the police control
room and a 'sprinkler' system.

Both are regularly tested and maintained by Lillekers of
Rotherham.  Fire extinguishers -are situated throughout the
stand and are clearly identified.   They are regularly checked
by the fire brigade.

The bars below operate on a registration Certificate and are
in use just prior to the start of the game, during the half
time interval and immediately following the full time whistle.

Regular staff are employed.  Members and their guests are
allowed access.  Evacuation of the bars would be through the
players'   tunnel onto the field of play.

Evacuation of the Main Stand and bars would take six minutes
at the outside.  The fire brigade have allowed eight minutes
for evacuation.


Public Address

The football ground has a modern public address system to
speakers on the floodlight pylons at all sides of the ground.
In normal times the system is operated by the disc jockey
from the kiosk situated above the players' tunnel.  The
system is such that a 'cut out' facility,situated in the
police control box, can be operated and the public address
immediately taken over by the Police Superintendent in
charge of policing the game.


The Police Control   Room

The Police Control Room is a brick building with glass
windows giving vision to all parts of the ground.   It is
elevated at the back of the Railway Terrace extension on the
far right hand side of the ground when entering from the
front of the stadium, adjacent to the players' tunnel and
the disc jockey's kiosk.  It has a telephone facility connecting
with the Detention Room below.   The telephone is an internal
line from the Main Street Police Station number 2207. It has
a facility for outside calls.  An independent police radio
control system is in use from the Police Control Room,
connecting the ground with Divisional Control Room Main Street
and Force Control Room Sheffield Headquarters.

The Detention Room is situated immediately below the Police
Control Room and also has a telephone facility for outside
calls   Prisoners are kept in the Detention Room until
processed and then taken to Rotherham Divisional Headquarters
Main Street for charging and bail.


St. John Ambulance

The St. John Ambulance Department operate within the football
ground from various sites around the perimeter of the playing
area. All are uniformed and readily identifiable.      The
organisation have a First Aid ambulance post of brick
construction in the left hand corner of the ground when
entering from the front of the stadium.     The post is situated
between the Railway Stand Terrace and Millmoor Lane and is
manned on match d a y s . An ambulance is in attendance through­
out the g a m e .

Egress from the First Aid/Ambulance post is via the double
gates in Millmoor Lane, Millmoor Lane, Masborough Street to
Centenary Way.
Evacuation Plan

Due to the construction of the football stadium it is
considered that any emergency evacuation would be as a
result of fire or bomb hoax call.  In the event of fire
it is felt that such would be confined to the main stand
which is of wooden construction, therefore, evacuation has
been planned with this in mind.

Should fire be indicated on the fire control panel in the
Police Control Room or be established by the police, the
Police Controller would be made aware immediately.  Similarly
the Superintendent in charge of the football match policing
would be informed.

The Police Controller will cut into the public address system
and pass the coded message:-

     "THE ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY REQUIRED
      AT POLICE CONTROL."

The officer at the players' entrance would go into the field
of play and inform the referee.  The Police Officers on the
pitch perimeter would immediately open the gates in the   •
perimeter wall allowing the fans on the terrace in front of the
main stand to clear the terrace onto the playing area.
Simultaneously the stewards on the double wooden gates at the
ground frontage and Millmoor Lane would open the gates to allow
egress.

The gates in the perimeter wall in front of the Tivoli Terrace
would be opened by the police officers in Serial 1 to allow the
public to leave the field of play thorugh the Tivoli Terrace
and into Masbrough Street.

The egress gates in the apron to the Grand Stand would be
opened and the crowd in the stand expelled from the stand
onto the terrace and onto the pitch, leaving the same via
the Tivoli Terrace and out into Masbrough Street.

The people under the stand would be directed by the stewards
onto the playing area via the players' tunnel.

The Railway Terrace would be cleared into Millmoor Lane and
people  in the Kop, Millmoor Terrace and the Millmoor
Visitors Terrace would leave via Millmoor Lane and through the
Tivoli Terrace extension.

The Police Control would inform C Division Control Room of
the emergency, requesting Fire and Ambulance.

Force Control would be informed of the evacuation.

The Superintendent in charge of policing the ground will direct
officers on duty at the ground and will call for support as
necessary.

To recover the situation in the event of a false alarm the
following message will be given out over the public address
by the Police Controller:-
     "MR. MEADOWS IS NO   LONGER REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL"


The Fire Brigade - Telephone 375661

Initially the fire brigade response will be 2 tenders and
one ladder to the front of the ground - turnstiles 1-5.

The appliances will be despatched from Erskine Road,
Rotherham, and will travel via St. Anns Road, Inner Bypass
to Masbrough Street Traffic Island and Masborough Street
to the rendezvous point (turnstiles 1-5).  The response
time is three minutes.

The officer in charge will liaise with the police and direct
the operation in respect of the fire (bomb).

Back up as requested by the fire officer will respond from
Darnall Fire Station via Sheffield Road, inner bypass to
Masbrough Street Island, Masbrough Street, to the rendezvous
point (turnstile 1-5), or from Oakes  Lane Fire Station,
Rotherham, via Upper Wortley Road, Wortley Road, A629 inner
bypass to Masbrough Street Island, Masbrough Street to
rendezvous point (turnstile 1-5).


Ambulance Service - Telephone 361581

The ambulance service will attend from Moorgate District
General Hospital.  One ambulance will be despatched to the
rendezvous point (turnstile 1-5) via Moorgate Street, Alma
Road, Old Sheffield Road, Sheffield Road, inner bypass to
Masbrough Street Traffic Island, Masbrough Street.

Further ambulances will go to a harbouring area in Armer
Street, turning off the inner bypass at Masbrough Street
Traffic Island into Armer Street.  They will then be controlled
by the senior ambulance officer from the football ground by
r ad i o .

Response time for the ambulance service is three minutes.


Emergency Routes

A map showing the routes for emergency services is attached,
Appendix B.  The fire brigade routes are shown on the map in
red.

The ambulance service routes are shown on the map in yellow.


Crowd Control

In the event of an emergency evacuation of the ground Serial
5 will leave the Tivoli Terrace with the crowd and will
direct the crowd towards Coronation Bridge in order to keep
Masbrough Street clear for the fire brigade and ambulance
service.
Mounted Department and Serial 4 will direct persons leaving
the Railway End along Millmoor Lane over the railway line
and towards the visitors' coach park behind the Railway End
Terrace, to prevent confusion at Millmoor Lane/Masbrough
Street.

Serial 6 will prevent obstruction of the passageway which
runs from the front of the ground to the Main Stand at the
top of the terrace and underneath the Presentation Box, to
facilitate the fire brigade getting firefighting equipment
to the stand.


Fire Hydrants

There is a fire hydrant on the ground frontage and further
hydrants in Masbrough Street and Victoria Street.  The hydrants
are maintained on a regular basis by the fire brigade.


Injured Persons

Injured persons will be taken from the ground to Rotherham
District General Hospital. Telephone number 362222.

Hospital liaison will be set up by Community Liaison
Department.
                                                                                     rUULt

                        Pr   ,»<4
                                          Rotherham United F.C.
                        wW•:**
                             «j
                        KW /             A ppendix A

                                         Ma p o f Mi 1 l m o o r       F ootball       G round

                                                                Church Hall


                                    £
                                                        Pen'.et&JUi Chore to




                                                                                                                           !Police Traffic:
                                                                                                                           jControl H Q ;




       El Sub Su                                                                                             SktluV
                                                                                                                        T o T o w n C trn r rQ
                   Coal Merth«nu Vird


                             Tr»y«U!nf           \
                                                            IS ,1 4 -1 7 j 18, • 22 1j"-(» \-‘£-sii
                                                      10 * 1 3 .             I
                                                                                                 j T j,                  Victoria
                                                                                                                           Hall II
                                                 \       ^ T t i t Winjnnill           ^         ‘“ I- *!




                                                          \TIVOLI -




                                                                                                             M illm oor W orks                     ^


                                                                                                              Dividing Gate
                                                                                                              Millraoor L&no Stand I *,j

                                                 M illrn o o r Foocball G ro u n d

                   I-                                                                                               SUPrOJlTERS
                                                                                                               ROTHERHAM

             J                                                                                                 ( ci o i n 17 )
                                                                                                                VISITORS




’olice Control Room*
                                                          •X X * > 0
  Detention Room


                                    fWimoor fooss.ii; Gfon-««                                               ____________                    r - '----- P
                                                                                                            S o u t h T ori.ibire r o n c a ( '
                                                                                                             PLANS DEPT. 5 / 7 S
      I '
                                                       Fire Brigade Emergency Route


                                                                         I t                             //           -**




                                                                                 «•            yy $           r*nr>
                                                                                               Qoaqy )

                                                                                                                                                                                                    if
                                                                                                              Thoi'nhili

                                                'SMgsbroi

                                                                                               ThorrtW




                                                                                                                                                                                  * < , 1            F

                           *£^h a si                                                                                                         W        &     itW      &        M          y * K
                             tl 1 S J 4 K * .                                                                                                                0 * f i S $ » f e r ...
                                                                        _-s • 5..W4
                             \ ai J5 l_ ? - v


               V^-3Tr5Z5^-^

 -             -rJ ET __                    £>' *,
                                                 holmes
-----------J     U"/®*nas      \             ; . >Colliery
                                         -' •!..
                                                  jliStJea)                                                                      _   owjo^r*
                                                                                                                                                             fWafc^i




                    Worrs
                                                                                                                                                 ■jDenietery^

                                                                                                                                              60&/e
                                                                                                                                                                            p o M c fvf
                                                                                                                                                           ^ct^e.*,rt7/n^c//€?
                                                                                                          r■— 1■1 -y.fcg g                        :Moscorb
                                                                                                              I1         n
                                                                                                                                                          "* '''»)Otofie/'W<\

                                                                                                             \ •/ne£25*5ss*                                                          C   *3

                                                                                                          •- II       *1%::i'' ;                                                    e ^m      '” *t""
                            tf«sp<»                            •>, i,
                                   Sports         G r o u n d -\ A
                                                                                                                                                               =. . ■■: l\
                                                                                                     WOrksZ^\'\           \V.                                  3 :i/,f      'A           r ? 1; .
                                                                                                                                                               2 : . ’        v,     R -otherhjrfi G»-
                                                                                                                                                                  !iW*.          *\          Ho«r>;'ai;
                                                                                                                                                                                  ;\.pckn-oo-jhi-::
                               S          Sports Ground                                                                                                           **
                                                                                                                                                                   *r
                                                                                                                                                                    •f41*
                                                                                                                                                                        «
                               Cnckec                                                                                                                             4 1*
                               Grcuns                                       %                   ^              .                                                  t«^\,V
                                                                                                                                                                       tf**        ••”\• hasp-tat,
                                                                                                                                                                                            r ^
                                                                Canklow \-                                    H
                                                                                                                                "" P A,--Tf]k l                   o "Sti
                                                                 o   — r   <^,        * - 'V     \   >    •           w                  *        I                 : £\
                                                                                                                                     /       W O O D                  K\'.

                                                     s.<r’)1
                                                  Ambulance               Service Emergency
                                                  Route




                                                                                                                                                            3S




                                                                                                                      A
                                                                      ¥/,

                                                                          bcr>s!Pnm'j
                                                                          T norrtiill
                                                                            Orovna



                     _  —-ftiuisO)S 'V>JL
                     Ferham'\-^&iv.fWas
                                     -®o>                       '
                                                                college

                 E&MAM                                         ■tp Jp s u o h
                            ■JrJiT RE_j                                   f-                                   ? ? W ® h & T t * £ : & ¥ ■****■                             _   _
                                                                                                                                             ^*^4/2

                                                     'J-pcm*a"3%■          S-3




                                       m'hoCoiner
                                           i/ries
iff   «
                                                                                                                               osj



                                                               run




          Lee/      Warns
                                                                                                                      fis n e t e j v :
                                                                                                                      - ^-S'S? «*
                                                                                                                     ton’>
                                                                                                                    CasUt &
                 «Ufarrtj                                                                                                 Mostpn,
                                                                                            I I ; tasSsS' ft               \Itrrfc . .
                                                                            i     V,        I O   > E 5 S E 3 f;              - °'\- ''C%- Reservoir
                                                                                   m
                                                                                        ■
                                                                                            » n/ ■^'-* .£. s.
                                                                                                        5? Tx2 »
                                                                                                                                          VJ ,!V                  ■£■ uakrtOQQ
                                                                                        ' 1 //    3 ^ -                                       "■'\ "A               lT -Ss: & v "
                                                                                                                                          &         i\          ■*■ -
                     Ui      S/5o r    ts   Gr o und      >■
                                                          \
                                                      X                                                                                   i;a ::
                                                                                Works^^.,\
                                                                                                                                                         ”, \     Rotherham Ger,
                                       Sp<Jt t S Ground                                                                                       $4*          - v.         Hospital
                                                                                                                                        5 V- * ~2*"OOdHC.i ^
                            iCocxec.
                             GfCurta                                                                                                ... :oV*" '*■.'■'
                                                                                                                              » .s.* +!?A.*              y ^ iK
                                                                                                                          K     L         O      ft;

                                                                                                                   W O O D                       l?A            1   ‘l l ^ T
CONTROL ACTION IN EVENT OF MAJOR INCIDENT AT ..QAKWELL..................
                                               BARNSLEY FOOTBALL GROUND


       Despatch crew to location to establish nature of incident,
       exact location, establish link with Police.


        Contact: P/P. I       (designated officer for                    :s at
                           .
        . OA KWE................ nQt available contact
        (second responsible officer).


3.     Despatch number of available crews to . .??kGI^VE R O A D ........
       (Parking Point). This area is kept clear of all traffic on
       match days.      There is available parking at this location for
       .1 9 ? . ......... ambulances.


4.     Notify Duty Officer.


5.      On arrival at ground ..§(9.L— ... 1....... after consultation with
        Police, will establish patient treatment and loading point at
       MAIN E N H A N C E . .. .which is located at GROVE .STREET,.. .*........ ..
                                                    BELGRAVE ROAD

6.     Station Officer to update Control.


7.     Any extra crews that may be available should be stood by at
          BARNSLEY DISTRICT GENERAL HOSPITAL


8.     The route to . .?fRN§LEY.DISTRICT .GENERAL      Hospital f r o m ......
               .................   that the Police will try to maintain will
       v_   GROVE STREET, PONTEFRACT ROAD, HARBRO HILL, OLD MILL LANE,
          VICTORIA. ROAD,.GAWBER.ROAD.................... .............
       This route will also be used by the Fire Brigade.




N.B.     If on arrival at the scene, the incident warrants special
         resources and manpower, the major incident plan will need to
         be considered.
                                                                   •\ \ \                                                                    '                                   t i U !   U U J       V U < ft »

                                                                                                                                                                                           .h ill                                                                        Lot
                                                                   ■ w       w jg L
                                                                       * \\ 4‘  1
                                                                                                                                                    >./

                                                                               S 'i i
                                                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                                         Jo&-A- . \J- v----/oV-----
                                                                         -C- •'/ ,!^
                                                                                    i* /    v. -^ \
                                                                                                      ^     ~
                                                                                                           »_
                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    \ \\^
                                                                                                                            \            / ^ r
                                                                                                                                         /— /
                                                                                                                                                          •••' i>
                                                                                                                                                          »*;       \%v                   fi                        1   N 1T *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ■"'v ••
:^ ' A                         p ;s € ( ^ s / M & r y ^ M                                                                                    1      -K                             jf *                                                                                  rj




                                                                              <-•-' I :i 1            \                                  /                      .            .                                                                         sports
r-v V-              • \ (o O            •                          •/tyr?:.:;v§j                                            /
                                                                                                                                                                                              .,. ■Queen's ■
•
    -■:
                         ^ 1f. ' '•'j-'
                             i — 'v
         , V ; V * cV * i — »*• - • *
                                            r r ,.-/.<■:•
                                                            . C ' S A V ' v :
                                                                       -<.\
                                                                 J f'ZA f a # r.l /
                                                                                                  !i
                                                                                                  /
                                                                                     * . • / / / /l
                                                                                                            ’
                                                                                                                U       / (
                                                                                                                        ///      >’
                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                           Recreation Ground                                           ! C/?'/.
    ,.   .-',.1 ^- ;—»• 4 -,jc V j ■■?                           / V-\ V'z';{>.'</ .4      / 11 /
                                                                       W sm U U l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J H i
-    •_______
           • •       *i
                      •            ;•                       )'.
                                                              ,•*;:
                                                                  , ■    , .»J i•-'
                                                                                  t-
                                                                                   **;/
                                                                                      H    "•Mm
                                                                                           ILI V* * I * . 1<
          - ‘- r r *                                        J -i                  x \ :• \ T‘ -*         / a                                                                                 LS.8 .A v
                                                     X :v K                    X X s^ *                                                                    .'(•;<                /■;'•/    ! I   /o/~rr ^ t ~ T ri‘w ! / /
                                  A f b''A,

                                                                                                      V      7          /
                                                                                                                            f U • \V:
                                                                                                                                                          l f W
                                                                                                                                                          iki'-'/*/

                                                                                                                                                           0 clyW.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   r&y
                                                                                                                                                                                                             w      A-^yty C

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        / i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cfd. /

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ?i>y Ground
                                                                                                                                  \r-^                    \T ^ < r \ ^                             %
                                                   v\ \
                                                   \\ y ^ v                                                         [\
                                                                                                                    \^ X ^ V ; '
                                                                                                                                   \-v\
                                                                                                                                                      X             ‘ -> '
                                                  :X )       /     \                              V                                                                                                                              deevor />
                                                                                                            I /         \? 'S V \ . .                                                                                             HqII ^
                                                                                                            L '                 4.           V,»^




                   /
                 ^Va          (             /
                                                ;X'^>              S A                 /v



                                                                                           (.3)            '"tf!                                                                  i"'\ ,                                 I
                                                                                       cr4 J \ ^                                         ^           \                                                                                   .<•   ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       j •-'/'/<'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4       *« .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /,^V     /_ /
                                                                                                          r\.                                                                                                h ^                   0    ^ : : ; ^ ^ /r/
CONTROL ACTION IN EVENT OF MAJOR INCIDENT AT BRAMALL LANE FOOTBALL GROUND




1.     Despatch crew to location to establish nature of incident,
       exact location, establish link with Police.


2.     Contact S/0 Higgins (designated officer for incidents at
       S.U.F.C).  If not available contact S/0         |(Second
       responsible officer).


3.     Despatch number of available crews to Cherry Street (Parking
       Point). This area is kept clear of all traffic on match days.
       There is available parking at this location for eight ambulances.




4.     Notify Duty Officer.




5.     On arrival at ground S/0 Higgins, after consultation with Police
       will establish patient treatment and loading point at S.U.F.C. Gym
       which is located at the Bramall Lane end of Cherry Street.




6.     Station Officer to update Control.




7.     Any extra crews that may be available should be stood by at
       Royal Hallamshire Hospital.




8.      The route to Royal Hallamshire Hospital from Bramall Lane that the
         Police will try to maintain will be Bramall Lane, St. Marys
       J j p p a r Hanover Street. This route will also be used by the Fire
         Brigade.           w A 'i




N.B.    If on arrival at the scene, the incident warrants special
        resources and manpower, the major incident plan will need to
        be considered.
                                                                  /1 ^>
                                                                  UtfTeA Mor&r^A-b)
    CONTROL ACTION IN THE EVENT OF A MAJOR INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY -
    HILLSBOROUGH




    1   Despatch crew to location to establish nature of incident, exact
         location, establish link with Police.


 2      Contact Station Officer Higgins (designated officer for incidents at
        Hillsborough).  If not available contact Station Officer Eason
        (second responsible officer).


 3      Despatch number of available crews to Herries Road Bus Depot (Parking
         point). This area is kept clear of all traffic on match days. There
         is available parking at this location for 10 + ambulances.


4       Notify Duty Officer


5       On arrival at ground, Station Officer Higgins,   after consultation
        with Police, will establish patient treatment and loading point at
        Gymnasium which is located at rear of north stand off Penistone Road
        North.


6       Station Officer to update Control


7       Any extra crews that may be available should be stood by at Longley
        Ambulance Station.


8       The route to Northern General Hospital from Hillsborough that the
        Police will try to maintain will be Herries Road South, Herries Road,
        Barnsley Road.




NB      If on arrival at the scene, the incident warrants special resources
        and manpower, the major incident plan will need to be considered.




                                   03
■ £ >
-V ’>o h ‘i s / d        W s o 'n e s o 'o y    F .C .

       H ilt s b o r o u gh Gro un o'
                                                                                                      • FIRST-AlO
                                                                                                         ROCM
                                                                                                  _    _   1
                                                                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                       Gytnrifjsiua

                                                                             i____


                                                                                  H O X TH S7AN0                     '•a^g,                •\ \ ^   v
               !t                                                                                                                            \ i flA N                         I
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                      S               ii,i
                                                                                                                                         |]&£A              \       -73
                                                                                                                      "'I1™ '           'I '^   v   X   a       \    o     \

        //     h    '•
                                                                                                                    'C
                                                                                                                     1‘ifiPr
* 0


-r       '#//                                            ii!                                                                   '!•'

                                                                                                                               :h
                                                          i*!
                                   \
                                                                                                                     »'I I •
                                                                                                                     iV\
      A w *y    f AM5    E K lT ^ q ^

        A no        ENecosotes                                  ■ ""




                                                                                        301/77/ 57VOY6
                                                                                                                                                                          'jTWJ' P4


                                            m/ff
                                           CONTROL                     orr/c/AL


                                                                             om cro.Q 's
                                                                             I n TRA n CC
  'N                TWIST!LtS             rrrT" 7
                                 Halifax Road



UADSLEY BRIDGE STATION




                      Ovhrtr •
                      I     »
                            «1
          St«4t«a
        COACH FAtft
 S.V.F.C.             Hillsbro1



 Evacuation             of          casualties             in     the        event     of     a         major     incident.




 Duty      Officer, responsible                            for    the        ground,         to         be     alerted,




 Herries          road         'bus'             garage          to be used           to     house             ambulances

 sent      to         scene.


 Frotball              ground          gy~nasium            to    be     used        as casualty                clearing      post,


Vehicles              sent         frora         bus       depot as and              \;hen    required             via     Herries

road,         fenistcne                road      Ecrth             ar.d into          first             large    gateway

leading           to       gymnasium,                reversing          up     to     single             door    situated

at      the       end        of        the      gym.



Routes           to     be         taker*       tc        hr spiral      casualr:* re-art-er. " ,


Priority               rruteto            I. cithern         '."-er.eral      Hcsrital        via             Herries     road

South,        Herries               readand           darnel~y             read      ir.tr          r^t ir-.1       :r:~

3p. rT,? "L-•v    v*o °d.          aT- “t ■
                                          *"- **r&    i           ~t     -                        ; ©




Seccr.dar-j            m     t e                 to       Rr~al     Hall -..-.-hire tal                 via      :-e'isr:ne      rc.-

}•'crth,      Per.istor.e               road,         ohales I.:cr,            Kc”le        sir- t,            .»#<*«•*— Htil,

'.'ester".       larh,             Slarhsor.               rr-et,        ,1c--:: rr -d              \ . i.-ro            1- -rnt
SYMAS Control Log for 15th April 1989
SYMAS Control Log for 15th April 1989
   G1769


                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                                       1&
                                                                                                                                                       (Page num ber£/-j   )


                                                                            LOG

      DATE                         TIME               ORIGIN                        ITEM                                                 REMARKS                  SIGNATURI


  /

 —    a                                                                       'S " ' rv    _ \_ v                    X‘




                             <?/     QjO                           ^ )^ p .a ^ ^                                 c L .^                  &i£c.cf
                                                                                     <-(

i i f b-      $ °i       X    -L    C O         C-OvvV'i C-      W t \ va ci.oo e                       c   O v \ v t)      x
                                                                                                                          .11                    o w




                                          O                      Si 41- ClX/liA. ''V'VA^                ^    I      ^^           t. C   kj<        (   k


Ih         O h - % ci   C ^ O                  Ccry 'i/V (?    / V -V -rn     ■   C        p    t.   V4
                                                                              J
                                                                ^ ** . r ^ !'C / Ok            a*-/ o

                        <D & -2 , S'           u&rt S*'                                                   o° ^ w7
                                              ticjdcr~*j ^ ^   S o o {'. (c / /   o-<u_°/ /v^       t /J                        a .'
                                                                                                                                       a?, o r
                                                                Q Cl^r^ I, K       (^n^dtrL </v/tmcn-Q
                                                               ^rVcSL.'it u   O   C<7<!
  form No. AS4
                             *                                                            •
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                                                                                                                (Page numJaer

                                                                  LOG                                                                                  IMu
           TIME               ORIGIN
                                                                               ITEM
                                                                                                                               REMARKS

 6   L- H o
                                                                                 T                                                     T
                                              9          S        ■      S
                                             i/ ^                       (0 >              ^ h ‘f A-0
                                                /ti<>         *l*eJu> ~~^cLc^r^ei                  ^foa/
                                                                                                                                                        X
0 -6 X S                                                                                                                                                 \
                         t /r- ('   .
                                                            (L*Li Cn^ S c./'i
                                                    /?   /.
                                                            CM-                r-»
                                                                         C> /v <o L^ 'jj
                                                                                                                 ^cHcrxc                   <V>yv

                                                ^ ^cUsU-                     '~^yt~                     fee-v^

02     3    ^       <To>Va^             .
                                            / l L -0         J j -’ c .t-L C-LiJ- 'i <—       t Hs-Jc

                                                clJbi. c/tvc,                        0-   Gttvsy h>^
                                                                X)


                                            OcX^OlV   ^l-icrt-^oX^A Cc>-^£ ^q£^2*J7
                                              W     '            s/                                              O'?    2     3



                                                                                                                       C fti#

Ho H               ^cr> 'f *-o&-
                                                             ^L)aJo?         ^                                              S l J q_   / ( i> 0 U«S



m l               (o>- f •yssti-?
                                            $   .    1   ■




                                                     £_JLp               (Cb-try^             (2.1$CL+-r*2t
 G 1769
                                          •                       •
                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                                                                         (Page number    )

                                                                                                                                                                                               A/ S
                                                                                                               LOG
      DATE                TIME                   ORIGIN                                                                    ITEM                                          REMARKS                  SIGNATURE


                     m     l                                                                         Mfi.   Met               r J j Slt-x

                                                                                                                 d            R
                    tIZo          Co-,Mf he-i-1 ■                                                tp?           k <~V\S <T>v 'U<

                    11 a'c          m      ’     f t '- * '       .                              )y]a                /C.C.^)           f;<i- ^ / i              %
                                                                                                                                                               A-c/* S\-   i-c   ilS~Cf//ZS




                                                                                                                  c /t/*


                    /33«r>
                                 (cry'fa*                                                                                                                        £ £"C      [
                                                                                                     A7/C
tfi


      H-        I
                                     (v/o\4
                                                                                                P           CcA\'v£                          to       iVSVXH
                                                                                                                                                          cv
                                                                                                                                   iL



                1   U O
                                         c Lay
                                                                                                "v&         \v.vW .               D'P'




      M                                 o r_ _ Q _ ,          C       o   v   x   V   r o   ^
                                                                                                ~I*\C C Cc<LCv"Ct              lf2cpr> qr*c=£rA -cC$“



                                                                                                kx\i            o ttlo c x c v         q r o o .x c i ^
                                                                                                vn                     _               O              J
                                                                                                lEc^or^tr     .from                       r orrt'_
FolSn No. AS4                                                                                   C ^ v ^ \ • -tVxodr                       ‘
                                                                                                                                          W-*e- O
                                                                                                                 V--t-‘ r>- ., ,- *—        r r
       G ! 769



                                    SOUTH V^.KSHIRE METROPOLITAN AM^uANCE SERVICE                                                                           (Page number

                                                                                                                                                                 M / r.
                                                                      LOG
           DATE          TIME             ORIGIN                               ITEM
                                                                                                                                     REMARKS                          SIGNA7

\ c > • M;
                     ■3 \ a S        c \
                                     V   <QKkJ^' r-C~K
                                                                   X? f \ C'u u-V "TX2
                                                                                                                                            ?   5




                                                         \^v<V\o ^                ^ ^        D ^vt     K          C-COXJ-iL'VC

                                                         \^S^v \C V* v ^ 3 .
                              \ v

                                                         VCs^O.v^                     § C 1o'^Tv>A         vtv4_ c r X )            tA D v J 7 *^ v v v__
-T
                                                              vL \ v . C ^        ^                   V-                 .    ito       r
                                                                                                                         V.

                                                                                                                 c                  ^           \
                                                         ^   o V .C     -c v                           r
                                                                                         r
                                                                                      Ox                     v .\,\_«.5j            Va v^O*s>^"'^




                    . 4 5 0   Vo                         u                                                                                                  tH

                                                         VmnvjlA      Wc       ClVx lo                 ^                            v C \j?A<
                                                                                                                r-\ •< ( r^5»
                                                                                                                ,.3^3                           c>
                                                                          (T   tV c -b v v .f\




                    •3v3>\>                                                                      a.
                                                                                                  a
     Form No. AS4
                                                                   ou\ a X                           ^y\    5        0    - \ V <v ^ r
                                                                                                                           &           }
                                    S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E A ffT flO F O L iT A iN A M B U L A N C E S E R V IC E                                (Page number

                                                                                                                                                        14 .
                                                                              LOG

          DATE               TIME            ORIGIN                                      ITEM                                              REMARKS             SIGNA1


                                    P
                                    V— (S
                                          (N 3iV-M.‘ 4           ^    I   O    v   U')     vL.               W \         A   ^    0    <bv\. tst
                    c?vlV»                                   -
                                                                           Mi ,v V o                ^          \     \       k>JxA<\C
                                                                 ^ j D Vc ^ ■ c a c N                   ^     2      ^                2 I             &
V\



S'                  1   1     (K)                                           -&A vk^ K
                                                                          ''VvQU,




'5     ’ *4 •       'X'l *i. o                   ic O w $                                                   (A/ivv\
                                                                                                                                 cr
                                                         \
                                                                       lUrWc^                                                         Cl

                        ~>-5  C
                        <—c _
                                     v— o »~-i—< /c^
                                                 n
                                                     _
                                                                 /fe o o ~ o 2 o c -      C . ~ms,i—v.-> f t . -


                                                                 >’ •I’-           *<                        '>/.,
                                                                                                                   i7r                     /
                                                                 c >> 'T,-<                                  .
                                                                                                                                 / V ^ / r -/

 X   p v \n   AC,
SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                                                    (Page number    )


                            LOG
     ORIGIN
                                                                          REMARKS             SIGNATU

                                                                               5

         (}P    J   , . ■


               k m y / l         (\




                    C^(/v    LA j
                                                 oMvvj

               L- ui-ic^H               oW      xjl
                                                       <-o
                                                                 °f7.      D,

c     Hy \(A         (V i             CVv        %\      ••
                                                                 j.H        ii,*_

                                                                  —) I/Vva!l/V_X>

                                                             0
                                            &    c .    ({

                      •rt   U:
SYMAS Special Incident Log for 15th April 1989
                                                          s~>               4„r>y^
                                                                                                              V?

                 \V v ^ V / v V v t f c V ^ u -   4 ,   C W   A j ' f l" ^                            \ ^ 0 \          ■




e -   is s ° \ .        IS\ 8 L          •^orcca, Qa^dftot^   " X r v C X L C e tllv r *   Q>£Xs(£tec\       . d d h


                                                              Sjfrv                          K^piVxcjs
                                                              bx\ i      6 4 <f»t^oouLA.     c j r o o * \c i ^
                                                              'G^poa-x?               ^Tror>r> Ilorc^—
  Form No. AS4                                                                    * "tYvodr    Vkje.Cs
                       : uU TH Y f ^ S H I R E METROPOLITAN A M E ^ A N C E SERVICE

                                                                 LOG
     DATE      TIM E         ORIGIN                                            ITEM
                                                                                                                                              REMARKS


                                          people                       i o ^ v<.. o                          \A

                                         tnvo.                                     ..rooxbeu^
                                                                                                                            A
                                          ftiP W ck                5                  Sc^iACL.^ ~ r u ^ < r

                                                   ^        ^      mo>cxx\.»s«.a ~Vr>Sc^xL
                                                                ~    i*   ^     ^ </        7
                                                                                                  £f>ox-
                                                                o ^ s v o a $ i a 0 <b ^ b o s y.\<yr -—
                                                                                                                                tfgo ' -
                                                                                                             fcS l
                                                              R S o S ' 5 5 L o ^ 55Q^p\ g,5QL                                  /€S't>(lt -
                                                                                                                                £ 1207. —
                                                            'OprA\;etjo rtXcA^o\^}(?
                                         I°          S ” C?_A v o „ <■

                                                           C a o V ic o - J f c - Q 'o     Iw      m         c x j- e c 4
                                                        rvAd.c!l           .


                                                                               A i w b o a a ^ Scladi 2 2 _
                                         Of\©taf lirl.-v^                      boa        V.^c.wcd.uv3
                                         r>vo_
                                                                               e^-^jcor.                 cau^d


                                         i ' s x j C b v V v . ^ V x > J fr%   A v V v VO m J lC iA -C O -
                                         Tvoo                   \J e c K C c V c o           <oxv
                                         ~To                  IrA c n s l o r o
                                         COVW^                         \JeCLUa CVo. {YXc^fci-l\^aC„


                                         fY ^ e d x ^ c u                 -h g s x w o        on        Ccxxte
Form No. AS4
                                         'V'nt-«v'\                                         £>v\rV-V~ tvjc^an
                                                                                                                                                                 S#l4Ss:*-:
                                                                                                                                          I1: * * ’.*'-- ' i t


                                            s S D 'C l T H f ^ '
                                                                                      ,: J f t , : 2.,                                                                                                           (Page number




                                                       •>I.»,  ORIGIN''                                                                                                      ITEM
                                   jfior-K*.J.:3. ^
                 fci’iSMsiSCJ->?;i■■                       4 -^ur<win
                                                                                                               ':'^A.f.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       REMARKS             SIGNATUR

                                                                                                               V-fe' y •.                              .'.'■
                                                                                                                                 -■■■■■ W*;'                     *. '

                            i i M t a l
                 |S ii® S                                                                                               \ ■
                                                   m ^ iW m                                                                                                                    VY^c AqdlA CSeoi “Vo
                                                                   •:
                                                                    v.;«lfe^g g p
                                                                                                                  on                       ^jbe                         -
                                                                                                               .m
                                                                                 J jf*
                                                                                                               A          4     -fbrtk*r                                 5     oejcvuejuio o v < H
                       ■'■■■.'I,v.     ‘
                                     il'ti')■;;?S
                                                  '•iV-i'.-’-v--■■,
                                                                  ‘■'.’-•/•                         ;|V--'.   3                 motoCvroart) c m a                                       etc^e^
                                                   " ' - '\ ’ T*1^•, ',*-j*' -■■ ■ -■•'                  ^    fbixce.
                                                                                                              'i vti            ■' ■'■ ':4;-'l'Vf ■
                                                                                                              r?**'•;•%.' •'-
                                                                                                                                    •fcv-^'VA.*'                 • 'V




                                                  lSl|®i$l
                                                  iy   :•?'•>;l£$?                        ..,
                                                                                                                                                                               ofPicaj S cy^scjiAc /
                                                                                                              Afc lW.i^CXiudb M
      m*:m                                                                                                                                                              ....
                iHST^S                                                                                        aj“*--X;ro<*JK»_ “TPO                                                 COAsbteH .


                 W K « » ' \ r 5 : ^
                                                                                                                                                                               VJSCV\fcAOs>-©\
                 3 ’t K ®


                                                                                                                                                                                       -P^obodLxA

                    KH&till
                 ,1 '•'■•* '•''■■•-.“'
                                     . ••"•'-!$

                                                                                                                                                                    WveV^joLUa^rA “T o

Form M#> A<{4
  61769
                       ^                                              € •
               SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                                                                   (Page number


                                         LOG
      DATE          ORIGIN                          ITEM
                                                                                         REMARKS             SIGNATUR




 -tl                                   •P u jrc k c r'       CoSoouJtv^o Vo
                              be_      Ccwoe^dL               “TO              •

                             IP^U     vj<vex^vextto *Xvvfortv<?c-|


                             “Hoes       VfeeWcj^D                  Coie*^
                             O vxjt
                                                                    5 .
                                                     -fbr e*VS£fXj«,\Cs^"b




                                      A(rv\t)^x<xvCiio              c?n   JCC2 .0 x> ,




                                       ^CUJJCX-VCJ       3   ^ or'^Q
                                      ' B o e v ^ cx^i          Voge.v

                                      v                      tccmt w?xl / W a
                             ^O-ffcjuJde-vj   «■
Form No. AS4
61769
                                                                                %
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                       (Page number


                                                       LOG
     DATE      TIME        ORIGIN                               ITEM                                     REMARKS                     SIGNATUR




                                                       c_o.cs.o_ocx     cd



                                                       cuwe* q>_xoCc. XvvJ o (



                                    Rll       \JecihjLc\ao ■                             “to
                                    o   Cs a o .       ix>     roivclaoi e ^ P ext

                                                              (jjo jc u ^ 2 ,   O fV   M e /^ u tc




                                                                                                     /j llsrO   {& C f ■


                                                                                                     f*' ^           ’
                                    (JC|' k        /                            (Q




Form No. AS4
   61769
                                                                                                                                     c
                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                                                    (Page number

                                                                                              LOG
      DATE                        TIME                 ORIGIN                                                   ITEM
                                                                                                                                                                    REMARKS             SIGNATUR
           1
                                    2                          3                                                 4                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                         /7   o   5 .
                                            lA c I d Q.At* O ff , C CiT       5 ic v \ c 'i     Ca k ;(|                    vj / y

                                                                                                                                                         j
                                                                              ^                                                      4    K t W , r




                     I ~l •             .
                                            A i / O l - XC-v

                                                                              C U        10        / u r '             ; ^ ( o           M -c    (v
                                                                              C o /            j \ j *\                ,       .
                                                                                                                           T              CV \ ^ - ,     ■ V.
                                                                              ^\Q rv }                                                                          1




                                                                                               3          .•*              C'* i * v


                 ■                                                        C '^ v \            /V ^ r W f V C , ,
                                                                                                           0

                     n        e i



                                                                              ^ecjc<4.



                                                                   •
                                                                          S 130£                   0^ e           0 c w                    1    ^ . tv
form No.   AS4
                                                                          f          i
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                  (Page number    )


                                                                    LOG
      DATE               TIME            ORIGIN                              ITEM                               REMARKS                   SIGNATURI



                                                  S \               f                    C^CXOi ) -

                                                   /                        to       (be - A'j       c




                 1%
                                                  f *£0 vrLA-?r\(- cJ~                  ( ;v,    v
vl
                                                  ~i^CxC>'o              iAcmac -<-\\       c

                                                        t       ,




                                                  C o r \C . r r * v ^      ~K)oC\         t jc ’
                1% -£rs.         i A I




                /%'S S ’
                                                              f\C^                          oc k-t- t

                                                  to                    .



                O s t r t >
                                          LC'
                                                                                                         >-*•          I. -v . <•' '*
                                                  • ^ “7       i»-rrG       &.-7ti2uhir} ^>STCi<.^
 Form No. AS4                                                                                                   /C .
 61769
                                         *%                                                        <” #

                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                                                    (Page number       )


                                                                           LOG
     DATE            TIME          ORIGIN                                            ITEM                                                   REMARKS                     SIGNATUR
         1             2             3                                                   4                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                             6
               3^    3 .0                             /J k A fv ?           2.       m e -A ; L           -r-_.


               ZLo

                                                     ^           -*7“ y,         ,                                      /
                             ^ 3




                                         J

                                                                                                                            v     C v - j V ' t \ < l <- \    ,

                                                                                                                                   V
                                                                                                                                   x—> U- (
                                                                                                                                          U C
                                                                                                                                            V-        c». >  ~
                                                     C X ^ o e J l                   ^              ^               ^

                                                                                                                            J U         55
                                                                                             ^            ' ^           v

                                                                                                                                Vc (^   A tfC rVvc*
                                                     S ^ A )            V .U .       L <         V C * ^        ^
                                                 i




                                                      (L                    V lv /t/V o W *                                 V ^ d           U r   -
                                                               \^ > v                                                                                 U

                                                                                                                            C C t*v.c!s t i. Ca'
                                                     <6    :       ^         .       ^                    ^


                                                                                                                            ^ W     t   •


                                             •


Form No. AS4
     61769



                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                                                                    (Page number    )


                                                                              LOG
         DATE              TIME              ORIGIN                                    ITEM                                      REMARKS                          SIGNATUR
             1                 2               3

£    '   V S0*-            '   U ^\
                                       W p -R a n               ,



*5 '                       ' B>o                   2_
                                                                           OLe. (A i1 1 ^       I                i..                    ■ V   i ;
JD                                                                                                                         V ‘ -i



^    •   4 .g * s       CrO G ^        ("W                                      &   g c   L '           io i




lo *                    £>Vo2         ftlf L       i                % ■        SicreUjU)            W
                                                                                                                             I W O VMr I/'




 (? •    M   •   $° ]   aVcA           W       X            i       \1 —                                V l J L A (y            \'Y"- <jA;
                                                                                                                                        4,,   A



ife                     o^ il          m ^ a           -)                                                       n      3     lA'VfV, tA             i
                                                   •

    FormNn AS4
    61769


                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE                              (Page number     )


                                                      LOG

        DATE           TIME           ORIGIN                ITEM                                  REMARKS              SIGNATUR

                                                             H
                                               1                           ^ V V Xi W      (/




                                 /f
                   o ’S ' i b
                                                   W a '               I        V v.

O
                                                                                (/ ■ ' W   V...    , I


                                                                   ^       IW     Iff               I

                                                                                           /




    Form No. AS4
                                                                 H
                                                  C                   Ofcj   o R S "b>vA_Tlf?X^

              Vtt4                      ~ - 0         Cc^wc-


t^ . 0 (o. ‘’BUuA-vc-.
• :.< — t  i— . - ..* .
  *            tifw     *
     V-o    T>tnx*-
 <&oS       tiirV'TA,
 ^>oi        DecrA
 t>Ol         &M*r?D.
 S b S       Q omiso
 2    c 3    S r a ^ A -
t>c7         <£.©wieo            5/h„
3 o S       S /c 2 ^ 2   a   *
(Slf         %l£>£fcA-           ^OfKlfo           C H SenS ‘^cr<L "^cTVU r i T fc       ^fj>£
l” i        3 & W o .


/k J 5 j» . 8<P5 -oas-A                         -D ^ M                fet.   ( o , a ^ c ^ r /L e e .
                                                litrrtf £Wt* 2 KJ^.    IKlPoo2 u.||^>.            ATfpo
Control    "Pink   Cards"   relating   to   Hillsborough
Disaster
J      Relevant Vehicle Logs for 15th April 1989
Page   Ambulance Call Sign
1

5
10
12
13
16
18
19
20
22
24
25
32
33
36
37
38
41
44
46
48
50
54
55
57
61
64
69
73
79
81
82
84
Major Incident Vehicle - Inventory
                                                          fttblk
                                                            (jMMULUA/ ca            CiaJ m . ( J aJLJUMJ#)

                                                                    ICULjA                        /Ui^
                           MAJOR INCIDENT VEHICLE - INVENTORY
                                                                     rffttp'                             J


                                                                                          -tyuf      .
CATEGORY                        ITEM                                        NUMBER      tijsUMd * ^ r j Ko/>

Administration                 Clipboards                                   10
                               Incident log sheets                          50      Sfo
                               Lined paper                                  -
                               Major incident form                          -
                               Pencils                                      24

                               Medical Gasses & Equipment
Aini^lance Aid Equipment       Airway, size 1                               89      %idi <4* & *****
                               Airway, size 2                              §06,          Aa*I4 u/sU)<£
                               A i r w M y , s‘ize '3 '                     95
                               Entonox          ^44   '                      6
                               Entonox head & tube                            I
                               Flynn oxygen ventilator                        1
                               Oxygen, size F                               30
                               Oxygen tubes                                  8

                               Carrying Equipment

                               Blankets (new)                              40
                               Blankets (old)                              32
                               Carrying poles                              20
                               Thermal wrap emergency blankets,
                                                   paediatric                   5
                               Thermal wrap green sheet,
                                                  hospital                 72
                               Neil Robertson                               5
                               Orange emergency stretcher                   1
                               Scoop stretcher                              2
                               Shroud covers                               25
                               White sheets, hospital                      11
                               Thermal wrap emergency blankets,
                                                       adult                3

                               D ressings

                               Burns sheets                             30
                               Cotton wool                              24
                               Dressings    1                          125
                               Dressings   2                           216
                               Dressings   3                           176
                               Gauze, I metre (packs)                    7
                               Maternity packs                           2
                               Triangular bandages                     144

                               Splints

                               Cervical collars                            46
                               Frae-pac                                    I1
                               Hayes splints                                J
                                                                        SHEET 2
     v




CATEGORY              ITEM                                         NUMBER



Personal Safety       A mb ul a n c e O f f i c e r   incident
                                                      j acke t
                      Blue hard hat

                      C h e m i c a l suits                         9
                      De bris gloves                               11
                      F u l l - l e n g t h y e ll o w luminous
                                                       j acke ts   20
                      H.V. jacket                                   4
                      Rubber gloves, heavy duty                     4 (pairs)
                      W a r n i n g triangles                       2
                      White har d hat                               4
                      Y e l l o w hard hat                         20

lescl^H.Cit           Bolt crops (large)                            1

                      Bottle jack                                   1

                      Fireman's axe                                 2
                      Hammers, 141b.                                2
                      Lashings                                      2
                      Philips screwdriver,                10"       1

                      Wrecking bars                                 2
                      Saws, G.P.                                    3
                      Stillson wrench, 18"                          1



-mergency signs       Ambulance loading point                       2
                      Casualty collecting station                   1

                      First aid supplies                            1

                      Parking point                                 1



L s ce ll an e ou s   Bat te ri es                                  6
                      De -icer                                      1

                      Flasks                                        2
                      Fire exti ng u is he r                        2
                      HYGI wipes (packe)                            2
                      Identity jackets                             30
                      Tissues (packs)                              2
                      Torches                                      2
                      T owels (hand)                               4
                      Wash basin
Photographs
     M a r k e d A and B.   The   approximate positions
     from which they were taken are shown on the
     plan.    Photograph B was taken from seat H137;
     SYMAS'   usual seats were T152     and   153,   from
     where the view is slightly better.
                                                                                                                   Main Police Access


       Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                                          Police
                                                                                                          R oojtk S
         Hillsborough Ground                                                                       Room


                                                                                       Gymnasium
                                                                                                                                        77-88
                                                                                                                                          73-76
                                                                                                                                          i S -   7 2
                                                                                                                                                                              cS
                                                                                  no rth stan d
                                                                                                                                                         i        ^   »   y




                                                                                                                                                                  4 9 -5 4
                                      1-16
       •   Co       1                                                                                                                                        '^   4 3 -4 8

•r '   £   '    ‘
                                v£7,                                                                                                                    A \  \\\
■i     & /,                                                                                                                                              \ \  ''XrA
!          /




                                                                                 Player's
                                                                                 Tunnel
Away Fans Entrance
       and Enclosures

                                                 £
                        Police Control       19-22                              S O U ltf'S TAND
                                                                 tn   B i   m



                                                     O fficial


                KEY

                TURNSTILES        P7777I                         Directors Entrance
                                                                                                                         Hv




                                                                                                             nmnicommb
                                                                                    •Ig . hanW metata ltd.
                                                                    ftm V O L V O




y * **■»».«                  pmnjry iH v m j m ; sstj




         -i. •. . , - -"'-- ■■'        ••   -   *-
                                                        *v ■: f : -
                                                                ~ --s


                                                                 afe
^W ARDS   e.lflhamei metaKHri
M      Correspondence
Page   Document                                         Date
1      Letter Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
       Officer to the football clubs    16th January 1986
       Letter Chairman Sheffield
       Wednesday to Chief
       Metropolitan Ambulance Officer   29th January 1986
3      Letter South Yorkshire Police
       to SYMAS with enclosure                 7th July 1986
13     Letter SYMAS to Sheffield
       Wednesday                             6th August 1986
14     Letter SYMAS to Sheffield
       Wednesday                                 April 1988
i6 th   J a n u a ry   1986




Dear Sir,

As a result of several incidents during the recent past, involving casualties
within Sports areas, I have decided to delegate one of my Officers the
specific task of liaison with the Football Clubs within the South Yorkshire
boundaries.

This Officer will have the task to ensure that advice and, if necessary,
training can be provided by this Service to members of your staff.  It is also
to be his responsibility to ensure that the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service are totally aware of the geography of your ground and of any
Incident Plans which you may have drawn up in order to ensure the safety of the
general public.

Obviously, in order for this task to be successful it is necessary for you to
accept,in principle, our involvement and I should be grateful if you would
consider this proposal and communicate with me when you have made a decision.

I will ensure that if you require a visit or any form of advice associated to
this suggestion an Officer will be made available to meet with you or your
colleagues to explain our intentions.

I look forward to hearing from you with any comments you may wish to make.

Y«*urs faithfully,




A • P '*5,w-------------------
Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
                                    Sheffield
                                   Wednesday
                                                                                       o
                                          Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
                            Telephone: (0742) 343123 Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.


  HEM/                                                                                               29th January 1986

  A.Page Esq.,F.A.S.I.,
  Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer,
  South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service,
  "Fairfield",
  Moorgate Road,
  R O T H E R H A M S60 2BQ .




  Dear Mr.Page,

          Thank you for your recent letter and of course we would like to co-operate
  with you in any way possible to improve your service at games played at our stadium.

          A copy of your letter and this reply is being sent to Mr.Dick Chester, our
  Secretary, and I should be pleased if you, or one of your officers, would communicate
  with Mr.Chester so that the m atter can be discussed further.

                                                       Yours sincerely,




                                                      hl.E.McCee,
                                                      Chairman.

                                                                                                                           \

                                                                                                                               \V
                                                                              «            ••’
                                                                                                                                \i
                                                                               V       -       ...                               V

  cc           Mr.R.H.Chester                                                      \                                                \


                                                                                       »
                                                                                       \   .



                          Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: R. H. Chester, Manager: H. Wilkinson.
Directors: M. Sheppard. J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron, G. K. Hulley.
                                              Oanfetai'aH in
                                                                                                                                                   £ x:    ^~\   ^




           South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                                  D IV IS IO N A L HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                                  WEST B A R G R E E N
                                                                                                                  SH EFFIELD           S1 2 D A
                                                                                                                  T E L E P H O N E ( 0 7 4 2 ) 7 8 522



           A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S T O BE A D D R E S S E D T O " T H E C H IE F S U P E R I N T E N D E N T "


                                                                                                                  YOUR REFERENCE

           Mr. J. Wilkinson,
           South Yorkshire Ambulance Service,                                                                     OUR REFERENCE                           D1/RMQ
           Moorgate Road,                                                                                         DATE                                    7 July 1986
           Rotherham.




                             J|v . ^
           EVACUATION OF SPORTS STADIA
           I have pleasure                    in            enclosing a copy of Appendix 1L 1                                         of our Force Standing Order
           on the policing                    of            football matches.   You will see                                          that it incorporates most of
           the points made                    by            Mr. Justice Popplewell following                                          the Bradford Fire.
           I hope that you can find the time to read through the Appendix prior to our
           meeting at Bramall Lane at 10.30 a.m. on Thursday 10 July 1986, as obviously it
           will assist our deliberations and hopefully, agreement, in respect of crowd safety
           during the forthcoming football season.
           I look forward to meeting you on Thursday but if there is any point on which you
           require further clarification, please do not hesitate to contact myself or
           Inspector Godwin at West Bar Police Station.




           Enc.




A D M /3   T H E O F F IC E R D E A L IN G W ITH T H IS CORRESPONDENCE IS                     ........                                                     EX TE N SIO N


                                                                                       3>
        ii   »
jta M
                                                                             \\ \ ^    Cj "NT-

                                                            35                                     (APPENDIX 'L*)

                                E V AC U AT I ON   OF       SPORTS         STADIA

                            Contingency         Plans           f o r ' E v a c u a t i on


It    is s t r e s s e d t h a t a l l   evacuation plans                         must       be    drawn   up    in
c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the f o l l o w i n g a g e n c i e s : -

3)      Fire     Br i g a d e
                                                            «

b)      ^ Amb u l a n c e    Service

c)      An     appropriate           o fficial         of       the    club      concerned
          !
d)       Statutory           Local     Authority            (Safety          Committee)

T o b e e f f e c t i v e a n y e v a c u a t i o n p l a n m u s t be r e c o g n i s e d b y a l l
t h o s e a g e n c i e s and l i a i s o n m e e t i n g s i n v o l v i n g r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s
from the agencies l i s t e d above,                    will      be t h e      mos t e f f i c i e n t
method of           achieving a workable,                 agreed contingency plan for
evacua t i o n .

An e s s e n t i a l  pre-requisite    to s u cc ess fu l                          evacuation         is     that
all  e x i t g a t e s a r e ma nned and u n l o c k e d .

It  s h o u l d be n o t e d t h a t e s c a p e r o u t e s f r o m i n d i v i d u a l                  grounds
ma y a l r e a d y be c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s .

It       is  appreciated that                    dealing            with     emergencies              requires
considerable f l e x i b i l i t y             a n d mu c h        will  d e p e n d on t h e         specific
n a t u r e of the i n c i d e n t .

In preparing            contingency plans                       for    evacuation            the     following
headings are            r ecommended.

i ,      Plan     of    t he    Ground

        A     plan         containing     detailed                     information   relevant   to
        e v a c u a t i o n is   essential     and                     consideration   should  be
        g i v e n to the i n c l u s i o n of the                     following points,  location
        o f :-

         a)       Emergency           telephones.

         b)      Fire        fighting        equipment.

         c)       Control         r o o ms   and   police             rooms.

         d)      Fire        Tender      <if    appropriate).

         e.)      First        A i d/ Ambu l a n c e    posts.

         f)       Evacuation           routes.

         g)       Exit gates (to               show     both          onto     the     pitch        and    out   of
                  the ground ) .
                                               3G
Aerial         p h o t o g r a p h s ma y be a d v a n t a g s o u s i n Q i v i n g c I e s r s r
d e f i n i t i o n of the p h y s i c a l c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s ~ o f    the ground
and s u r r o u n d i n g a r e a .

P lan    of      the   5urroundinq_Area

This should            i n c l u d e a g r e e d a c c e s s r o u t e s and r e n d e z v o u s
p o i n t s a s ’ a t ( 1 2 ) and        (13) together              v it h other        infor-
  ation,       useful            to   o ffic e rs performing               d u t y , s u c h as

r ocations          for        potential
r a il w a y s t a t i o n s , coach par ks.
                                               i
                                                 disorder         ie.     p u b l i c houses,


3r i e f i n q    Police

This should include                  how      and      where       officers     are    briefed
a n d b y wh om.
ii
In addition            to the normal   pre-match  briefing   officers
must        be i n f o r m e d of evacuation  procedures   which w i l l
i n c l u d e coded messages.

Officers           performing duty          in   different             areas of     the
g r o u n d m u s t b e ma d e a w a r e o f t h e    exit      r o u t e s , emergency
t e l e p h o n e s and f i r e p o i n t s in t h a t a r e a .

C o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d be g i v e n t o p r o v i d i n g o f f i c e r s w i t h
returnable,              individual,          briefing           cards,         containing
essential              facts       in  relation       to p o l i c i n g      the       ground
g e n e r a l l y and s p e c i f i c r o l e s .

All o ffic e rs         s h o u l d be i s s u e d w i t h a ma p o f t h e     ground
and s u r r o u n d i n g     area,   to enable           them  t o be f u l l y c o n ­
v e r s a n t w i t h the lay out of the ground.

B£le^j_ng_of_SX§wa£ds

Stewards      s h o u l d be b r i e f e d         by     a senior Police Officer
p r i o r to  every match to                  ensure that      they      a r e aware of
their      duties       and       responsibilities             in   the        event       of
evacuation        or o t h e r emergency.                  Previously         identified
deficiencies         i n s t e w a r c j i n g s h o u l d be  brought         to n o t i c e
a t such b r i e f i n g s .                _    _                   .......

D e d j . c a_t e d _ Q f f j _ce r s _a_t _Dedj _ca_t e d_ Pos _ t s

Consideration             s h o u l d be   given        to     deploying dedicated
officers          a t key p o i n t s     on a r e g u l a r     basis.            T h e k’sy
points,         together with            the o f f i c e r s   responsibilities            in
a n e m e r g e n c y , s h o u l d be i n c l u d e d u n d e r t h i s h e a d i n g .

De_t a_[J_s_o_f_DegJ_o vme n_t                     e s_and__I ns_t_ruc_t_i_ons__t o
Stewards

These         d e t a i l s s h o u l d be d r a w n up by t h e c l u b          in c o n s u l ­
t a t i o n w i t h t he P o l i c e and F i r e B r i g a d e , w i t h          particular
r e f e r e n c e to       stewards'           responsibilities       in           assisting
police         in e v a c u a t i o n s i t u a t i o n s .
Is IkjU fi a       Mj{tAjUA<e i *    <*<M tu U o a ^a

Oc mX dXctUt ;

           V   tfftj *

          L/    C&ou#/l&* *•


 <[ L « J d fkou ? tJ lr b* 0^ tb jfA m r corf* *

  Ar*tA^us>L^               h^*   °1 UulALtMt^ «

  ^            h    w   v      «   -   ^      ~
            \ V         \       \             v        -V *0
                        \       KO^t ^/«Aaov>Vv^ (T5’'-'"
      -   ~(„yo                    _ ^^^    \vA0 TV»-u"A1/v
                                                          '0— ~tj ~^VjL-
                ^p^JVAcC- ~^D                  '— °"~ (pe's-^>=e'Ao- CV^oev.
                         "“t W ^ o-^           '.^tw^dVAov^ ,
                                                   37



7.    Locs_tj_o.ns_and_FyncIJ.ons             of        Control      Points     and Po l i c e
      Ro o ms

      This    should      include        details         of   club      and    police       control
      points.
       I
      lit i s s t r o n g l y    a d v i s e d t h a t one      control     point which is
      not n e c e s s a r i l y the main p o l i c e          control     r o o m , be m a n n e d
      j o i n t l y by p o l i c e ,   a club o f f i c i a l     and   the F i r e B r i g a d e
       (if available)           in     order       t h a t ma x i mum c o m m u n i c a t i o n and
      liaison       is m a i n t a i n e d .

      Each     of      the above pe rs on n el                should    have      access      to   his
      ojwn m e a n s   of communication.

      In the event of the p r i n c i p l e               control             room      being ren­
      dered in o p e r a t iv e , c o n s id e r a tio n should               be   g i v e n to the
      s u i t a b i l i t y o f an a l t e r n a t i v e location.

8.    Communicating            A v a i l a b 1 e wi t h j n     t h e Ground

      This should         include:-

      ai      Police     communications

      b)      Club communications -                eg.r a d i o s a n d / o r   telephones
              w i t h i n f o r m a t i o n on t h e s y s t e m s e m p l o y e d

      c>      Methods       of      communication                  w i t h the   public        -     to
               include     w h e t h e r p o l i c e have         a c c e s s t o t hem,    eg:-

               i >      Tannoy
               ii)      Electronic Display                    Boards
               M i)     Loudha i I e rs
               Jv)      Banners

      d)               Methods      of    contacting            emergency        services

q .   Coded     Messages

      C o d e d m e s s a g e s a r e t h e m e a n s by        w h i c h a t t e n t i o n i s drawn
      t o s t a f f and P o l i c e o f t h e need              to take        immediate a c t io n
      3S a r e s u l t      o f an    emergency s i t           uation         t h a t has a r i s e n ,
      w ith o u t causing immediate alarm                       to the s p e c t a t o r s .
                                                                                                      t •

      It  Is e s s e n t i a l   that everyone concerned                      in the   manage­
      ment o f cr owd          s a f e t y w i t h i n the ground is              aware of the
      coded     me ss ag e and            this    is     an e s s e n t i a l   ingredient  or
      both    s t e w a r d and p o l i c e b r i e f i n g s .        Under t h i s heading
      the a c tu a l       text      of       the coded       me s s a g e and t h e way     in
      which it       i s t r a n s m i t t e d s h o u l d be i n c l u d e d .

10.   lDiilai_Res£onse_^o_Emefsenc^

      To     include     the     following:-

      a)      Methods       by     w h i c h p o l i c e and         steward        notify       emer­
              gencies       to    the p o l i c e c o n tr o l       r oom.



                                            (o
                                                           38

        b)       Method of announcing    coded  messages    in                                   order  to
                 give   personnel  early   warning   of  an                                      emergency
                 situation.

        c)       The   r e q u i r e d response of          p o l i c e and    stewards          to
                  such    messages, eg. s e n i o r o f f i c e r w i l l        go      to     the
                  control     r o o m , g a t e s w i l l be m a n n e d a n d o p e n e d e t c .

        d)       Method       of communicating                   with     the   referee          in              order
                  t o s t o p t h e game.

        e)       Method of communicating                         the     in itial     address                to          the
                 spectators.

i 1.    E v a c u a_t j . o n _ P £ o c e d u £ e

        (To  be i m p l e m e n t e d   in              the  event of  fire,  structural
        hazard,   serious           crowd               disorder,  explosion    or   other
        serious  incident           which              ma y require a fu ll  or    partial
        evacuat ion).

        a)       This      sub-heading     should          identify,     the    intended
                  r ou te s to   be  used     and e x i t s    available         for     the
                  evacuation      of   t he t e r r a c e s and s t a n d s  w i t h i n the
                  ground.

        b)       It   is a p p r e c i a t e d certain    routes                    ma y h o w e v e r                    by
                  inaccessible           depending     on   the                     n a t u r e of                       the
                  incident.

        c)       An e s s e n t i a l       p r e - r e q u i s i t e to su cc e ss fu l evacuation
                  is th at a l l           g a t e s a r e ma nned and u n l o c k e d .

        d)        Access         routes             must   be    preserved      as     far       as                  prac-
                  t i c a b 1e .

        e)        It      Is      suggested     t h a t g r o u n d s be     divided     on         an
                  individual         basis into read ily             id e n tifia b le sections
                  d e p e n d i n g on t h e l a y o u t o f t h e g r o u n d i n q u e s t i o n .

                  Exit         routes          from these s e c t i o n s       should        be s p e c i ­
                  fied,        (Safety         c e r t i f i c a t e s should   be r e f e r r e d t o ) .

                  The s y s t e m o f alphabetically                      identifying                segments
                  is     worthy of    consideration,                       especially                in  c o n ­


                  junction       with   the o p e r a t i o n              of C C T V e      f   f   e   c   t   i   v   e   l   y


                  lo c a tin g problem areas w ith in                     the ground.

        f)        This        sub-heading       should          also include          details  of
                  s p e c i f i c tasks subsequent to               the i n i t i a l    response
                  t h a t ma y r e q u i r e a l l o c a t i o n .

12.     Access_Royies

        These       must      be     agreed         with   the    emergency         services.

    A   I n a d d i t i o n to t h e i r        location,          the    method o f         opening                         and
'       p r e s e r v i n g t hr e s e r o u t e s s h o u l d      be    included.




                                                     “7
                                                                 39
13 .   !iiLQ£l££^2y§._E2±Ql§.

       L o c a t i o n o f r e n d e z v o u s p o i n t s , a g r e e d w i t h the emergency
       serv ice s should             be       included       In       this     heading.             A n y


       fa c ilitie s       that        exist       at r e n d e z v o u s p o i n t s , eg.     larqe
       car pa rks , accommodation                    capable         of h o l d i n g c a s u a l t i e s
       and/or personnel,               s h o u l d a l s o be i n c l u d e d .

14 .   L o c a t _j gn_Of _FJ. r e _ F j g h t _ l n g _ E q y j D me n t _ g n d _ F j r e      Hvdrants
       i
       Details             of the   l o c a t i o n of f i r e f i g h t i n g equipment                         and
       hydrants             should    be c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n    th is heading                          and
       d o u l d be        usefully   l i n k e d t o a ma p o f t h e s t a d i u m .

15 .   Irranqements _for_yjs i ting                              Su p p o r t e r s

       t h i s heading should                        include arrangements that                exist for
       the s e g r e g a t i o n of                 rival   s u p p o r t e r s and mu s t    take into
       a cc ount methods         of                 dealing with v i s i t i n g supporters           in
       the event of p a r t i a l                     or to t a l  e v a c u a t i o n to mi nimise the
       opportunity for riva                        l   fans to engage in d i s o r d e r .
                                             I
       C r o w d Mon i t o r i nq

       T h i s s houl d d e t a i l what methods e x i s t              w i t h i n the ground
       tp     o b s e r v e and a s s i s t    in crowd       movement f o r e v a c u a t i o n
       piurposes          and s h o u l d i n c l u d e the     CCT V        fa c ilitie s ,       if
       available,          the l o c a t i o n of c o n t r o l p o i n t s , s p o t t e r s e t c .

17 .   CasuaJ__t l es                                       v

       Methods           of    dealing           with       casualties             should     include:-

       a)         Location              of        casualty                 clearing      station         If    prac­
                  ticable.

       b)        Designated h o sp itals                        for        rival      supporters    or        police
                 and s u p p o r t e r s .

       It is a p p r e c ia t e d that local major incident                                        plans        will
       probably c ater for these e v e n t u a l i t i e s .

18.    A d d j . _ t j . o n a J . _ I n f o £ ma j M on

       The      following             points          are       put        forward     for   consideration:-

       a>        Local     c o n d i t i o n s , eg.                      whether      emergency      vehicles
                 can g a i n a c c e s s ' t o the                        stadium.

       b)        I n f o r m a t i o n as t o t h e h o o l i g a n e l e m e n t               - where they
                  c a n be         located,     t a c t i c s e m p l o y e d by               t hem, v u l n e r ­
                  able areas of the ground.

       c>        Special             arrangements                     -     eg.    deployment       of         plain
                 cIothes            poIi c e .

       d)        Location of spec ial                         equipment       <if   any) eg.                   white
                 tape,   loudhailers,                         firs t     aid,     seek  and                   search
                  lamps, f l u o r e s c e n t              jac k e ts , banners.




                                                           ■8
                SAFETY      OF S P C R T S    GROUNDS              STEWARDS

!
i        The p r i m e      responsibility      for     the  arrangement      of
        a f f a i r s at s po rts grounds l i e s w i t h the c lu b .  To t h a t
        end       they     should ensure that     stewards     are     suitably
        q u a I 1f i e d .

        QUALIFICATIONS;

        Stewards       should:-

        a)     Be t r a i n e d and  instructed        to  deal          with                                    any
                 emergencies r e l a t i n g to f i r e or e v a c u a t i o n .

        b)     Be g i v e n w r i t t e n i n s t r u c t i o n about the                a c t i o n to
!              be       taken       in     cases         of     emergency,               including
j                 arrangements for c a llin g                 the emergency              services.
    i                            ;
        c)      Receive             practical         instruction    and                     training
                 a p p r o p r i a t e to t h e i r    responsibility.

    1 d)        Should   not            be    e m p l o y e d as   a   steward           unless                      so
                 instructed           and    t r a i n e d , and

        e>      Be a d e q u a t e    in number, p h y s i c a l l y    and m e n t a l l y
                 capable of p e r f o r m i n g t h e i r d u t i e s ,   effectively-
                 deployed,         e fficien tly    supervised           and   readily
                 identifiable.

                 N B . S t e w a r d s s h o u l d n o t be l e s s t h a n 1 8 y e a r s o r
                 more        than      60    years        o f age     and       shouid    wear
                 d i s t i n c t i v e dress       such       as f l u o r e s c e n t jackets
                 suitably           inscribed      f r o n t and b a c k .


        On t h e o c c a s i o n o f e a c h m a t c h s t e w a r d s s h o u l d a t t e n d a
        pre-match b rie fin g              and      be ma d e       f u l l y awareof t h e i r
        r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s and t h e   l o c a t i o n of      me mber s  of     the
        Emergency S e r v i c e s ,        if     appropriate,           in    the    area for
        which they are r e s p o n s ib le .


        S t e w a r d s s h o u l d be    d is tr ib u te d throughout            the ground
        in       accordance w ith a             detailed        pre -a rra n g e d schedule
        agreed         between        the    police         and   management.            Their,
        numbers         and        location       should      not     be    l e s s t han the
        mi ni mum       stated        in the        safety      certificate.             Their
        d u t i e s ma y be d i v i d e d     i n t o f o u r main c a t e g o r i e s :

        a)        C o n t r o l l i n g or d i r e c t i n g member s o f        the                     public
                  who a r e e n t e r i n g o r l e a v i n g t h e g r o u n d .

        b)       Pa t r o l l i n g    the ground to            deal   with          any                     emer­
                  gencies.              eg:  raising           alarms,   e x     t   i   n   g   u   i   s   h   i   n   g


                  fire s etc.

        c)       Manning        entrances,   exits              and      other    strategic
                  points,       particu larly exit             doors      and g a t e s w h i c h
                                                41
           are  not              continuously           open    whilst        the   ground           is
           in use.

d>         Undertaking                 specific         duties         relating     to       emer­
           g e n c i e s and           e v a c u a t ion p r o c e d u r e s .


Eme r j g e n c ^ _ P r o c e d u r e s

The i m p o r t a n c e of the          provision          of       f ormal emergency
procedures            a t e a c h g r o u n d c a n n o t be o v e r - e m p h a s i z e d .
Joint        consultation            i n t.h i s r e s p e c t s h o u l d    be    taken
between         the      police,       the     management             of the      ground,
fire,     a mb u l a n c e and      other services.                 It     Is   essential
t h a t s t e w a r d s and t h e i r s u p e r v i s o r s a r e f u l l y a war e of
the part           they have to pi ay            in    the        plans       which     are
produced.

Management       should          ensure        that     written         Instructions
detailing       the a c t i o n       t o be t a k e n i n        the event        o f an
emergency       are served            on a l l   s t e w a r d s , and t h a t s t a f f
and      stewards     receive             practical            instruction            and
training appropriate                 to t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in the
e v e n t o f an e m e r g e n c y .

Bodies   such     as      the   fire     service,   thep o l i c e and
ambulance s e r v i c e    have    expressed      a willingness        to
assist  in    such      training     and   clubs are urged to take
full a dva nt age of the o f f e r .

Exercises       f o r s t a f f a n d s t e w a r d s s h o u l d be c a r r i e d o u t
regularly       to ensure            the      smooth        o p e r at on of the p r o ­
cedures       for     dealing          w i t h an        emergency.             A record
s h o u l d be k e p t c o n t a i n i n g     d e t a i l s o f t h e t r a i n i n g and
Instruction          given       and        exercises           held,     and       should
Inc lu d e the f o l l o w i n g m a t t e r s : -

a )         Date       and       time     of   the    instruction        or    exercise.

b)          Durat ion.

c )         Na me      of    the       person     giving     the    i ns t r u e t I o n .

d>          N a me s    of       the     persons     receiving       the      i n s t r u e t i on

e )         Nature          of    instruction          or   exercise.


Control        of   stewards    s h o u l d be f r o m a  central point
containing         efficient    me ans       to      communicate   with
stewards        at    key   points         identified    in  discussion,
b e t w e e n mana ge me nt and t h e p o l i c e .



C h i e f s t eiwa r d s

Clubs should        appoint a           Chief Steward responsible for
co-ordinating            the      duties       of      stewards       and to  De
Im m ed ia te ly a v a i l a b l e f o r d i s c u s s io n s w i t h the senior
                                         42
police o ffic e r         present       concerning           any    problem       in   the
ground.


S£ e c_i__f j_c_Du_t j_ e s_oj f _S_t e wa_rd s

Specific       duties       to   be    undertaken       by    stewards       Include:

a)       Preventing         overcrowding,       ensuring        that      crowd
          limits      in     various   parts       of      the  ground       are
         complied        w i t h and t h a t g a n g wa y s and    e x it s are
          kept c l e a r .

b)       Preventing,             so f a r       as      possible,          standing    on
         seats,          and      the      c li m b i n g of      f e n c e s and   other
         structures.              W h e r e by v i r t u e o f t h e s c a l e o f t h e
          i n c i d e n t s t e w a r d s a r e u n a b l e to comply w i t h t h i s
          requirement,               they      should w ithout               delay report
          the m a t t e r to the n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r , or ,         if
         no        police       officer          Is p r e s e n t ,      to    the  Chief
         Steward or d e s i g n a t e d club o f f i c i a l .

c)       The        Investigation           and     Identification          of       any
          i n c i d e n t or o c c u r r e n c e , reporting their findings
          to       police        or     management     In    accordance             with
          I n s t r u c t i o n s gi v e n at the p r e -m a t c h b r i e f i n g .

d>       B e i n g a w a r e o f t h e l o c a t i o n o f f i r e f i g h t i n g and
          medical equipment              in the a r e a f o r whi ch they a r e
          responsible            and b e i n g     capable       of    effectively
          o p e r a t i n g t h e same .

e)       Being f u l l y        conversant          with   the        methods      and
          s i g n a l s u s e d t o i n d i c a t e an e m e r g e n c y   situation
          w h i c h s h o u l d have been          previously          set   d o wn i n
          w r i t i n g a n d s e r v e d on t h e m .

f)       Being         capable   of    recognising            potential        fire
          h a z a r d s and    suspect packages.             Such f i n d i n g s to
          be r e p o r t e d t o  t he n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r or in
          his absence the c h i e f steward or d e s i g n a te d club
          official.

g)       Except    i n an e m e r g e n c y s t e w a r d s s h o u I d n o t l e a v e
          th e ir place    of duty          without        the c ons e nt of the
         C h ief Steward      or       senior police o f f ic e r present
         wh o    should,,    if      it     is     considered           necessary,
         arrange for a replacement.

h)       All    e x i t g a t e s s h o u l d be m a n n e d w h i l e t h e g r o u n d
          Is     u s e d b y t h e p u b l i c , a n d be          capa ble of being
         o p e n e d i m m e d i a t e l y , f r o m i n s i d e , by a n y o n e i n an
         emergency.                                           (

i)       Reporting       tothe     Chief Steward                     a n y da ma ge     or
         defect    l i k e l y to  cause    injury                   or danger          to
          pe rsons in a t t e n d a n c e .

j)       in  the  event               o f an e m e r g e n c y o r i n c i d e n t    the
          senior police            o f f i c e r present w i ll      take        c o mma n d



                                   u
                                         43
          and a l l     stewards should promptly                compl y w i t h any
          instructions             given    by    him      or    by   any p o l i c e
          o f f i c e r a c t i n g on h i s b e h a l f .


Iiaming.

T r a i n i n g of stewards         should  be c o m p l e t e d p r i o r    to the
s t a r t of the      season         to  a standard acceptable                to the
police,          fire   and          ambulance     services          and       Local
Author i t y .
                                         •

Refresher           training  should               be      g i v e n by  a competent
p e r so n d u r i n g the months of             O c t o b e r and J a n u a r y .

S t e w a r d s s h o u l d be s u p p l i e d   with   a   handout        detailing
their         responsibilities              in   general    t e r m s as    set   out
above.

The above l i s t of d u t i e s    I s by n o m e a n s e x h a u s t i v e a nd
c l u b management s h o u l d l i a i s e c l o s e l y w i t h a p p r o p r i a t e
senior police,    fire ,      and a m b u l a n c e     services o fficers
to     arrive  at  a final       version that            takes account             of
local    factors.
    Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
    A PAGE. F A S I

    Please address all correspondence to the
    Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer

    "Fairfield" M ooigate Road.
    Rotherham S 6 0 2BQ


                                                                              S o u th Y o rk s h ire M e tro p o lita n
    Tel Rotherham (0 7 0 9 ) 3 6 1 5 8 1                                      A m b u la n c e S e rv ic e
                                                                              A   ll.'til   ......... H .   A u l t ........t y   .. l v



    Please ask for   Mr G L Wilkinson                               Your RH
    Our Ret (Please quote reference in ail tutuie correspondence!   AH/GLWJ


    6 th August 1986


    Mr Chester
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
    Hillsbro
    Sheffield


    Dear Mr Chester

    Following your recent telephone conversation with Mr Wilkinson on 28th J u l y 1986
    in regard to your Club supplying passes for Officers from the South Yorkshire
    Metropolitan Ambulance Service, I am submitting the following information for
    you to discuss with your fellow directors.

    On the 16th July 1986 Mr Wilkinson visited your Club along with two other Officers
    from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and Sergeant
    of South Yorkshire Police. The meeting was held with Mr I    1 Senior ^roundsman.
    After touring your complex and discussing evacuation plans with South Yorkshire
    Police, it was felt that the Ambulance Service would normally only become involved
    in any events after they had already occurred and therefore, slight delays could
    be experienced on occasions in responding to the incident. To avoid this I would
    ask if two passes could be supplied to the Ambulance Service which would enable

#   us to ensure that an Ambulance Officer was in your ground at all home fixtures.

    There would be no cost to the Club for this facility, and it would improve ground
    safety.  In the event of any untoward occurrence my Officers would be in a position
    to identify problems prior to them happening and would therefore be in a much
    better position to respond to any emergency.

    If you require any further information then please do nothesitate to contact
    Mr Wilkinson on Rotherham 361581 extension 259, who will ask one of our
    Offciers responsible for the safety of your ground to contact you.

    Yours sincerely




    A HopkinsI
    Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer




                                                            'iS
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                      AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                           FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD.
                                               ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                      TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 8 8 2 0



                    OUR REF:                                                   Mr. A. PAGE.JP, F A.S.I.
                                                                                    CHIEF M ETROPOLITAN
                    YOUR REF:
                                                                                    AMBULANCE OFFICER
                    Please ask for:




April 1988

The Director
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                                 /|/0
Hillsborough
Sheffied 6




Dear Sir,

Do you provide the best standards of Ambulance Care for the large number of
Employees and Members of the Public whilst they are on your premises?

Major Sporting Events have always relied heavily on the resources which are
provided by the Voluntary First Aid Organisations.

We acknowledge the very valuable contribution which the St John Ambulance
and British Red Cross Society make. There are, however, areas where the
level of care which we can provide, of necessity, exceed those which can be
provided by the Voluntary Societies. These include Advanced Ambulance Aid,
Treatment   of   Fractures    with  the   most   modern   equipment   available
(particularly Spinal     Injuries),   Stabilisation   of patients with Head
Injuries,    Intubation,     Intravenous    Infusion,    Cardiac    Monitoring,
Defibrillation and the Administration of Drugs.

Can we be of assistance to you ? If so, get in touch with Don Trueman on
Rotherham (0709) 828820 to discuss your requirements.

If we can't help with your immediate requirements, please place this letter
on file for any future occasion when we may be able to assist.

I am sure that you will be more than happy with any the facilities which we
are able to offer.

Yours faithfully,




A. Page.

CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER.
Removal of Fatalities to Medico Legal Centre
             CREWS INVOLVED   >


CALL SIGN.         CREW.               STATION.
406                Q.A.M.              LONGLEY.
                      If          ft




401                Q.A.W.
                      ii                  H


1206               A.M.                HOYLAND.
                   A.M.


601                Q.AM.               MALTBY.

                   Q.A.W.


206                Q.A.M.              PARKWAY.
                   Q.A.M.


503                A.M.                ROTHERHAM.
                    Q.A.M.                „
                              a.Y .M .A . j .           (PATIE       ■' R k - P V A L )

                                                        DECEASED.




REMOVAL.           C /S .     PP/. mO.                  P!’/ . , AivE .                       PC/NO

( ? If'E LOADED)

2 I . 3 '0 .       40b        I.                        JOHN ANDERSON.                        5 20 .

2 1 .3 5 .         40b        2.                        VICPOhIA HICKS.                       3038.

2 1 .3 5 .         4 °b       3*                        SARAH rfICfCS.                        66.

                   LE?T SCE..E             2 2 .0 1 .

2 2 .0 b .         1206       4.                        CHR1SPINE JONES.                      2658.

2 2 .0 6 .         1206       5.                        ALAN J’OHMSON.                        1986.

2 2 .0 6 .         1206       6.                        P H ILL IP STEEL.                     159-

                   LEST SCENE 2 2 . 2 8 .

22. 25.            bOI        7.                        IAK GLOVER.                           465.

2 2 .2 9 .         601        6.                        PE PER HARRISON.                      779-

2 2 .3 3 .         601        9-                        MARTIN WILDE.                         1 96 1 .

                    LEifP SCENE 2 2 .4 7 *

2 2 .4 9 .         406        1 0.                      CHRISTOPHER EVANS I BE.               1073*

2 2 .5 3 .         406        II.                       ? GILL/HCOLY.                         2 35 8 .

2 2 .5 5 .         406        I2 *                      JOSEPH CLARKE.                        2332.

                    LEb’ 11 SCENE      23. 3O.

 2 3 .0 6 .        1206        13.                      GARY          J R C i.                I6 J 8 ,

 2 3 .0 8 .        1206        14.                      ANDREW SHOCKS.                        1779-

 2 3 .J C .        120b        15.                      AhTri'JR HCRRCCKS.                    2662.

                    I .v ’             2$.I5.

 23. 31.           6C1         lo .                     '. - . i      - ALI..                 22b 5.

 25.53.             r^ T                   •                                      ------                  •

 2 3 . 55.          oL i           i v .                                                  •    . - '? I - .
REMOVAL.               C/5.          PT/.NO.             PT/.NA;-iE.               PC/NO

(           LOAI iD)

23.48.                 1206          19.                 PETER TOOTLE.             1529.

23.46.                 1206         20.                  ALAN Me GLOUE             275.0.

23.50.                 I20b         21.                 JOSEPH Me CARTHY.          2382.

                       LEeT 8CEME 23.56.

OO.OI.                 406          22.                  DAVID y.Ai’.-lEH.         1282.

00.02.                 406          23.                  b'HAiMCIS Me ALLISTER.    1479.

00.02.                 40b          24.                 DAVID HI.'hviER.           2620.

                       LEFT SCaiNiE 00.07.

c o . 15.              120b          25.                 JOHN Me B R I A N .       2503-

0 0.1 5.               1206          26.                 ? PEMBERTON.              2299.

00.21.                 1206          27.                 ? THOMPSON.               2057.

                       LEFT SCEN'E 00.24.

0 0.2 9.               401           28.                 GORDON HORN.              339.

0 0.2 9.               401           29.                 CHRISTOPHEH EDWARDS.      1958.

0 0 .3 1.              401           30.                 CARL RIMKEP.              271.

                       LE?‘n SCENE 00.34*

00.53.                 40o.          31.                 :..VJL "I..-.: •-..       IIOO.

Go.         .          40-j          y   t- •           * LAV XL   -li-i'i.'E.     2348.

                       d'dk          33.                 PA- ’i. »EwITSG.-.        290?.
00.54*

                               JCEivi 00.56.

OI.1 5 .        -      *.•01                             Kh.v:;, !’YR3iL.          -PO.

                       K 01                                                        iv-2.
01. T S

                       '0:                                ’r« HW       »\      ^
0 1 .:^.                                 y •
                               •sc-j.i     6 . . i ~.
r




    REMOVAL.            c/s.        PT/NO.          p p /i m a w e .               p c /no


    (t i m e LOADEI.)

    0 1 .2 0 .          1206        37.             JOHn CROSS.                    797.

    0 1 .2 0 .          1206        38.             NICK JOYNESS.                  I8 6 4 .
    HH
    ro




                        I 2 0 fa.                   PAUL M U R R A Y .             1072.
    O
    •
    O
    •




                                    39.

                        LEFT SCENE 0 1 .2 3 .

    01.38.              406         40.             P3PER THOMPSON.                1236.

    0 1 .3 8 .          406         41.             GEKRARD BARON.                 1559.

    01.40.              406         42.             31.-ION BELL.                  714.

                        LEFT SCENE 01.43.

    01.44.              601         43.             COLIN WAFER.                   66.

    01.45.              601         44. '           DAVIL HAWLEY.                  2233.

    01.45.              601         45.             STEVEiM O ’NEIL.                204.

                        LEFT SCENE OI. 4 6 .

    0 2 .0 2 .          401         46.             M. McCABE.                      3329.

    02.03.              401         47.             GRArfAM ROBERTS.                2964.

    02.03.              401         48.             IiMGA 3HAH-3IDE3.               2102.

                        LEFT SCENE 02.05.

    0 2 .2 0 .          206         49-             ERIC HA.N;K1 .                  2247.

    0 2 .2 0 .          206          50.            DaVIE       BENSON.             1629.

    0 2 .2 0 .          206          51.            GAR'’ JONES.                   3120.

                        LFFT SCiAr. 0 2 .2 5 .

    02.26.              •03          52.            3 . ’ETy”i.\! ? 0 3 I \30.<.    2 7 9 o.

    0 2 .3 1 .          505          53.            CCi.:>; SSF'-’O S.              1795.

    02.4(3              ^03          54.            ifSxRrY aU ;'X.                 1844.

                        r ^3 p          0 2 .ah.

    03.05.                                          .          M.iJ J 0 'ir.r>.
                                                    7*.I..."■n ,                     2 2vJ*

    05.05.                           -n>.           L.-iVIl            aK.          334.
    V-N




                                                     :’-acv cox.                    -7 9 .
    £-




                        40 c
    O

    O




                                     r7.
    •

    •




                        L EFT 0 C 2. i 0 5 .1 0 .
Pi.'OVAL.         C/S.       PP/NO.       PP/\AME.                    PC/NO.

(TIME LOADED)

0 3 .1 6 .        401        50.          CHRISTOPHER t r a YWDR.     2828.

0 3 .1 6 ,        401        59.          CARL BROWN.                 1124.

0 3 .1 7 .        401      60.            MARTIN TRAYwOR.             2857.
                  LEFT SCENE 03 .20.
0 3 .2 9 .        206      bl.            LAVID THOMAS.               700.

0 3 .3 0 .        206        62.          NICHOLAS HEWIPT.            1123.

0 3 .3 0 .        206        63.          CARL HEWITT.                1962.

                  LEHT SCENE 03 •32.

0 3 .4 0 .        503        64.          GAP.Y COLLINS.              1842.

0 3 .4 0 .        503        ^5.          HENRY ROGERS.               2916.

0 3 .4 0 .        503        66.          BRIAN MA1THEWS.             2652.

                  LEFT SCENE 03 .42.
        'OH




                  406                     ERIC HUGHES.
         O
0




                             67-                                      3151.
              •
    •




0 5 .S 2 .        406        68.          BARRY GLOVER.               I7 b 5.

03.53.            4O6        b9-          JAMES ASPINALL.             253.

                  Ls-'P SCENE 03 .55-

04.10.            401        70.          J A -:ES DEL AN E Y .       2396.

04.10.            401        71.          HOY HAMILTON.               659.

04.14.            401        72.          CrtHL LEWIS.                2745.

                  L ij'T SCE--E 04 .15.

04.18.            206        73.          Hi I LI.IP HAi':Mt a !'.    1927.

0 4 .25 .         20 u       r <4 •       AI)A.v: SP.uirl J i1.       1032.

0/:. 0 .          206        7^.          ?   Me   i H . - i : ’H .


04.46.            flOb       r •          JCH.'J wRiG T.              2Qv5.
                      /,•
             AL.    -/ 0 .                P'/XQ.        PT/NA:'! -1!.   p c /no

    (Tl^E LOATED)

    04.31.          505                   11.           IJNKM.'to'N.    2392.
    04.32.                                76.                II
                    505                                                 682.

    04.33.                                                   It
                    503                   79.                           2620.

                    LEEP SCi.E O4.3o.

                    406                   80.                II
    04.35.                                                              10b.

                    406                   bl.                II
    04.55«                                                              6.

    0 4 .3 7 .      40b.                  b2.                It
                                                                        1403.

                    LEFT SC-NE 04-40.

^04.46.             401                                      II
                                          83.                           1431.

    04.48.          401                   84.                II
                                                                        2502.
                                                             II
    04.50.          401               85.                               2002.

                    LEFT SCENE 04.51.

                                      6b.                   tt
    04.55.          503                                                 221.

                                                            II
    04.55.          503               67-                               1531.

    04.56.                            08.                   II
                    503                                                 1615.

                    LEb'P SC AW?’ 04.57.

                                                            II
    05.13.          406               '   '/ *                          17 9T.

                                                            tl
    HH
    k T\




                    406               90.
     O




                                                                        1212.
    •



            •




w   0 5 .1 4 .      40t               91.                   ft
                                                                        II7T.

                    I        SC:.'.         0 5 . io.

    0 5 .2 3 .                        92 .                  It
                    503                                                 796.

                                                            If
    05.23.          -05               95.                               6.L1.
                                                            II
    ()•; .2/i.      5C5                                                 47tj.

                    ■ ;..<
                         •n '■JCi h - 0" .2b.
