                    - AMBULANCEWOMAN - ROTHERHAM AMBULANCE STATION


Date:   20.4.89

Time:   1015-1130

Duty:   0900-16230

Call Sign:    505

Crewed with              I

At approximately 1510 at Badsley Moor Lane when we received a call from
Control. We were just green and loading the stretcher back into the
ambulance. We were told to proceed to Hillsborough Football ground. We
were given no firm details, but I did hear a message being passed to
another vehicle advising that there were casualties and possibly some
fatalities. I was driving and we proceeded to Hillsborough via Kimberworth
and Meadowhall.

Following Control's instructions we approached the ground down Herries Road
towards the gymnasium entrance on Penistone Road.

On approach we were directed by Police towards the Penistone Road entrance.
There were several ambulances already there, presumably being loaded with
casualties. One of these vehicles left and I reversed the vehicle into the
ground. Once inside my attendant advised me that we needed a stretcher.
We went to collect a patient, who had already been attended to. He had a
frac-pac on his leg. He didn’t want to go with us at first and said so.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer Mr A Hopkins persuaded the patient to go
with us. I think the patient was confused and distressed, rather than
agressive.

On returning to our vehicle we became aware that several items of equipment
had been removed: the remaining stretcher, blankets and the suction unit.
We loaded our patient into the ambulance and we were approached by a group
of people carrying what I took to be an advertising board. It was bright
yellow. The patient was quite young. We transferred him to a carrying
sheet and loaded him onto the floor of the ambulance, due to the absence of
the stretcher. He was unconscious, but was having difficulty breathing.

We then left for the Northern General Hospital, my attendant administering
oxygen to the second patient.

Just outside the ground I was asked by a policeman where we were going,   I
told him, the Northern General Hospital. He said to follow him. He was a
motorcycle policeman and he escorted us to the Northern General Hospital.

At the hospital we unloaded the kiddie first and he was taken straight to
theatre. The second patient was still fully conscious and he was taken
into the Accident and Emergency Unit, but I don't know where. The
unloading took very little time and other ambulances were unloading at the
same time.
SHEET 2 -               - AMBULANCEWOMAN - ROTHERHAM AMBULANCE STATION

Once green, we returned to the ground, the Penistone Road entrance. Things
seemed to be working well. We waited in |ine for a short time, then I
reversed into the ground, in more or less the same spot as before, but a
bit further inside.

We loaded a patient onto our single stretcher and a second patient already
on a stretcher was brought to us. Some SYMAS Officers were on the scene.
I recognised Station Officer P Eason, Superintendent T Dale. I saw others
whose faces were familiar but I didn't know their names. This time we
gained some unfamiliar blankets. We left the ground this time for the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital, as we'd heard over the radio that the Northern
General was full. A police motorcyclist once again escorted us, via
Leppings Lane. The police help was invaluable on both trips, helping us to
get through the huge crowds.

We took the patients to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. These were
unloaded quickly, straight in. We then moved away from the unloading bay,
to allow other vehicles to get in. We called green and were told to
proceed to Netherthorpe Road and standby.

At Netherthorpe Road we encountered about eight or ten ambulances also on
standby. Some were directed to Hillsborough and some were directed to the
Herries Road Bus Garage.

After a short while we were sent back to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and
instructed to transfer patients to King Edwards Hospital.

We reported to Standards and Efficiency Officer____________ at the Porters
Lodge Desk. Before this we had to report to the Porters Lodge and been
told that no-one knew anything about it. We then went back to Casualty and
were told to definitely report to Porters Lodge. Another crew with us
checked with Control, and we were told definitely to report to the Porters
Lodge. We did and this time m e t ____________ . We collected two stretcher
patients - one from ward FI and one from ward F2. Both these we took to
King Edwards Hospital.

At King Edwards no-one was at the gate, but we reported to the main
building and were advised where the patients needed to be.

On radioing green, we were told to return to Station, but to contact
Control before going off duty. This we did, contacting Control by
telephone and were stood down and told we could go home.

I began to tidy up the vehicle, logged the items we have gained and lost
and then went home. I signed off at 1845 and left about 1900.
