I                   born 31.5.54 am 35 years old.        I am a
qualified ambulance man, working for SYMAS and stationed at

Doncaster.    I have been with SYMAS for 10 years.



On Saturday 15th April 1989 my tour of duty was a day shift

0900 to 1630 hours.    I was crewed with                  ~j the

driver of our ambulance.


At about 1515 hours we arrived back at Doncaster having been

out to take a child to Doncaster hospital.    We went into the
mess room.



Almost at once a telephone message was received to the

effect that there had been a major incident at Hillsborough

football ground at Sheffield.     We were to proceed there as
quickly as possible.



We had only travelled about two miles when I noticed the

temperature gauge was showing high temperature.      I contacted

control at Doncaster and was told to take the vehicle back

to base and take another one.



I exchanged vehicles and again set off for Sheffield.      I am

not quite sure but it would be about 1550 hours when we

arrived   at the Penistone   Road end of the ground.


There were lots of supporters leaving the ground as we
     arrived and service vehicles,     police, ambulance and fire

     service were parked outside the ground in Penistone Road.



     There was some confusion at first with a policeman directing

     us but we eventually arrived outside the ground and then

     were directed      by Mr.Eason to reverse into the ground and
     park alongside other ambulances near the gym.



    We were also told the emergency tender was expected and

    would be parking in the same area, nearer the    ground.


10. I was told to     stay with my vehicle again by Mr.Eason.    My

    colleague got out of the ambulance and went back towards the

    gym.   Some short time later he came back with two stretcher

    patients.   He was helped by police and what appeared to be
    ground officials.


11 . The patients were put on the ambulance and we were going to

    Northern General.     There was also a third patient who was

    sitting in the front passenger seat having been placed there

    by a policeman.


12. Outside the ground we joined other ambulances and I was told
    by a police officer that they were going to the Hallamshire

    hospital with an escort and I could join them if I wished.
    I knew this would be quicker so I went with them.
13.   The journey to the hospital was quite reasonable.       At the

      hospital we off loaded the stretcher case and handed them

      over to the hospital staff.      A doctor went to look at the

      patient in the front seat.



14.   We returned to the ambulance:- there were other ambulances

      waiting to off load patients so I moved my vehicle out of

      the way.   Two police officers had approached us and asked

      for a lift back to the ground.



15.   We set off but had oniy travelled a few yards when the

      engine cut out and I could not restart it.      With some help

      the ambulance was pushed to the top of a hill and I tried to

      bump start it, but the vehicle would not start.


16.   I parked in a safe place and contacted control       but even

      though I could hear them I could not get through so I
      changed to channel three.



17.   I was able to contact Rotherham control, reported the break

      down.   Meanwhile two men had come to us, saying they were

      mechanics and offered to look at the vehicle.


18.   I would say it would be some 20/25 minutes later that the

      vehicle was restarted.      I informed control and asked for

      instructions.   We were told to standby at the Hallamshire to

      transfer patients to other hospitals.




                                   470
19.   We were asked to transfer three patients to King Edward VII

      hospital.      We took two elderly ladies as sitting patients

      and one young man as a stretcher case.           We went "green"

      again and contacted control.        We were told to return to
      Doncaster.



20.   Apart from the pedestrians around the ground I was able to

      proceed quite freely.      The police escort to the hospital

      made sure that we had a good run.


21.   There is a major incident plan that I am aware of and by the

      time I got to Sheffield the incident was being properly
      dealt with.




Dated the   f‘ r v      day of    /?/?/         1989
