                        states:-


1.   I am employed as   a Control Assistant for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is 27th February 1962.


3.   I have worked      for SYMAS since June 1987 as a Control
     Assistant.   Prior to that I did not have a fulltime job.


4.   The work of a Control Assistant principally involves taking
     incoming calls.     Normally all calls that come into the
     control desks are passed on where appropriate to the
     emergency desk or the outpatient desk.      At night, however,
     the outpatient desks are not open and there will normally be
     one Control Assistant at the control desk and the emergency
     desk will also be manned.


5.   As well as receiving "ordinary" incoming calls the control
     desks also have direct lines from the hospitals, police
     force and fire brigade headquarters.      When a call comes in
     on one of the direct lines a buzzer sounds            and the
     appropriate light flashes.


6.   On Saturday 15th April I was on duty from 1400 to 2200 I had
     worked the same shift the previous day.


7.   At aJaeu-t 150G a call came from the police headquarters at



                              -   34.7
Snig Hill in Sheffield on the direct line.                   The police
officer wanted to speak to a Superintendent in charge at
control.     I put him through to Superintendent Ray Clarke.          I
heard Mr Clarke say that there were duty officers at the
ground, as well as an ambulance, and that there was another
ambulance standing by not far from the ground.

                                       e j-   I sox-27 (•'=«(*<»
Very shortly after the first calir^there was a second call
via the direct line from Snig Hill.           I- think Jit was the same
policeman.     t-)->ni-iruro that t-Ho police fnrrr nnntrnl n1- ‘hrhj
H-ll-l— i-s— organised— &q— that— each— officer— at— control has
rooponoibility for a partirnlar arpa, fmifl rm it ir-
likely thfrt the eall did <LJ6me front the MdiuB police officer.
He told me that they wanted a fleet of ambulances down to
the Leppings Lane entrance at Hillsborough.            As I was taking
this call, Mr Hopkins and Mr Clarke were present and I told
them that the police wanted a fleet of ambulances to the
Leppings Lane end of the ground.        Whilst this was happening
I could hear                    contacting one of the liaison
officers at Hillsborough.


Mr Clarkfi/told me to open up a major incident log which I did
and all of the entries in that log up to and including the
entry at 1835 is in my handwriting.C0^ /

 A^iS58 <fl fr^ok n /% s,l)                    ^
Some time between 1513 and 1515 jt mobilised the ambulance on
standby at Middlewood, by- telephoning Middlowood Station .by*


                          3^
       tol-d the ambulance to proceed o«— red to Hillsborough
       Leppings Lane where there was an Incident.


11 .                 contacted all of the casualty departments by
       telephone to tell them that there was an Incident and to
       prepare   for possible casualties.        I know that he had
       difficulty getting through to some because the lines were
       being heavily used.


12 . We have a major incident room which is next door to the

       control room and which had been set up a few weeks prior to
       15th April.   Superintendent Clarke and I moved to that room
       at around 1515.     All of the ERC calls came into the incident
       room.   Superintendent Clarke had told all vehicles to use
       the ERC channel.     Any calls coming in on the other channels
       would have gone into the control room and a message passed
       to us in the incident room.


Dated the                day of     t"Vcx>        1989
