STATEMENT OF
DATE OF BIRTH                12TH MARCH 1935
OCCUPATION                   CONT R O L OFFI C E R SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                              METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE.

1.   I have been a driver and leading ambulance man with over 21
     years service originally with West Riding County Council and
     then     from   about    1974    on   with   the   South Yorkshire
     Metropolitan Ambulance Service.


2.   In about 1974 I became a Control Officer, a post which I
     have held until the present date.


3.   I received the Miller Award (Ambulance Aid).          This followed
     a six week course at Cleckheaton Training College in 1968.
     We did all aspects of ambulance work and aid including first
     aid etc.


4.   At Leicester about four years ago I attended a fortnights
     course on control procedures which was an up date.


5.   I am currently a controller.             There are two sections to
     this.    The outpatients service is one section and the other
     is the emergency section.             The control room is one unit
     comprising the two sections.           If you are on the emergency
     desk the hours are 06.00 to 14.00, 14.00 to 22.00, 22.00 to
     06.00. The outpatients desk is 07.30 to 16.00 and 08.30 to
     17.00.


                                 25
         I ordinarily work a rota system which will be both emergency
         and outpatient desk.   In addition to the set rotas there is
         also a relief shift for the change overs and lunch breaks.


7.       I work on a twelve week rota with eleven others.   There is a
         superintendent in overall charge.   There are also control
         assistants who cover the phones making emergency calls,
         passing on messages to the stations and messages        from
         Doctors.


8.       The outpatient work is planning use of vehicles for patients
         to and from home and hospital, hospital transfers and the
         like.


9.       The emergency section of the job is the demand of the public
         on 999 service,    requests from Doctors      and hospitals.
         Ordinarily I would have about 26 or 27 vehicles from 10.00
         a.m. onwards to control.


10   .   Regarding "major incidents" there is a booklet which is
         circulated called Major Incident Procedure.


11. There is also a booklet entitled "Control Procedures 1 to 8"
         which is effectively the instructions for the control job
         and also has a portion which deals with emergencies and
         major incidents.


                                    36
12    In addition to these booklets I have taken part in a "dry
      run" for a major incident.         This was in Rotherham on a
      demolition site of an old hospital and the scenario was that
      a large building had collapsed on a lot of people.      That was
      about two years ago as far as I can recall.        Following the
      "dry run" there is a de-brief when any problems that may
      have arisen can be ironed out and lessons learnt can be
      added to the major incident book.


13.   At the time of the Hillsborough incident I was on duty
      eight.    This was:-
      Monday:                Rota off.   In fact I went into work to
                             planning shift 07.00 to 15.30.
      Tuesday to Friday:     08.30 to 17.00
      Tuesday                I was "spare control"   - covering people
                             who were off and organising control.
      Wednesday,
      Thursday,Friday        I was Rotherham, Barnsley day control.


      Saturday 15th:         09.00 to 16.30
      I was outpatient control for the whole of South Yorkshire.
      This is a busy day for outpatients because of discharges,
      transfers and admissions which have usually been booked.
      The hospitals ring up to see if we can organise any
      transport for patients returning home and the like.
      Saturday is ordinarily quieter than week days and so we can



                                 37
          Hillsborough ground and for them to make their way there on
          red to the Leppings Lane end.


    20.   This is a code for emergency indicating they should proceed
          at speed.


    21.   All ambulances have a crew of two as far as I can recall


•
          apart from 607 from Rotherham.


    22.   At that time,       about 15.08 hours,       I had the following
          vehicles available:-
          1206 Barnsley Hoyland Station - he was mobile between
                Mexbrough     and   Hoyland.     He    went   str a i g h t   to
                Hillsborough.


          407   Sheffield -     was doing outpatient work in Sheffield and
                as soon as he had finished he went to the scene.


          906   Doncaster -     he was green (empty) in Sheffield and went
                straight to the scene.


          805   Both are Doncaster vehicles who were at base, and both
                went to the ground 801     together.


          601   Maltby   -    had arrived back at base and went straight
                to the    ground.
505   Rotherham        -    was doing a transfer between Rotherham
      Hospital    and Barnsley Moor Lane and as soon as empty
      he went straight to the scene.


203   Sheffield    -        as far as I can recall he was working
      and when clear went straight to the scene.


607   Maltby -     this was a volunteer off duty who came into
      work and kept on my channel, he went straight to the
      scene and reported in saying he was a single handed
      volunteer i.e. driver only.


308   Sheffield    -       was working in Sheffield on outpatients
      and went to the scene as soon as clear.


105   Volunteer crew came on too late to assist at the scene,
      but did 999 calls and emergency transfers.


1101 Barnsley Station         -   as far as I can recall he was at
      the station and went straight to the scene.


All these vehicles were kept on the outpatients channel
because of the pressure on the emergency reserve channel:
channel 1.


805   Doncaster made a certain number of journeys to and from
      the scene, but then broke down.        At 16.35 I mobilised
               our duty fitter to attend and repair the vehicle.


    23.   Upon reaching the scene the ambulances reported to the
          senior officer on site who deployed them where required.


    24.   I kept on receiving calls from vehicles passing messages on
          to hospitals and gathering and relaying information to crews


•
          as and when it became available.


    25.   It was from the messages that I began to realise that it was
          a major incident.   Crews would report back in some cases
          stating that they had a D1 (this is the code for a body i.e.
          a death).   In other cases they would report that they were
          treating bad crush injuries and asked me to contact the
          hospital to prepare them for admission.


    26.   Initially we did so, but it soon became clear that because
          of the volume the hospitals were too busy to be logging
          calls, we used a special hot line to the Royal   Hallamshire
          Casualty and to Northern General Casualty.


    27.   Throughout the course of the incident I had no problems with
          communications with my vehicles.


    28.   Radio contact was direct to the vehicle.


    29.   Initially I directed vehicles to the Leppings Lane end where


                                  ^0
      the incident was thought to be taking place.


30. Soon afterwards, about 10 to 15 minutes approximately the
      location was changed to the gym entrance off Penistone Road.


31.   It is only a short journey from the Penistone Road entrance
      to the Northern General and further on, the Royal Halamshire
      Hospital.


32.   Communication from my control was solely between me and the
      ambulances I have referred to.      No one else can use that
      frequency.


33.   In the course of the incident I needed to use our phone
      line.   An example would be to telephone the Royal Halamshire
      and Northern General Hospitals.         This was virtually
      impossible to do.    The lines were ringing, but were not
      answered presumably because of pressure from outside calls
      and work during the incident.


34.   Another problem was that the press and media effectively
      blocked our phone lines asking for information about the
      incident.    I dealt with ITN twice, the Manchester Guardian,
      BBC Leeds and the Times on the phone.     They would not get
      off the line and so I spoke to them telling them that we
      were attending an incident, but nothing more.




                              4-t
35.   At about 1730 there were no longer any casualties to remove
      from the ground and I was asked by           _ in charge if I
      could get vehicles to transfer people from the Halamshire to
      the King Edward VII in Sheffield.




      I sent him vehicles:-
      505
      607
      1101

      203
      403
      805
      801
      308 to transfer patients.


36.   I would liaise with the ambulances to inform the King Edward
      Hospital of their arrival.      Reception was organised by Mr
      Hartley in control and Mrs Wooley at the Hallamshire.


37.   I co-ordinated this between the Halamshire and my crews.
      This continued from approximately 17.30 to 19.00.


38.   In the meantime I also dealt with transfers from Northern
      General incoming casualty unit to the Royal Halamshire CAT
      SCAN (bodyscanner).


                                  Z
39. These were seriously ill crush victims from the incident.
      The scan was required prior to surgery.


40.   By this time it was approaching evening and as the vehicles
      under my control became clear or empty I sent them back to
      their bases.   I then checked that all of my vehicles were
      off the air and finished and accordingly I closed my control
      at 20.30.


Dated this        day of               1989




                             43
