                      D E P A R T M E N T OF HEALTH A N D SOCIAL SECURIT Y
                         R ic h m o n d H o ii'-e , 7 9 W h it e h a l l, L o n d o n S \ \ 1A 2 \ S

                                              T e le p h o n e 01 210 .1000




F J Kenny Esq
Assistant Regional General Manager
Trent RHA
Fulwod House
Fulwood Road
SHEFFIELD



                                                              17 April 1989




Many thanks for all your and Brian Edwards' help in dealing with the
numerous enquiries I have had from the Home Office in connection with
the Hillsborough Disaster.

The Home Secretary's statement to the House today is expected to refer
to his request for immediate factual reports on events from the police
and other services, the local authority and the Football Association.
Officials at the Home Office have been in touch and asked me to ensure
that these reports include ones from the local health authority and the
ambulance service.   When we spoke about this you kindly agreed to set
the wheels in motion.

I should emphasise that these reports should be confined to statements
of the facts about their involvement in the rescue operation. They are
not expected to address the many wider issues that are properly a matter
for the official Inquiry.

I have told Home Office that we shall try to provide them with these two
factual reports as quickly as possible.      Do you think it would be , v
possible to let me have them by the end of next week?      I realise (thev
many other calls on everyone's time, particularly at the moment may make
this very difficult, but do let me know if you feel it is an impossible
task.

                                                                                      Yours sincerely




                                                                                        BARRY SLATER
Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
Tel: Sheffield (0742) 630 30 0   Telex: 547246 TRHA G   Fax: (0742) 306956
                                                                             trent
Your Reference:                                                              REGIONAL
Our Reference:    F J K /^ ^                                                 HEALTH
Please ask for:   Mr F J Kenny                                               AUTHORITY




 Mr B Slater
 Regional Liaison Division
 Richmond House
 79 Whitehall
 LONDON
 SW1A 2NS


  28 April 1989


  Dear Mr Slater

  I refer to your letter of 17th April, 1989 requesting irimediate factual
  reports concerning the involvement of our Hospitals, and Ambulance and
  Blood Transfusion Services in the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday 15th
  April, 1989.

  As I have already informed you, extensive debriefing is proceeding in
  preparation for our participation in Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry and the
  reports prepared (copies attached) are necessarily of a preliminary and
  factual nature in order to avoid, as I am sure we must at this stage, wider
  issues which are properly in the province of the other Inquiries.

  Apart from our involvement in the official Inquiry, arising from the
  Region’s responsibilities under Circular HC(77)1, we will shortly be
  holding our own Region/Di strict debriefing meeting with a view to
  formulating in due course a report for submission to the Regional and
  District Health Authorities and the Department and consideration of any
  operational matters which need dealing with in advance of the official
  Inquiry.

   Please do not hesitate to contact me if there is any further information
   you require.

   Yours sincerely




   Regional General Manager
MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE

                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                 H I L L S B O R O U G H    E M E R G E N C Y

        BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE TO THE
         HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989

 1   Activation of Mai or Disaster Plan

     1.1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
         regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
         Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports.

     1.2 Northern General Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
         Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
         to ‘stand b y ’ as there was an incident with casualties at
         Hillsborough.     A further message was received at approximately 15.25
         hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the
         Northern General Hospital.     At approximately 15.27 hours the
         paediatric cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty
         from Hillsborough.     The ambulance driver stated that there had been
         a major accident at the Football Ground.

     1.3 Charge Nurse Batty at the Northern General Accident and Emergency
         Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
         prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
         instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
         call-out cascade for a major disaster.

     1.4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
         approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
         to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

     1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs B Williams, Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
         and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
         implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to
         ‘stand b y ’ by the police.

     1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
         Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
         casualties.

     1.7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
         Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
         Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
         from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
         monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the
         receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
         Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
         Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
         anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At
   approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room
   and, in response to a hospital staff enquiry, confirmed that a major
   alert was in being and the hospital duty Nursing officer notified
   switchboard which commenced cascade call out for staff in accordance
   with major disaster procedure.

Accident and Emergency Department

2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
    Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
    the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
    by approximately 17.30 hours.

2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
    and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
    approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
    approximately 18.15 hours.

Site Medical Teams

3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
    team to attend the site at approximately 15.45 hours.   The team,  f
    comprising two doctors, was collected by ambulance from the
    Northern General Hospital at approximately 15.55 hours (earlier
    response was not possible because of the volume of casualties in the
    Accident and Emergency Department).   The team was sent back on
    arrival at the Ground but the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was
    retained for use at the Ground.

3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
    a request although it had put a team on stand by, ready to respond to
    any request to attend the site of the incident.   No ambulance
    reported to collect the team.

Patients Statistics

4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
    Hospitals from the incident are as follows

                                      NGH             KHH           T0TA{

Casualties brought
to Accident & Emergency               88              71                159

Dead on arrival or died in
the Accident & Emergency              11               1                 12

Treated and discharged                21              45                 66

Admitted                              56              25                 81

Admitted to ITUs (included
in total admissions above)             19              7                 26

Subsequent transfers from ITU
(for scans and neurological care)          7 to RHH    7 from NGH         7

Subsequent deaths                      2                                  2
4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
    on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the
    Northern General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the
    Royal
    Hallamshire Hospital.

4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
    District General Hospital.

Hospital Responses

5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
    proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
    the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
    District or in the inter-face with the other emergency services can
    be made for future planning.

5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
    HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
    HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
    QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
    staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
    others involved in the disaster.

5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles were:-

    5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
          orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at
          Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

    5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
          transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
          transfers were made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

    5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
          for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
          hospitals and to release staff for the district general
          hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.

    5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
          receive casualties if required.

    5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
          Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
          two district general hospitals.

    5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
          with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
          practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
          Hospital to take medical emergencies.

    5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
          Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
          Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
          ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
          emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
          hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until
              9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
              confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
              Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.

6   Communications

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agencies

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
        social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.




    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        offers of help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the following:-

        Sunday. 16 April :

        Mr D Blunkett MP (to Northern General Hospital)

        Archbishop of Liverpool, the
        Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
        and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

        Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
        (accompanied by Mr I Patnick MP at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital)     flj

        Chair of Liverpool Council          )
        Lord Mayor of Sheffield accompanied) Sunday Royal Hallamshire   Hospital
        by Councillor Clive Betts           ) Monday Northern General Hospital
        Lord Mayor of Nottingham            )


        Monday. 17 April:

        Liverpool Football Team

        TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales




                                     4
          Tuesday. 18 April;

          HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital)

          The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

          Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party
          accompanied by Councillor Clive Betts


          Wednesday. 19 April;

          The Bishop of Hallam

          Nottingham Forrest Football Team


          Thursday. 20 April;

          Lord Justice Taylor

          Chief Constable Dear, West Midlands Police


          Tuesday. 25 April

          Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN




27 4 89




                                      5
Trent Regional Health Authority


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Report of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service



1.   Two Liaison Officers of Station Officer rank were based inside

     Hillsborough with radio communications well before the kick off.        It

     is our normal policy to have one or both Liaison Officers at every match,
     and both attend every major game.      The Liaison Officers were stationed

     at pitch level as for major matches the Club does not supply the tickets
     for the south stand which we normally receive.      In addition there was

     a fully equipped emergency ambulance with two crew members at the
     ground and another as back up at Middlewood Ambulance Station, a little

     under one mile away.     Both ambulances were specifically assigned to
     this match;   that is our usual procedure for major football matches

     at Hillsborough.


2.   The first notification received by SYMAS of any need for our

     involvement came at 1508 hours from Police Headquarters when a fleet
     of ambulances was requested to attend at the Leppings Lane entrance
     to the ground;     no notification of the nature of the incident was

     received.


3.   Within 15 minutes eleven SYMAS ambulances had reached Hillsborough.
     In total forty two ambulances attended, of which thirty one were

     SYMAS vehicles and eleven came from outside areas.      Most of these

     vehicles made several trips between the ground and the Sheffield
     hospitals.    In addition further vehicles were brought in from

     outside SYMAS and were put on stand by.


4.   A Divisional Superintendent arrived on the scene before 1515 hours,

     the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer and the Senior Duty
     Officer arrived at Hillsborough at 1523 hours and the Assistant Chief

     Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Operations) before 1600 hours.
 At 1519 hours SYMAS was informed by the Police that they had told the

 Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General Hospital of the incident

 at Hillsborough.   At 1520 hours, SYMAS informed Barnsley and Rotherham

 District General Hospitals that the incident had escalated and at

 1523 hours a Charge Nurse at the Northern General Hospital was verbally

 informed by a Leading Ambulanceman that a major incident had been

 declared.


 At 1536 hours the Royal Hallamshire were asked to supply a medical team.
 At 1538 hours the same request was made of the Northern General and at

 1540 hours of the Barnsley District General Hospital.    The medical
 teams from each of the Northern General and the Barnsley District

 General were taken to the ground by ambulance.



 The major incident vehicle arrived at the ground at 1540 hours.


 One hundred and seventy two casualties were taken to hospital by

 ambulance, initially to the Northern General and then to the Royal
 Hallamshire.    Two patients were taken to Barnsley District General

 Hospital.


 All casualties had been removed from Hillsborough by 1620 hours.


 Ninety four fatalities were taken to the Medico Legal Centre in

 Sheffield, some after having been returned from the Northern General

 and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals.    The last of the fatalities left

 Hillsborough at 0528 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.



incident was closed at 0530 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
                            TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989


                  Report From Trent Regional Blood Transfusion Centre


15.30    Call from Glasgow BTS with offer of help - they had seen it on TV.

15.35    Call from Dr M Greaves, Consultant Haematologist,
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital to:

             1)   notify of disaster

             2)   request blood           20   0   Positive
                                          20   A   Positive   )
                                           9   0   Negative       sent at 16.00
                                           9   A   Negative
                                          10   0   FFP

15.40        Transport Officer arrives.

15.50        Switchboard Operator, Deputy Donor Organiser, extra driver arrive.

16.00        Medical Officer on-call (Dr Forman), Donor Organiser, backup
             Despatch Orderly arrives.

16.00        Call from the Northern General Hospital requesting 20 units of O
             Negative blood - sent at 16.20.

17.00        Call from Barnsley District General Hospital requesting:

             20 O Positive, 10 A Positive - sent at 17.15.

The Director, Chief Administrator, further Consultant Haematologist, relief
Telephonist and Donor Attendant Supervisor also attended.

4 further Donor Panel Department staff were called in to help deal with the
constant stream of ’phone calls from potential donors which continued until
~ 2 2 .00.

Further offers of help from Liverpool BTS, North-East Thames BTS,
Birmingham BTS, Edinburgh BTS, Lancaster BTS and the Army Blood Supply
Depot were received.
18th April 1989




SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989



The events at Hillsborough last Saturday were one of the most serious

disasters ever faced by the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

They will be the subject of a major public enquiry.     This must limit

immediate comment.     Nevertheless, it is important for SYMAS to put the

record straight concerning some factual aspects of their involvement.



In accordance with standard procedures one SYMAS ambulance and its crew

plus two liaison officers were at the ground before the kick off.     Another

SYMAS ambulance and its crew were on stand by in the vicinity.     SYMAS

control at Rotherham were notified of the incident at 3.08 pm.     Ten further

ambulances were immediately despatched.    Two senior officers, including the

Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer, had arrived by 3.23 pm.       By

3.25 pm 12 vehicles and their crews were operational at the ground.       As

off-duty staff reported in, further vehicles were despatched and within one

hour of the incident 40 fully equipped emergency ambulances from South

Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and West Yorkshire were

operationally involved.     In this connection, SYMAS would like to place on

record its thanks for the assistance rendered by neighbouring ambulance

authorities and their crews.    The officers deployed by SYMAS included fully

trained para-medics.
The stadium was cleared of all live casualties within 75 minutes of the

initial alert.



SYMAS and its staff did everything in their power to support life after

this terrible event.   It believes its response was both speedy and

efficient.   Its officers at Hillsborough worked hard and with determination

to relieve the injured and to convey them to hospital.   It deeply regrets

the loss of life that took place and offers its sincere condolences to the

bereaved.



The Service has issued this statement to record the basic framework of the

facts concerning its response.   It will co-operate fully with Lord Justice

Taylor’s Enquiry and make available its records and staff as need be.
FROH SflS FLB HQ EDINBURGH                                   04,21,1989 15:19                NO, 3      P, 2
  -.4#
                                    OF

                      CHIEF AMBULANOE OFFICERS




          20 April 1989
                                                             Our ref:                        'llf'CDl


                                               NEWS RELEASE


         I!!? *S t ?C - n       Chief Ambulance Officers,                               Region           sent
            ^           l e t t e r t o t h e Secretary of the                          Football
         and the Scottish Football Association:

          "HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND DISASTER

         The "ffoli^traaldv^o^i1 h???1?* th® circumstances leading                               u,
         (oot«!      ground,                  stadiums                9   *   ™   ”*   faster.
          Voluntary First-Aid                                                  events
                                                    often supporcea t>y a
          with the variety of
          The        "•                            probieme whicli wili
                            quite understandably view large crowd problems as Police
         'crowd:l^ntrbl;‘issues        and .not  intiallv  in
          such^a;vtri " ~ --'a- .. . .     -.            ~
                                                         x         health care
          Ambulance             occurs  speed   of  response  is imperitiv^.
                       1 ^ --— W         equipped by virtue of staff,
                        a"d 6xP?ri®«ce to provide the on-site erne,.yeney
          treatment, communications and command structure to ensiire
          takeft1116^hosDital               are Positively resuscitated before
          taKen to hospital. To ensure that there is a professional emergency
         Premier DiviRlrt®               suyely time that, at all internatio         First.' or
         Premier Division matches (and other similar large public events} a '
         professional Ambulance Officer should be on dutv at

         terma of potential for patient ^ u r y            Ld    ^ S L ^ o             coordinate all
         patient care resources effectively.                           y               co-ordinate all

         to £ e s n * M f aM ken place      Hillsborough, and Ambulance Staff directed
                    uESsvSiS:..1**11wond- 1^ «                            daath        ton   lAntt
         Further information can be obtained from:

         Scotland    -   D J Carrington, Secretary, Scottish Region
                                            Chief Ambulance Officers
                         Tel. 031-447-8746   Fax: 031-447-2484
         UK              V N Jolliffe, National Secretary
                         E l . ' M O j f M M ? , 0 * C W e f AmbUl—       0«lC.r.
        CONFIDENTIAL



TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY



     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
     SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989
    HILLSBOROUGH               DISASTER

    It has been agreed to hold a de-briefing on Tuesday 2 May 1989 at the
    Regional Conference Centre, Lodge Moor Hospital.

    A buffet lunch will be available frcm. 1.00 pn in the Board Roan of Lodge Moor
    Hospital. The de-briefing meeting will ccrrmence at 2.00 pm in Suite A at the
    Regional Conference Centre.

    AIM

    To receive reports frcm the NHS services involved in order to:-

    (a)   Produce a report to enable experience gained to be shared.

    (b)   Reach conclusions on the effectiveness of major incident response
          procedures.

    (c) Make recarmendatians.


•
    Please note that it will be necessary to also let Mr Gostley have written
    details of the Antoulance Service, Hospitals and DHA reports to assist in
    ccnpjLLaticn of the first Draft of the RHA report which will be circulated for
    ccmnent prior to submission to the RHA and the Department.




    Co-ordinator
    J A Costley
    Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
    24 April 1989




                                          1
                            PROGRAMME


1.00   Assemble and buffet lunch in Board Room of Lodge Moor Hospital

2.00   Meeting in Suite A, Regional Conference Centre
       Introduction by Chairman                       Dr R Alderslade
                                                      mo


       Report by South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

       Report by Sheffield Health Authority

       Report by Northern General Hospital

       Report by Royal Hallamshire Hospital

       General Discussion

       Conclusions

       Recommendations




                                  2
Participants

Trent Regional Health Authority

Dr R Alderslade (Chairman)   Director of Public Health Medicine/Regional
                             Medical Officer
Mr   J   A Costley           Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
Mr   F   J Kenny             Assistant Regional General Manager (Admin)
Mr   D   Hull                Regional Public Relations Officer
Mr   J   Evans               Regional Solicitor
Mr   A   J Callaghan         Solicitor to the RHA
Mr   A   G Chappell          Solicitor to the RHA
                             Assistant Secretary (General Aministration)
                             Secretary to RHEPO


Sheffield Health Authority

Mr A Mapplebeck              District General Manager
Mr K Thornton                Deputy District General Manager
Miss D Hallett               Solicitor to Sheffield HA


South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

Mr   A   Page                Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
Mr   A   Hopkins             Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer
Mr   D   Jones               Assistant CAO (Operations)
Mr   A   Smith               Assistant CAO (Control and Ccmnunications)


Northern General Hospital

Mr N S McKay                 Unit General Manager
Miss R A Dando               Director of Nursing Services
Mr J Wardrope                Consultant in Accident and Emergency
A N Other?                   General Surgeon


Royal Hallamshire Hospital

Mr D H Baldwin               Uhit General Manager
Mrs R Carter                 Senior Assistant Matron
Dr D L Edbrooke              Consultant Anaesthetist
A N Other?                   General Surgeon




                                      3
trent               T REN T RE G IO NA L H E A L T H A U T H O R I T Y




            W ith the Compliments o f the

                 Regional General Manager




Fulwood House,
    Old Fuiwood Road,                            Telephone: 630300
        Sheffield S10 3TH                          (STD Code 0742)
                                                                                                                                                                                         3305.


TPe.AC           Sift.

                         ;             A n                                                                     U S T T e f c         tCrvi           0'~r"Te£ t ) \ S ^ S l
AT* '"The      A c 'fi’c -J ^ ^ 5                                     '"T*Vfe*J                                    S o o 'm HcCc^h\<& ^ e i^ P c - u iW
^rH ^o u A M ce S e ^ c . ^ - f b                                      C ^e^- u f                                  *q r^ ccjMferT%fJcJo f t - r S fe ^o 6
                    M=viei-                c<>ooe^M5                                               VA\uus^>c^o                     OvS^~Te£ C ^                                 lS’Trt
                                   M f e J u AlOcS                            fe&*^«4Co                                A&fr
“X ^ i v i     \ Q v * < x ? f       g y        ^        f f ^ e .U                   O p              5 6 ^ 0 (2-               OF^vOEtS                                        WeO€
  ^ © eM T              ^"T          "T i^e OTm              cT       T S * T ) ^ i O > T v H ' O A “ieO } p v ^ o                                                              Uit1t\
 14c> lo \ ^ 5         -^*vf<iC K «v‘T icio     VM c < ^         o f rtef<?-v3Aus ^ c n " T h ^
 Y?g~$$'T<i                       At^O      c & < l 't 'A u j t4 w c H    . T fe  C v tie F AN&/Liwd
o^RcfeC-              is         Q o c r r % o               A^>                                                              S c e ^         wiAs                  Ccjs^teO
              *75“ r-ftKieT^S                       A<oO Se^<-o«_ a F ftc e ^ S u e n e                                                      f fe ^ ^ T ^ S o v j+ te T
V^v h v t        vi$e>            irsieeoeo                                       \J fv io fv tc €                                                   JA eK \£ & o j AT ioi
\/Vo                             Sot-te              OftbeS                           < 4 - ^ " l ^ M J e - ^ o ^ aY                                   ^           g v ],       Uitte£€
U e ^                                                                                                              ?    \MU-H                          "04C
 C A :*-^ O U T                                   tsJoT' F u u o N              ?        v io u L /'b k! O
 S^oT^      Hc><z-Vis                          i% i£ocj#w ce      o F ^ c jb £ - ’ wvv-S c^K*MCj^ *? VitVM
      if^S ^ " T           —     f^e             SfatCL                       H A ^ o .                    ^ r p ^ u o e ^ T                ifb^                    ^      T             CtioPc          .



   A ^uo«^i                  A-%           <P(2_\^1eto                                                                                   ^ X .0 ._ C ^ hCiDS •?
 VkVH           w > <\?>          ~“C ^ e           <h (V3 ^ &-                                                          \jt£*v tjue          ^\£^3k                       coIi%\ii:
V\                                 u nU T "              Pl c S                   U A U iiM ? '^                         S r'MbE'tc&G£-3
  feoL-^r        coT-rer£S                           Y   M    -   *   *   X   >           o f              Arwjp              ^.ef^r            ^ 1 0                    f e t ^ 4 G
A r ^AJUQ k] CL r f a & i J c r H ? \sSW^\      s0 \ 0 O $=fMVTco<*-HAc OF^tcJef'-S
t ih^ ~"T^*c   <flJ^-€>\^0 ( tfsio'T"    'rOv.clcn'w         '$-e>CJES ^ V^\^M
W     T l-v e O ^ o 'T V   L U ^e rF ^VnS^u^wtG. o F f^ o E f2- (^ee ? m <ctm c^oseo
' P t W C f c . ^^ jM ^ Q        <2>*^~u^                    fi'Toti                                                                                       o F             Ci^e>i^5
V^i*T^           Sevj(.ot                  f         c                t^oO A o e                       off^c^dS                      o>(*.          p*t                         01.0 ^ 1
O d « ^ T ^ < ^             <*. V M - V M           VI^O je                   Mc(2^                    TjfeKi             M^vlF                        S       h   m    * £ >   C        A   &   u   S

        ^ O A M P v e O                         O        w                                                                     f d O - ’^ b ^ i    1 %             f^VTvQk{
                               c f         ^-<c^O-el2-i«OS                        M.^DiC_^VC                       f ^ v D ^ \0>\M                 M ^ D                        fivicAvoti
  c^voers                                                                 m f t                s ^ i ^ S                           seis                                         Kie^e
                                           »^G&v?^rO Pv-J- tfi^cs€>c^o                                                               fv fteesK cX : ViAuvC ?
\ av V %      vieftWr                                                                                                                    C o «o>,i ^           u       £ f <2q *<
 \lcsou^~^t^                                                                  ^       (“^*^)?                  UifcH       WigCS           S<s<^e ? A V ^ H e v ( C S
     ^Co't?-€‘ V             ^                 t-lGvi^ 0 0 TVtVTifc:'^T5 (S (^-                                                io v -O
 YM*0fc 9-eO ?             UHH                 P \P    kS <^T" M o ^ s u it e                                                                                                            ~
                       V ^ v ^ e 1^            ScieT^             'io(Li<a                     ^Wt^^^eL.                        loetUE^            #iW A ^ t A ^ c Je /
                M g^l\cs     us^TeP                                                                                               ®<lcrt J E A U € ( j* \t ^ %
V )vS C o 'T e')|fV ii> '^H€   t>v)to L e f^ v C v ^ ^ T                                                                              ^      ^ObcisHeP
 P\                  T “ M -T T c l€ o f T tfe                                            S tfe f'fte u D S'Tftfc, g ^ x                                           ^idwi
 m o ^ t                               a f          ^ 0               g?e         C   Q    U   t   S   T   e   o         Ayoo                              * n ^ e 'ft^rr
'^ u v ^ st      G dooo               ^ o t                  r ^ o u iu e                      ^ -T v fe               3 e ^ iic E          •n ^ w v 'T ' . P o C ^ l
                     fif H A v O O i ^ S ' X e ^                                                               N ^ r o e o               ^L-OS
      vJicrn^s o p H-iccs                                                         ^o .
                                                                                                                                                           .                        ..




      Coft^>             -Tb               -Tte»JT
                                                                                                                                               >                       J        fc&T.
                        XII   RECOMENDATIONS

153. Staff of all disciplines responded magnificently to this
     incident, at the scene, in the hospitals and at Ambulance
     Controls and are deserving of the utmost credit for their
     professional approach and dedication in the best traditions
     of health care.

154. However, far from being complacent about what worked well we
     should take the opportunity to examine and assess those
     areas of our procedures where having used them in a ’live’
     situation we can now, with some conviction, identify where
     improvements can be made.

155. The main problems are discussed below and centred around:

     (1)     Conrnunicat ions
     (2)    Alerting procedures
     (3)    Triage and casualty clearing station
     (4)     Site Medical Officer/Flying Squad
     (5)     Police Casualty Bureau
     (6)     Documentation of casualties

COMMUNICATIONS

Ambulance

156. The Leicestershire Ambulance Mobile Control and
     communications vehicle suffered technical failure on the way
     to the incident. Thereafter the Ambulance Incident Officer
     used his car/radio as mobile control.

    In the light of this experience the CAO has agreed to review
    the concept of using a mobile conmunications vehicle and
    will be considering mobile communications options based on
    individual officers with key responsibilities in the Major
    Incident Response (MIR) procedures.

Flying Squads

157. The Derbyshire Royal Infirmary (DRI) Flying Squad has a special
     role in the East Midlands Airport Major Disaster Plan, in the
     past the Leicestershire Police have been responsible for
     alerting them.

    It has been agreed that in future the Leicestershire Ambulance
    Service will alert the DRI flying squad at the same time as it
    alerts the Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Ambulance Services.

    The detail of "call out" at each Ambulance Service control
    already covers procedures for alerting the flying squads in        J
    emergencies.
158. It is essential to establish direct contact between the
     hospital Accident and Emergency departments and the Flying
     Squad on site, in order to'provide:-

           (a)   Regularly update the hospital on numbers and
                 type of casualties they can^expect.
           (b)   Request further staff support and equipment to support
                 the scene.
           (c)   Monitor the status of the hospital to continue to
                 receive casualties.

     The system used must not compromise corrmuni cat ions between the
     other emergency services.

    These issues should be discussed and agreed between Accident
    and Emergency Departments and appropriate Chief Ambulance
    Officers.

     The provision of miners style head lamps should be considered
     in order to improve lighting for medical teams at the site.

HOSPITAL

Police Casualty Bureau

159. Relatives rang the Police Casualty number and hospital
     numbers in rotation, in the hope that they might discover
     some information. The hospitals opened telephone points,
     manned by social workers, in order to take details of
     relatives’ enquiries with a promise to contact them once it
     was known whether their relative had been admitted.

    The Major Incident Plan should identify up to four
    telephones and an office for this function.

     There is a need to discuss and agree policy with the police
     regarding procedures and possible shared (NHS/police)
     training needs.

Switchboard

160. Due to,initial television "NEWS FLASH" hospital switchboards
     became blocked with incoming calls, staff volunteering mixed
     with staff responding to long range bleeps which require
     staff to call in, this interfered with the call out
     procedure.

    These problems could be reduced in future by standardising
    the long distance pager systems in use, and either adapting
    pagers with read out, or introducing a major incident paging
    signal and hospital Ex-directory emergency numbers. Ex­
    directory hospital (emergency) numbers should be known to
    all other hospital A & E Depts.

     Additional switchboard staff may be required and instructions
     need to be issued not to respond to incoming calls during the
     ’call out’ sequence. Precise instructions for staff reporting
     for duty or volunteering should be contained in revised MIR
     plan.

     Discussions should be held with British Telecom to discuss
     possible options to overcome these difficulties by installing
     additional lines to be reserved for major accidents only.

Internal Communications

161. Some hospitals experienced both telephone and intercom
     problems for various reasons (building wor'' ■installation of
     new equipment in progress, overload of the s>stem etc).

     Mobile telephones and better intercom systems need to be
     provided between key areas, ie A & E and X-Ray; A & E and
     designated receiving wards; A & E and theatres; Theatre
     Manager and Ward Medical Controller; A & E and Hospital
     Control Room.

     Essential information on casualty numbers and types of
     injury was required to ensure hospital departments received
     the information they needed to support front line activity
     in A & E.

Key Staff
    }'■

162.4 t is highly desirable that during a major disaster, key
     hospital staff from supporting departments should wear
     identification arm bands.

ALERTING PROCEDURE AND CALL OUT SEQUENCE


163. The decision making sequence to declare a ’Major Accident’
     should be simplified and made clear to everyone concerned.

    Each hospital department should designate one person to
    maintain ’cascade’ call-out lists (updated regularly) and
    ensure that all key staff have current copies available at/-o'7
' * home.

     Junior doctors should be issued with ’Major Incident Action
     Cards’ as part of their induction.

TRIAGE AND FLOW OF CASUALTIES

164. The designation of specific hospitals to receive certain
     classifications of casualties should be a routine part of
     ’triage’ on site, eg neuro, spinal and burns to regional
     specialties.

      It is vital, when managing medical resources during an
      incident, to concentrate sub-regional specialist teams at

                                40.
    their base hospitals. Moving patients between hospitals is
    potentially dangerous, but dividing activity between sites
    may deplete these highly specialist resources. The number
    and severity of head injuries meant that all three
    consultant neuro-surgeons were required to cover Accident
    and Emergency, Computerised tomography scanning (CT) and
    Intensive Therapy Unit at the Queen’s Medical Centre.

    If at all possible the consultant orthopaedic surgeon ’on
    call’ should assist with triage in the Accident and
    Emergency department.

    The presence of a Consultant Radiologist at the A & E
    department x-ray is strongly recommended to provide
    immediate and definitive x-ray reports. Much time could be
    saved by this procedure.


SITE MEDICAL OFFICER -   FLYING SQUADS
                                           I .. .   .   -   /v
165. The message received by the DRI was unclear and led to delay
     in mobilising the Flying Squad. There were difficulties of
     co-ordination on site which initially prevented clear
     information being fed back to the Hospitals. Some of this
     was attributable to poor conmunications and conditions at
     the site.

     Nottingham Health Authority are to review the present
     Flying Squad arrangements and consider whether a vehicle
     should be based permanently at QMC to respond to incidents
     requiring a medical team at the scene.

166. Any one of three doctors could have become Site Medical Officer
     but no triage and casualty clearing point were permanently
     established. This was due to the incident being handled on two
     levels, one of which was on the A453 at the top of the incident
     site and the other on the M1 at the bottom of the site. The
     three Flying Squads were each required to devote their
     resources to three sections of the aircraft. Additional
     problems were caused by fuel leaking from the aircraft (17,000
     gallons) and the fumes being generated, Fire Service advice was
     to clear the site as quickly as possible in order that they
     might have the freedom of action required to prevent the possibility of
     fire and explosion. Initially a triage/casualty clearing
     station was established but had to be moved and could not be
     re-established due to the above. Survivors were being
     triaged, treated and body marked prior to their rapid transfer
     to hospital, there was no shortage of ambulance vehicles and
     therefore no delay in moving casualties from the site.

     There should be a common system of identifying Flying Squads
     at the scene, irrespective of their base hospital. It would
     also be useful to include under the word ’doctor’ or ’nurse’
     an appropriate abbreviation for the base hospital.
     These concepts will be discussed in plan review and
     appropriate procedures re-defined in EMA plans.

     Except in the most exceptional circumstances, national and
     local guidance should be adhered to in the setting up of a
     Triage Point and Casualty Clearing Station under the control
     of a Site Medical Officer.

DOCUMENTATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF CASUALTIES

167. Procedures for verifying and recording information about
     casualties should be reviewed. Identifying individual
     patients took longer than anticipated. Some patients went
     directly to theatres and it took time to locate and
     reconcile their details to the information held centrally.
     Passenger lists, when received, should be copied to all
     appropriate hospital departments including medical records.
     It would have been helpful if passenger lists had been in
     alphabetical order.

     There was no standard procedure in use from the site to the
     hospitals, which provided documentation for diagrammatic
     notation.of triage, recording vital signs and treatment
     given;"     .... ^                 ^           : r --           ‘
     -       ^      —                                       ' '- '
     It is considered that there is a need to standardise
     identification systems*used by each agency ^(f»l iee-«i^ NHS) 7
     to ease reconci1iation of hospital documentation to           ' ,/
     information received from relatives enquiries in order to
     assist the police identification procedures.

RE-DIRECTION OF MEDICAL AND SURGICAL EMERGENCIES

168. If possible, arrangements should be identified in major
     incident response procedures to re-direct medical and surgical
     emergencies^td other medical facilities in order to
     substantially increase the ability of the receiving hospital to
     absorb casualties from the incident.

AFTERMATH

169. Hospital departments should include plans for coping with
     the aftermath, with particular emphasis on:

     (1)    Continuing demands on staff with special expertise.
     (2)    Requirements for specialised equipment and
            consumables.
     (3)    Ability to maintain routine services eg possible
            postponement of list surgery, some clinics and other
            planned activity.

     (4)    Counselling of staff, patients and relatives.
STAND DOWN PROCEDURES

170. A clear, unambiguous "STAND DOWN" procedure is required
     which should probably originate "on site" and be
     communicated via Ambulance Controls to the hospitals.

        This will be considered at plan review

MEDIA

171. Intense and sustained media interest must be anticipated.
     Senior persons must be assigned to this function,
     preferably reporting to one central point (control) within
     the hospital. The Press Room must be separate from the
     room/function dealing with relatives enquiries in order to
     maintain privacy.

        Additional pay phone facilities should be provided for the
        media. It should be noted that the media can be used to
        inform both staff and patients (OPD) of the status of the
        hospital and the impact of the incident on normal routines.

BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE

172. The BTS will be asked to consider the preparation of a short
     statement to the media indicating whether blood donors are
     required, or not - if donors are subsequently required, the
     appeal should be initiated and controlled by the BTS.

Re l at i v e s a n d v o l u n t e e r o r g a n i s a t i o n s

173. The importance of establishing a relatives’ area as soon as
     possible is emphasised. Had this incident involved local
     people, the number of relatives would have been quite
     considerable, and their response almost instantaneous.

        A senior person should be responsible for liaison with
        relatives and should report to one central point (control)
        within the hospital. There is also a need to establish an
        office and about four telephones to handle calls from
        relatives.

        An area, separate from the relatives’ waiting room, should
        be identified for volunteers and a senior person assigned to
        control all volunteer activity.

COUNSELLING

174. Counselling and personal support should be co-ordinated
     through one person, and made available to casualties, their
     families and staff. It should involve the medical social
     work department, psychologists and chaplains working
     together.
STAFF

175. Hospital areas can become very crowded with medical, nursing
     and other staff reporting for duty and volunteering their
     services.

     Clear Instructions for staff reporting for duty, or
     volunteering, should be incorporated in all Major Incident
     Response Procedures. It is important to retain some staff
     in reserve to cope with activity 12 - 36 hours following the
     incident.

RECEIVING WARD(S)

176. The Medical Controller should assign a suitable doctor to
     the receiving ward(s) to co-ordinate medical staff, decide
     priorities for surgery and act as the link with ’hospital
     control’,

EQUIPMENT AND CONSUMABLES

177. It is not recorrmended that large reserves of equipment and
     consumables are held specifically for major incidents.
     However, based on variety reduction, increased working
     stocks of a limited inventory of some items, including
     external fixation kits, chest drains, plasma expanders
     theatre instruments and sterile supplies are required.

    Resells!tation equipment was required within examination
    rooms asr many of the patients in X-Ray were critically ill.

     Instructions to obtain and position this equipment should be
     included in action cards for the porters and Medical
     Equipment Services Unit (MESU).
                    Irvine Patnick, OBE, MP




                   H O U SE OF C O M M O N S
                        LONDON SW1A0AA

                                               18th April 1989




15th APRIL 1989 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


May I express to you the gratitude of everyone for the part
the Ambulance Services played in the tragedy.

It is always easy afterwards to "point a finger", but I am
satisfied that through the actions of your service the death
toll was reduced.

I did have a chance of speaking to you once over the weekend
but please convey this letter's contents to your staff.

Enclosed is a copy of Hansard for 17th April which I would
appreciate if this was circulated within the Ambulance Service.




A Page Esq.,
South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service
Headquarters
Moorgate Road
Rotherham.
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                      AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                           FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                              ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                      TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 828820


                    OUR REF:
                                 AP                                        Mr. A. PAGE.JP, F.A.S.I.
                    YOUR REF:                                                   CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                AMBULANCE OFFICER
                    Please ask for:




24th April 1989.


Mr.
Ambulance Advisor,
Department of Health and Social Security,
Alexander Fleming House,
Elephant and Castle,
London.
SE1 6BY


Dear       \

I write to confirm the content of my telephone conversation with you on
Monday 17th April 1989, in that I am now making a very strong request to
you and to other organisations to take what ever action is necessary to
have Chief Ambulance Officers given statutory powers to monitor andprovide
ambulance service advice and cover within sports stadiums which would
include football grounds. These statutory powers should not just be for
football matches but for any large gathering of people.
I should be grateful for any comments you would like to make.
Youife sincgrelg,




A. t'age,
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER


Copies:   Mr. G. Turnbull, President Association of Chief Ambulance
                             Officers
          Sir Michael Carlisle, Chairman Trent Regional Health Authority
        - CONTROL OFFICER

Date:   18.4.89

Time:   1525-1610

About 1515 I got a call at home to return to work - there had been a major
incident at Hillsborough. I returned to work arriving at approximately
1600 almost simultaneously with Control Assistant         and Control
Officer

I assisted the domestic emergency Control Officer |
                                                  ___     1, who was also
monitoring calls from the scene of the incident. We acted as a relay for
messages, sending vehicles from Herries Road Bus Garage to Main Entrance on
Penistone Road. This information was relayed by hand to the Incident Room.
Radio communications were breaking but generally messages were received.

All the messages were clear and concise. I never had need to contact
Hospitals this was being done by Control Assistants.

I finished duty at approximately 2000 enabling me to return to duty at 0600
the next day.

My impression of the atmosphere was of calm, with no hint of panic or
disorder.
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                          R E P O R T


NAME:       Qualified Ambulanceman

VEHICLE:    R608
SHIFT:      1400 - 2200 hours (15 April 1989)


DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:            18th April 1989, 1000 - 1230 hours



I was on afternoon duty on Saturday 15th April 1989, at 1515 hours we
received a telephone call from Control whilst on Station to attend an
incident at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield


We arrived at Hillsborough at approximately                  1537 hours, after experiencing
difficulties in getting through traffic and crowd congestion.                        Eventually
we arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and saw a lot of people
lying on the ground.            As we attempted to get into the ground to remove
casualties we had to struggle because lots of people seemed to want our
Services,    I    noticed      three    policemen     on   horses   who    were   having    great
difficulty in controlling the crowd.                  A policeman pointed to the floor
which indicated to me that we were needed there.


I stopped the ambulance in the area which I believe was adjacent to                           'C'
Gate (on the plan) at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.                           I left the
ambulance and walked to the rear and immediately noticed what I now know
was   a   group    of   dead   bodies    lying   on    the   ground   up   against   some    iron
railings.        I reached     the rear of the ambulance and was pulled away by
someone to a wall on the other side of the drive where a doctor was dealing
with a number of patients.


Together with Leading Ambulanceman                         (my crew mate) we took out both
stretches from our ambulance,             the doctor pointed out to us the two most
seriously injured patients and with assistance from bystanders we placed
them on our stretchers and loaded them onto our ambulance.


                                                                                     /continued
Qualified Ambulanceman


Statement Date:    18/04/89 @ 1000 - 1230 hours



Once we were in the Ambulance we administered Oxygen to both casualties who
appeared to be suffering from crush injuries. At this time I realised that
we were being assisted in the ambulance by someone who I now know to be an
off duty ambulanceman, Lol Yoxhall, from Barnsley Station, who had come to
watch the football match and had been caught up in the incident at the
Leppings Lane West stand area of the ground.


Somebody closed the rear doors of the ambulance and after making the
casualties as comfortable as possible I drove from the ground with a police
motor cycle escort and proceeded to the Northern General Hospital, arriving
there at approximately 1550 hours.


We were met at the Casualty department by hospital staff with trollies
where we transferred the casualties from our stretcher onto the trollies
and we immediately returned to the Football Ground.


We   arrived   back at    the Leppings Lane end of the ground and parked      the
ambulance in the same area of the driveway as on our previous journey and
experienced exactly the same difficulties as before.           Along with Leading
Ambulanceman             ~| and Ambulanceman Yoxhall we placed on our Ambulance
four more casualties (two stretcher and two sitting cases).         At this point
an off duty nurse asked if we needed any help, we said          'Yes' and she got
into the back of the Ambulance.         Leading Ambulanceman           decided to
stay at the ground to do whatever he could.




                                                                       /continued
Qualifed Ambulanceman

Statement Date:   18/04/89 @ 1000 - 1230 hours



I drove the ambulance whilst ambulanceman Yoxhall and the nurse treated the
four casualties. Before I set off a Parkway Ambulanceman told me that the
Northern General Hospital was getting full so I went to the Hallamshire
Hospital.


I arrived at the Hallamshire at approximately 1610 hours. The roads en-
route by this time were well policed and we experienced no difficulty in
getting through. Hospital staff met us on our arrival and we handed over
our patients to them, I radioed Control that we were clear and we once
again returned to the Football Ground.


We arrived back at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Again for the
third time I experienced great difficulty in getting the vehicle through
the crowds and onto the driveway close to Gate 'C'.

I eventually got through and was able to link up again with my crew mate
Leading Ambulanceman         . At this stage there were no live casualties
to deal with only the bodies which I had seen earlier and these had now
been screened off with green sheeting. Leading Ambulanceman            told
me that we were now needed at the Gymnasium and we proceeded to this point.
We were able to get onto Penistone Road and were then in a line of
Ambulances waiting along Penistone Road.


At this time 1 saw Assistant Chief Officer Jones who was getting all the
blankets off the ambulances. 1 removed the blankets from our ambulance and
placed them along with a pile of others onto the pavement. We were then
instructed by either Mr Jones of Station Officer              to go to the
Herries Road Bus Depot approximately 800 yards away and to stand-by at that
area.


                                                                 /continued
Qualified Ambulanceman


Statement taken:   18/04/89 @ 1000 - 1230 hours



After standing-by at the bus depot for approximately 40 minutes we were
directed back to the Gymnasium car park at the Football Ground. On our
arrival we were parked up in the car park with approximately 10 other
ambulances. Shortly after Mr Jones assembled all our staff and he briefed
us on what was to happen next.


After Mr Jones had established that we were a 1400 to 2200 afternoon crew
he released us from the ground to contact Control and return back to our
own area or Station.


We travelled back to Maltby        Ambulance      Station   arriving   there   at
approximately 1845 hours.
            ,.   VZs/d Wec/nesday F.C.
            H if/ s b o ro u g h Ground
                                                                                                                             F lR S T 'A fiy
                                                                                                                                                                                      V

     0             "i*'                                       1                                                                ROOM
                                                                                                                                                             pouce
                                                                                                                                                                         rf *4.

                                                                                                                                                                 >0H
                                                                                                                    ■       '      1                         V
                                                                                                f           p r ^ g g iM
                                                                                                                                       ttofl
                                                                          j         ii.     .       L...... ............
                                                                          \   f                                                        ^W'-TT
                                                                                                                                       /    i
                                                                                                                                       /    *..
                                                              }2=S-'€£.
                                                                          ^         •                //Oy?r,V S-X//5 •

                                                                                                                                                                                              A\
                                                                                                                                                                  i[J ji2 v ^ # ? \:v N \                              ■ » ’—

                                                                                                                                                                       u »                     \ *‘.C*V ' V .                     \
                                                                                                                                                                                              A. lv AW x                        -p \ .
                                                                                                                                                                  ! ii'?,"! j;l i J           f k K*&>\ \                       •i.V
                                                    W E S T



                                                     7a N O
                                                                                                                                                                 ?i.;*
                                                                                                                                                                                          ■   i'
                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                   '   .\\   **
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -•   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <1
          Aw ^ y           EN t ^
                     n c lo s o




                                                         - s T M              *                                 ^
KJ                                                                                  K      G'       G.      SOUTH STAND
     c?            A*©.                H s*e                                                                                       j            & ■


                    T^if^ST       Too(?N(=
                                                                                                                                   wauiif.           fiS.;
ye^»er$                                      r   ./w/rF]                          ' ^ o m c t A L
                   T^ft^vjSf’oA.TC^/             fWWOt 1                                                                                     <<w             . ._j~

                    ■X Sres’TcH«'^ livHg's                                                      owccm's.
                                                                                                LN TR A N C e

                    r u R H s m e s                                                                                     Jit.Vlv."'!■'iSjV.     :!,
                                                                                                                                                      O M ^ 1W   A f C > /



-
    ^ S h a h 'te /d W ed n e sd a y E C .
          H ills b o r o u g h            G ro u n d
                                                                                                                   FIRST'AID                                                     &
    ( J   )      * b                                                                                                                POLICE
                                                                                                                                    ROOM




                                                                                  I |* * L-                       •---■
                                                                                                                           •r — n
                                                                             t                                             /    i
                                                            m*'•fl*«
                                                            Zfi'-r.*-' •   »••             ,          *
                                                                                                   N O X T H STAND '                                 A       % V '                   "'^4
                                                 ;i'?/•'//'?£=% S£f>i2£
                                               h P ^ B z j i               — — ~ *— —•— ■— —■•— —- —• — — — — * — — %
                                                                                                                                                   w\'\\\ \       9    \
                                                                                                                                                                                 7       f   t

                                                                                                                                                     %   m       \.   ~o.




                                                  r r s r

                                                                                                                                         .   i      f c ^ s v ,
                                                                                                                                                    •M ^ V . \ V
                                                                                                                                       ''ll "■'!
                                                                                                                                                   ■ ^ s / ^ N .         \
          * \W A Y
                                                                                                                                                         M       v           -       \



                                                                                                                                      v r ,                                                      v
                                                                                                             SOUTH STAND                                               stawpj -»u


                                                                                                                       manmiinfS-8W 4»»*fcs*31
                      3 n «^   TooKwey
                                               pouce                                    OFFICIAL
                                              CONTROL



                     -2 ST*«S*rCHfi£fcJ                                                        owccm's.
                                                                                               M T f i A N C e
                     2. SjTrgfcS,

                         n>o»<;riir<f                                               ;
                                                                             , ‘.*r •                              ^-v--
                                                                                                                                                                                 :qrv              w   &    t    /
                                                                                                                    /
      S h c f / i s / d W e d n e sd a y E C .
              H ills b o r o u g h               G ro u n d
                                                                                                                                                FtP.ST'AlQ

      (T) rt/rt                                                                                                                                                  POLICE
                                                                                                                                                                 ROOM




                                                                >&>./•. «rv t
                                                                .■j • • »i* ♦•     •     >•



                                                                                                                "   H O A T H     & T A N O                           ■pni
                  !I
                                                                                                                                                                       rr-0

                    J*                                                                                                                                                                                                             rv)1
                                                                                                                                                                                       iU : 'A V \\        *Z-
                       /' /W                                                                                                                                                                                                          ftU tf
                                                                                                                                                                                            v '* \ w xf\ -p
                    n                                                                                                                                                                  fk              \         ''jL V        /     'fAtfcw
                                                                                                                                                                 !c n-fn          ••                       XK ^           \A         o r*
                                                                                                                                                                   'l.
                                                                                                                                                                                   i'^'V^-rX \ v (;\ \ \ \
                                                                                                                                                                                   ^ •A V -A v.>—\                        /V \ j j s
            A w * y rAAJi                                                                                                                                        ic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                \k i >             T > ^
            • AMD
                                                                                       *■ ■*        ♦**• •— •                                   ------------— J # J
                                                                                 7 ^ ^ = ? r r zrrjt-a-rir**—                                   1»•• ••• **••••/;
                                                                                                                                                              -T»v/
                                                                                                                                                                             I. / M v ^                                               ^ \
                                                                                                 rs G               G.
GiReKiP                            Xoueoft'/                                                                                                          1      *
      o f                           He                                                                                                              * "^sU u     ^ ' s S s O ”

I   >£A^ 3 » > c s                 C M u A lT iCS p o u c T ]
     *Slo                                                                                          cv/vc/^i
                                   An*       /    CONTROL I
    <Sc-0Si£K>Cy                                                                                                    ~    ;C I i £ 3 * .
                                                                                                                owccm's.
      'n                               s /n
                       t u r n s t il e s
                                            TO

                                                  trrrrm
                                                                                                                E N T R A N C E



                                                                                                                                          &x   d
                                                                                                                                               ..-■;►>:kv
                  SOOTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                     R E P O R T



NAME:       Station Officer

VEHICLE:    Major Incident Tender Vehcicle

SHIFT:      1530 - 0000 hours

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:       20 April 1989, 1005 -



I was proceeding in my own car towards work to start duty at               1530 hours,
when I heard on local radio of the problems at Sheffield Wednesday Football
Ground.    The time was approximately     1506 hours.     I immediately proceeded to
Rotherham Station and was turning into the hospital grounds when I observed
a Service Range Rover proceeding along Moorgate Road at speed.


I arrived at the Station and attempted to contact Control by telephone, the
lines were      engaged.   I collected    the Duty Range Rover and Ambulanceman
               and proceeded to Control


Upon arrival, I entered the Control Room and was immediately instructed by
Superintendent Ray Clarke to commence telephoning staff from a call out
list.     Before I could start this, I was instructed by Superintendent Clarke
to collect the Major Incident Tender Vehicle and take it to Hillsborough
Gymnasium.


I returned to Rotherham Station with Ambulanceman                         and collected
the Major Incident Tender Vehicle.        I then realised that I       did not have the
UHF radio sets, so I returned to Control to collect them.


I   informed    superintendent   Clarke   that   I had   called   to   collect   the UHF
radios - there were none in the charging rack.           I checked the radio case in
the Superintendent's office and it contained two sets oneof which was                 the
VHF set and the other was        a UHF    set without a battery.         I reported    to
Superintendent Clarke that there were no radios and that I was leaving.


                                                                             /continued
20 April 1989

Station Officer



I left Headquarters monitoring Channel 2 on the radio.    I encountered
Police Officers on traffic duty from the junction of Penistone Road and
Rutland Road all the way to the ground.


At Hillsborough Park I encountered a lot of football supporters walking
back towards the City Centre.     I had to slow down because they were
spilling into the road.


Traffic was being directed up Herries Road, I indicated to the Police
Officer that I wanted to go straight through.     Behind the Officer were
ranks of Police Officers, three or four deep, right across Penistone Road
North. I was directed into the first entrance on my left.


I was not aware of receiving any radio transmissions from the time I
approached the Ground.


I proceeded through the arch past two fire engines until my progress was
stopped by the road being completely blocked by Police vehicles.


I was then re-directed out by the same route and was eventually allowed
through the Police Ranks and gained access to the Ground via Gate 'O' at
the Gymnasium. I was met by Station Officer Higgins and Mr Hopkins. I was
instructed to park the vehicle and distribute body bags, stretcher
canvasses and poles that were in the vehicle. These were immediately used.

I was then instructed to lock the vehicle and stay with it.   After repeated
attempts, I was unable to get the radio in the Major Incident Vehicle to
function. My handset, however, was still functional on channel 2.



                                                                  /continued
20 April 1989

Station Officer



Ambulances were being loaded at Gate 'O', immediately behind me. I went to
the Police room under the North Stand. It appeared to be full of uniformed
Police Officers.   I attempted to gain access to a telephone - none was
available. I went to the first aid room. There were some young St John's
Cadets in tears, being comforted. I returned to the Major Incident Unit.

The Ambulances were arriving and being loaded. There were a large number
of distraught fans seeking friends and relatives.

I issued some bundles of brown and grey blankets from the Major Incident
Unit.   A West Yorkshire Emergency Tender Vehicle arrived and another 10
body bags were obtained from this vehicle.


I was aware of Mr Jones' presence and assisted with the marshalling and
loading of vehicles. During this, a non SYMAS vehicle broke down but was
eventually re-started.


The number of casualties started to ease off and vehicles started to be
stacked at Herries Road Bus Garage. British Telecom engineers arrived to
install telephone links for the Police.


I was instructed to attend the Bus depot and stand down all the non-SYMAS
vehicles.

Later in the evening, I liaised with Police regarding the organisation of
the identification and eventual removal of bodies to the Medico Legal
Centre after positive identification.




                                                                /continued
4

20 April 1989

Station Officer



More trollies were obtained from Longley Ambulance Station to speed up the
process when large numbers of relatives arrived from Liverpool by coaches.

At 0500 hours there were only the unidentified bodies remaining at the
Gymnasium.   These were documented and transferred to the Medico Legal
Centre by 0615 hours.

Shortly afterwards the staff were stood down.
Control Officer           0900 - 1630 OPD - 15.04.89 - stayed until 20.30.



Superintendent R. Clarke asked for all the spare outpatient vehicles to be
despatched to Hillsborough.


12 vehicles were deployed between approximately 1508 and 1600 hours as and
when they became available from throughout the county.


I kept the vehicles updated regarding the hospital status and   I also kept
them on the outpatient channel because of the pressure on the   "E" and the
ERC channels. I actually used some of these vehicles for "E"    calls within
Sheffield because the incident at the ground had been cleared   of all live
casualties.

I also used eight of the outpatient crews to transfer cases from the
Hallamshire Hospital to the King Edward Hospital. This transfer being
conducted between 1730 and 1854 hours. As they had completed their role at
the incident the crews continued to transfer patients between hospitals.

At 1534 hours, 1 transferred a medical team from the Northern General
Hospital to the scene.


We kept informing the Hospital of standby requirements, they asked us not
to do this.


Doctors and Nurses came on 999 lines to ask if they were required at
hospital. The telephone numbers to the hospitals were blocked, the same
happened with equipment suppliers.


The press calls were very heavy.
All Vehicles on Outpatient Duties


Vehicles sent to scene, Hillsborough football ground.

1206 Bravo
 407 Sierra
 906   Delta
 805   Delta
 801   Delta
 601   Romeo
 505 Romeo
 203 Sierra
 607 Romeo - Single handed
 308 Sierra
 105 Sierra - doing cases for domestic side.
1101 Bravo


1635 hours


 805 Delta - broke down Glossop Road, Claremont Place, duty fitter informed
             and attending.




Transfer to King Edward Hospital from Royal Hallamshire Hospital   (KEH)

 505   2
       stretchers to KEH          to base 1805
 607   2
       stretchers to KEH - 1735   to base 1805
1101   2
       stretchers to KEH          to base 1809
 203   2
       stretchers to KEH          to base 1813
 403 4 double handed to KEH       to base 1833
 805 1 stretcher
     2 double handed to KEH       to base 1854
 801 2 stretchers to KEH          to base 1823
 308 1 stretcher to KEH           to base 1843
LEADING AMBULANCEMAN              - MIDDLEWOOD STATION

Vehicle 101 - Duty 1400 - 2200


Crewed with Aaibulanceaan


At (*) we were at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. I was aware of something
happening at the Hillsborough Football ground. Upon radioing green we were
directed by control to attend at Sheffield Wednesday Football ground.

We proceeded to the gymnasium at the Penistone Road entrance of the
Football Ground. We switched the radio channel to ERC.


On arrival at the main gate to the gymnasium entrance we were confronted by
a group of people carrying a victim on an advertising board. We were
unable to make any further progress.


We were forced into loading him and almost immediately we were in the
position of having to accept another victim as a result of frantic fans
trying to do what they thought best for the victim.


The first man was dead, the second alive, but




We were forced to abandon our intentions of reporting to the gymnasium and
left the scene for the Northern General Hospital Accident and Emergency
Departments.


At the Hospital we were met by Doctor Jim Wardrobe and Charge Nurse Ian
Batty. They directed us to admit the live patient into the Resuscitation
room and the second victim into a temporary mortuary in what is normally
the Orthopaedic Clinic. Other bodies were already there.
Leading Ambulanceman



We returned to the ground and were met by Station Officer         , who
directed my driver to a specified location. I left the vehicle and was
directed by Station Officer       to the gymnasium. I took my infusion and
intubation box and assisted a number of Doctors as they treated the
injured. The gymnasium was being used as both treatment centre and
temporary mortuary.


I also assisted them with the evacuation of casualties from the gymnasium
helping to load them onto ambulances.


Once all the casualties had been cleared, I toured the gymnasium,
collecting contaminated Sharps, discarded by the Doctors, and placing them
in my "Sharp Case" for proper disposal later.


During this time I was working mostly on my own initiative, a suggestion I
had put to Control Officer          1as we returned to the ground, and
which he approved and authorised.


As far as 1 am aware, I was the only para-medic deployed in the Casualty
Clearing Area.


Once the casualties had been cleared I attended a briefing conducted by
Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer Jones who was deploying staff.


I reported to control and was instructed to return to station. By this
time I had rejoined my original partner on our original vehicle.
                                                                                                                                    —                              M ' £ * 6 /

%v///(? /d W ednesday F. C
  H ills b o ro u g h         G ro u n d
                                                                                                f ir st   ' A io



                                                                                                                        pol   ice




                                                                        H Q X T H   S T A N D                                                                                            *•V i 2 ^ S /
                                   S f i f S
                                                                                                                                                                    X                               7
                                                   gSsJ
                                                                                                                              | ,| ||h,Ij,!| % v \ \               *55           0   '   pA‘> v
                                                                                                                              !!i I illliiJi i 'i^ U X \ \ v o \
                                                                                                                                                      \A \i-r\ -
                                                                                                                                                          \v \ w           ~
                                                                                                                                                    W k               \    -jL
                                     tfcS T

                                                                                                                                                    ■"
                                                                                                                                                              \/7/A\
                                                                                                                                                     i,.vA-'V x\ vY-
                                                                                                                                                                   --\
                                                                                                                                                    i          A     ,<\ \\ ••           v\ >


                                                                                                                            i:|l| «,,!i.H
A W A Y   FAN5 ENT^ti^'                                                                                                                           "nH7.'tr..;* l?\x^ N/\\
                                                                                                                                                                        v s^'v\
                                                                                                                                                                             \ \,
   AM5     &NCLOS0(i€S<                                                                                                                                            v^\' ”        i   y* x       V^/'v

                                               »   j^ssssrfz:
                                                                                                                        v / '.                                                                    *   \
                                                                                £££££ 57VOVP
                                                          F\ 6          $■      -                                  A<
                                                                                                                                        iiiV
                                                                                                                        £-A             >
                                                                                                 rainijii
                                                                                                                        - 16*'              ,A^
                                 POLICE
                                                          O F n c M c
                          r
                                co imoi
                                com                                                                                     .     •J - .

                                                                    omccm'%
                                                                    iNTRANCC
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                   R E P O R T



NAME:      Ambulanceman ;________________
VEHICLE:   S405

SHIFT:     1000 - 1800 (extra crew assigned to Hillsborough
                         Football Ground duties)

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:     19 April 1989 - 1020-1145 hours



On Saturday 15 April 1989, I came on duty at 1000 hours, along with my
colleague Ambulanceman        to specifically provide additional Ambulance
cover for the semi-final football match at Hillsborough.       During the
morning we did a few jobs for Control (a couple of admissions and a couple
of '999' calls.


We returned to Longley Station for a break at approximately 1315 hours. At
approximately 1400 hours we left Longley Station and proceeded to the
football ground along with Station Officer Eason and Station Officer
Higgins, arriving at approximately 1410 hours.


We parked the Ambulance inside Gate 'O' at the Ground which       is off
Penistone Road. We stood-by at that location. I was stood at the corner
of the pitch between the North Stand and to the right of the Kop, as you
look towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground when the match kicked off.
Shortly after kick off I noticed the crowd were spilling onto the pitch at
Leppings Lane end from the West Stand terracing.


I immediately went up to this area with Station Officer Eason and saw a
number of people laying on the ground. In a short space of time large
numbers of the crowd spilled onto the pitch and whilst trying to assess the
situation I was assaulted by a fan who punched me on my right shoulder.


                                                                   /continued
2


19 April 1989

Ambulanceman



By this time Ambulanceman                      had joined me and Station Officer
sent us back to the vehicle for equipment.                    We returned to the football
pitch area at the Leppings Lane end with a cot, frac-pac,                      bag and mask,
portogen equipment and two first aid bags.                   We could see a fan with what
appeared       to be a broken        leg lying close         to one of the goalposts.             I
started to treat him and put a frac-pac on                  the injured leg.


By now     I    could    see   Police   Officers    doing    resuscitation on people.             I
grabbed my first-aid bag and took out some airways.                      I handed one to a
Police Officer and I inserted at least sixairways into casualties                       whowere
being resuscitated by both Police Officers                  and by-standers.


I then went to a young teenager who was being resuscitated by a Policeman.
I inserted an airway and commenced mouth to mouth whilst the Policeman did
cardiac massage.          Whilst doing this we were surrounded by fans one of them
kicked me several times, then a group of fans fell on top of us with some
advertising boards.            We pushed them off and continued resuscitation.                 We
got no response from the casualty so we stopped and I carried on attempting
to both treat and revive several other fans with the aid of Police Officers
and fans.


I eventually managed to get back to my Ambulance for more equipment.                          At
this stage there were two people working on a casualty already laid on the
stretcher      on my     Ambulance.      I got     into   the back of    the Ambulance        and
started to resuscitate the patient with an automatic resuscitator.                       Someone
loaded an asthmatic patient             into   the cab of the vehicle.           Ambulanceman
           jumped       into   the   driving seat    and we     set off to     travel    to   the
Northern General Hospital with a Police motor cycle escort.



                                                                                  /continued
3

19 April 1989

Ambulanceman



We arrived at the hospital and unloaded our patients and handed them over
to Casualty staff in the Plaster room which was being used as an overflow
room for resuscitation.     By this time approximately 1540, there were
already five or six Ambulances in the Casualty yard that had either brought
or were bringing patients from the Hillsborough incident.


We left our cot at the hospital with a patient on and picked up a spare one
at the hospital and returned back to the Ground with a Police motor cycle
escort. We arrived back at the Ground on Penistone Road and eventually
loaded two more casualties both stretcher cases, one with a drip set up.
Both these casualties were from the Gymnasium which was being used as a
Casualty Clearing area.


We were advised that the Northern General was full so we conveyed these two
patients to the Hallamshire Hospital arriving there at approximately 1605
hours.    We arrived at Casualty and were directed to the Orthopaedic
entrance.   We transferred the patients from our stretchers to hospital
trollies and handed them over the hospital staff.               was at the
Hallamshire and she told us not to return to the Ground but to stand-by at
a point on Netherthorpe Road. This we did and informed Control by radio.

Another Ambulance joined us on Netherthorpe Road and after a short time
Control informed us by radio to proceed to Herries Road Bus Depot and to
stand-by there. We arrived at Herries Road Bus Depot at approximately 1630
hours. We stood by at this point with approximately 30 other Ambulances
and were eventually directed back to the Car Park behind the Gymnasium at
Hillsborough Football Ground.


We were briefed by Mr Jones after having a drink and returned to Station
signing off duty at 1840 hours.
            VtQ/<f                                      7t c,
     H ills b o r o u g h                     G ro u n d
                                                                                                                   1F I R S T ' A i r
                                                                                                                       R O M                             y vj.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                           —             \ '
                                                                                                                                                CW
                                                                                            r               ■      ■       i
                                                                                           r             Cm,vsstum                                                        \                2     G v> u «. \ V t <cj

                                                                                                                            te4 / ^ s                                                      4"©
                                                                               i [. . L_______                                                                                \
                                                                                                                                        I..,
                                                                           r
                                                                         **•           ,                                     /             t
                                                                                                   •       .

                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                N O $ T H &TAHO    '

            !   i   &
                                                                    C'

                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                     \\ \*X. «\ \   *2--


       '///'
       ! b '•                                                                                                                                                         Y'-'-XW v O \
                                                                                                                                                                        \v '\ w v -p \ ;

                                                                                                                                               1=i|;pf
                                                                                                                                                                   ;
                                                                                                                                                                   %iv % \ \ \         ^
                                                                                                               ✓                                                   H'-'V, A V/.-X \ •.


   Aw a y       fam     *     ent^j)^'
                                                                                                                                                           w,
     AMD            £NCL0SOfl€S.                                                                                                                                 , N 1'" * , C y O \ , )z{ .\




                                                                                                                                            \ ^:!^',\\\\\\^ •                                     ■    *
                                                                               K   G       n             SOUTH STAND                       si                                     *y>^            \    ■ xv     vv
 )rtt~\re.$                                                                    \ / s “ — ,x?L J t- ■                      j.
                                                                                                                                   ■£UW            *'     > *                                            A v ^
^dr**s,Vj           »*v                         T o tic T                       ornciAL
                                                                                                       yI
                                                                \                                                                 G»/?
                                         /•
                                                c o n t r o l
                                                                                                                                                   J ~

                                                                                       owccm's.
                                                                                       t N T R A N C e

                    Til A n ^ l f M
                                                                                                                          —   C        ^              - U W 6 S




    H ills b o r o u g h    G ro u n d
                                                                                                   FtP.ST'A!0



                                                                                                                 POLICE

                                                                                                                                                                  Po>We*X Ke^€-
                                                                                                                                                                     \4-io
                                                                                                                                                                     -



                                                                               H Q f t T H &TAHO

                                                                                                                                                                >                 Aj
                                                                                                                      i— rO
                                                           :6‘
       7 ',r       S                                                                                                              11 iifc<\ r\v \ \    o \            *
       / S/                                                                                                                                             •   b        •     iv)^

                                                    “5?
                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                  •e 1
                                                                                                                     ►'
                                                                                                                      -


                                                               i
                                                    mmau

                                                    M
Aw*y        tan/           \ fif                                                                                 lc
                                \ cd            Hi-
.   A Nt>    &NCLO$0<i€S

                                                                                                                                       ,y ^ y r * - a w ^ .
                                                                                                                                       w d v " > . .<-, ,*
                                          - / 6 / r —
                                                           :
                                                                   -------------
                                                                   :
                                                                   f     G     g      &0UTH * tah °              •“ 'A    Vil >    '          \
                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                    »M.\
                                                                                                                                                                           \\ V,
                                                                                                                                                                             \ , \\

                                                                                                    mi I'mi.ii
                                    / W ffc F ] ^                      OT/OU
                           /•
                                   ro//r/?a
                                        got} ■;

                                                                             owccm's.
                                                                             LNTfiANCe



             TUMSmCS
                                                                                                                                3TV            W   &   b   /

            Wc?/<f W ednesday F .C \
       H ills b o ro u g h     G ro u n d
                                                                                               FtRST'AIO
                                                                                                ROOM

                                                                                                           POLICE

                                                                               O t U t O M                                                                     4oun\e

                                                                                                                                    j
                                                                       H O X T H   & T A H O




            ! i &




                                       Z T A H &
                                                                                                           ® r^rr»>


                                                                                                                  !»                i.   A\*   .           \
  A W A Y    f A N $


  •    A^VD 6NCL£S0fttfS.
                                                                                                                               ;m



                                                                               SOUTH STAHC
                                                                                                              ^                0S4&>
                                                S   /   ^
                                                                                                                                                   Stamps •
                                                                                                                                                   '


                                                                                                             x\ .      * 0 *
                                                                                                           ■"•W            ,/srt
                                 .P O L I C E               ornc/AL
                                 CONTROL

                                                                      -• . . o g :
                                                                  owccm's.
                                                                  cntrance
■ 'S           Tnone m   r<*
R CLARKE - CONTROL SUPERINTENDENT

On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was Duty Control Superintendent on the 1400-
2200 shift.

Shortly after 1500, I received a telephone call from Force Control
informing me our attendance might be required at the Hillsborough Football
Ground, although they were not sure at that time and would let us know.
Almost immediately after, Force Control telephoned again to request a fleet
of ambulances as there was "an incident" at the ground and there were
persons injured.
I informed Force Control that we had Duty Officers with vehicles inside the
ground, and would alert and mobilise them and assess the situation.

I then requested Control Officer       , who was on the Emergency Desk to
call our Duty Officers at the ground and get a situation report. At this
time a vehicle was being mobilised to the ground from Middlewood Station.
Information then started coming in simultaneously from the Duty Officers at
the ground and Force Control, that a large incident was in progress and
more ambulances were required. At this time, we did not know what the
incident was or numbers involved.
Mr Hopkins who was in the Control Unit at this time, proceeded to the
scene.

Moments later, information was received from Force Control that many people
had been injured and there were fatalities.
By this time, additional support vehicles were being mobilised to the scene
from various points throughout the SYMAS area, by Control Officer        on
the Emergency Desk, Control Officer         on the out-patient desk, C/A’s
      and       |, and myself. Superintendent         and           had
just arrived at the Control Unit in an off-duty capacity, so I enlisted
their assistance.
I instructed C/A       to start the Control Log, and record as many events
as possible. I took            into the Control Superintendent's office and
instructed her to start the re-call of Control Staff and call in as many as
possible.
Myself and Superintendent_____ ^ then contacted Derbyshire,
Nottinghamshire and West Yorkshire Ambulance Services and requested them to
move support vehicles up to the SYMAS boundaries and informing them of the
situation in hand.

It was about this point that it became evident that Control Officer
was becoming overwhelmed by the volume of vehicles and radio messages,
therefore, ensuring that cover was being maintained on other Emergency,
Urgent and domestic work which at this time was very busy, I decided to
Control the Hillsborough incident on ERC in the Major Incident Room.
SHEET 2 - R CLARKE

I took C/A       with me and set up the ERC facility. I continued then to
establish contact with as many vehicles as was possible. The major
incident communications vehicle was mobilised at the request of Mr Hopkins.
I was getting messages constantly from the Control Room anbd I attempted to
keep in touch with what was happening in there.
It became evident there were problems with communication at the scene.
Some of the transmissions were unreadable, likewise, others were not
receiving mine with clarity, resulting in messages having to be repeated
several times in some instances.

I continued to work as quickly as possible. Mr Smith was briefed on his
arrival.

Control Staff re-called to duty were by now arriving. Vehicles were by now
reporting movements between the scene and hospitals and a ferrying
operation was well underway.

It was established that sufficient vehicles were in attendance as the
incident progressed and those not required back at scene were sent to
various holding points.

As more Control Officers arrived I designated Control Officer         to
take over on the ERC Desk, and carried on with other duties within the
unit, until the end of my shift.

My priority at the outset of this incident was to mobilise vehicles to the
scene to deal effectively and quickly with the incident, at the same time
maintaining cover for the SYMAS area.

Events moved very quickly, and I selected what I saw as the immediate
priorities, and carried them out with the staff I had with me.

I have submitted this report honestly, outlining the main sequence of
events, as I remember them.

Control staff carried out their duties in a calm, efficient manner to the
credit of the Service.
             - CONTROL ASSISTANT
(off duty)

Date:   18.4.89
Time:   1600-1645



I was at home and was contacted by         asking me to come in there's a
major incident. This was approximately 1525. I arrived at Control at
approximately 1555.

I manned a phone and began taking calls, mostly from the press. I took a
few calls from Police Force Control mostly with reference to identification
of bodies.
I received calls from staff at Barnsley Station, who had arrived prepared
to assist. I had contact with two outside authorities, Notts and WYMAS who
offered help with removing patients from hospital to home.

I liaised with A/E Departments and asked them to be prepared to accept
casualties (Barnsley and Rotherham District General Hospitals).

I also had contact with Rotherham District General to advise them that
there would be no casualties after all.
I thought the incident was well controlled by staff in Control and I was
surprised to find the number of people already within the unit working.
Superintendent T. Dale.

At approximately 1450 hours I was stood by   outside the White Horse Public
House on Halifax Road. At this time there    were still hundreds of Liverpool
supporters making their way to the match.    I left this position, thinking
the match would be starting soon and there   would be less chance of any
incident once the game was underway.


At some time after 1500 hours I was on the other side of the city, I heard
Alpha 3 and 4 calling from inside the ground at Hillsborough and I thought
there was something wrong. Radio Sheffield reported the game had been
halted for some reason but did not report why. I contacted control who
were aware something had happened but could not give me much information.
At this stage I made all possible haste just in case I was needed at the
ground. I heard control direct crews to the Penistone Road end of the
ground towards the gymnasium entrance.


I do not know what time I arrived at the ground but I contacted Station
Officer Eason who was stood in the middle of Penistone Road informing
ambulance crews to reverse into the gateway, the driver to stay with the
ambulance and the attendant to go and help with the injured. I asked
Station Officer Eason how bad he thought the incident was and if there were
any dead, he replied he thought there were about nine dead at the time. At
this stage, I think Station Officer Eason asked me to continue with the
loading of ambulances whilst he found Mr. Hopkins, this I did. At this
time there were only two or three ambulances there and supporters with the
injured and dying were trying to put people into the vehicles either on
stretchers or on bill boards. My handset from the staff car did not work
and I tried to contact control on several occasions but eventually gave up
trying with the handset.


Whilst out on the road waiting for ambulances to arrive, I was approached
by dozens of fans wanting information about relatives, how to get to
hospital etc. I saw an ambulance come out of the South Stand entrance with
blue lights and horns on.    I thought he was coming to the incident and I
became frustrated because he was stuck in traffic unable to move. The
police appeared to be making no progress with the traffic situation at this
time. I asked the Police to make sure the ambulances gotthrough as a
Superintendent T. Dale.

priority. I think the ambulances in the loading area at this time had
loaded and gone to the Northern General Hospital with a Police motorcycle
escort. I ran up the road to this crew the driver was Ambulanceman
_____ from Middlewood, he had two patients on board but at that time I did
not know where from. Later I found out the patients were from the Leppings
Lane end of the ground. I returned to the loading area to Station Officer
Eason.


At this X went into the gymnasium to see Mr. Hopkins. His instructions to
me were "get the major incident vehicle here fast". I returned to the
staff car and called control regarding the major incident vehicle, but the
reception on the radio was very bad. I could not make out what the Control
Officer was saying. Eventually I think he said the Accident Tender was on-
route to the scene. He also asked about the number of deaths. I reported
from what I had seen in the gymnasium at that time there were about 30
bodies. I do not know if I was asked anything else as reception on ERC
could not be understood. I later found out that Station Officer Eason had
contacted control re the Major Accident Vehicle.


I returned to the loading area. At this time more ambulances were arriving
and were asked to reverse into the gate side by side. Other crews were
asked to wait until the vehicles in the loading area left before carrying
out the same procedure. One vehicle was left with no driver or keys this
caused a problem for a minute or two until the driver and keys were
located. Back on the road, the police had moved some vehicles and told
them to go round to Leppings Lane. Certain crews followed these
instructions instead of staying put. Police also instructed vehicles that
were parked waiting on Penistone Road to drive into the next gate as
injured people were being brought to that location. Some crews did this.
We then had two loading areas. Had police vehicles not been in the way we
would have been able to drive in the first door, load the injured at the
gymnasium, drive out of the second gate and away.
Superintendent T. Dale.



Sometime around now Station Officer _______ arrived with the Major
Accident Vehicle, he was instructed by Mr. Hopkins to pull the vehicle into
the space at the first gate, Station Officer Eason was at Gate One. I went
around to the second entrance where I found a number of vehicles stood
waiting for patients, drivers at the ready. There were also some police
mini buses which had been hired to move policemen to the game. These
vehicles were used to move the walking wounded. Communications between on
site officers could only be done by sending a runner or going oneself,
which happened to be more reliable, as any ambulanceman that left the
ambulances appeared to be utilised somewhere else.


Injured were being brought out on boards and I had to stop several groups
from just putting the injured, boards and the lot into the ambulance.
Patients were put on to cots, some being resuscitated. One young boy
arrived on a hoarding and was transferred to a cot, Qualified Ambulanceman
       and myself using CPR until I found a policeman to help. I then
continued trying to organise the loading and movement of patients.

I found a problem in that patients were being loaded by spectators helped
by our drivers, but then the attendant could not be found, this happened
more than once. I despatched the vehicle with our man attending in the
back and a policeman driving. Some ambulancemen (           ) and another
had filled a mini bus with less seriously injured, taking about ten
patients in one go. The other police mini buses were gradually being
filled with walking wounded and people in bad shock. There were people sat
all round the loading area in a state of shock, most were being looked
after by friends or other supporters. I found that I was being approached
by dozens of people either wanting help or information about relatives or
loved ones. Unfortunately, I could not help these people as I had other
more important things to attend to. At this stage we appeared to be
reasonably organised. Vehicles available with drivers waiting, attendants
taking cots and returning with the injured. When looking for ambulance
Superintendent T. Dale.



staff in the gymnasium, or among the police outside, it became very
difficult to find them. Apart from motorway jackets which both police and
ambulance staff had on, identification became difficult.


As the scene became less hectic, I was informed by Mr. Hopkins to get some
more body bags as all the ones in the Major Accident Vehicle had been used.
I tried to contact control through the radio on the Major Accident Vehicle
but had no success, so I went back to the staff car and called. Once
again, I could not make out what control were saying to me. Later I
established that a Major Accident Vehicle from West Yorkshire was on its
way with more equipment. Also at this time, we seemed to have an abundance
of ambulances waiting on Penistone Road.


At some stage, Mr. Hopkins asked me to go and wait with the surplus
vehicles at Herries Road Bus Garage. I went to the staff car and informed
control who then informed me that Station Officer Eason was already there.
During all this Mr. Jones arrived at some stage and ran the loading and
operations at the Number One gate.


At some stage the Emergency Tender from WYMAS arrived, Station Officer
         and myself met him and informed him we needed more body bags.
Eventually when he found them there were only about twelve. Allwere taken
to Mr. Hopkins who used them in the gymnasium.


Mr. Jones asked me to take two vehicles around to the Leppings Lane end and
collect some bodies and return to the gymnasium.    I took a WYMAS and
Nottingham ambulance around only to find StationOfficer Higgins had
already dealt with the bodies and was in the process of loading the last
two.   I returned to the gymnasium with the crews.
Superintendent T. Dale.



I was told by either Mr. Jones or Mr. Hopkins to take Station Officer
Higgins down to the Medico Legal Centre and prepare for the bodies
arriving. This I did, but we had great difficulty getting through the
traffic. On arrival at Medico Legal Centre I dropped off Station Officer
Higgins and contracted control - reception outside Medico Legal Centre on
ERC was excellent. Control told me to go to Herries Road Bus Garage and
establish a land line. On arrival at the Garage, Leading Ambulanceman
      informed me this had already been done and the message from Mr. Page
was to tell either Mr. Hopkins or Mr. Jones to contact him at Headquarters.


I then returned to the Sheffield Wednesday's Football Club Gymnasium and
passed Mr. Page's message to both Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Jones. Control also
informed me at some time during the operation that walking wounded needed
to be taken to Barnsley District General Hospital. This information was
passed late on in the incident when most casualties had been removed.

Mr. Hopkins informed me he wanted six ambulances to stay and the rest could
go to Herries Road Bus Garage. I passed this information to Mr. Jones who
dealt with it.


At this time, most of the incident had been cleared, all that remained were
the 90 or so bodies in the gymnasium.


Mr. Page arrived on scene and the incident began to wind down.


I was instructed by Mr. Page to bring in some night men early to help ease
the work load. This was done from the Control Unit. I later collected
Station Officer Higgins from the Medico Legal Centre and returned to
Hillsborough and assisted until midnight.
         -AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION
Date:   19.4.89
Time:   1355-1435

Duty:   0600-1400

Call Sign:   S105 (Out-Patient Ambulance)


I left Middlewood Station at 1415 to go shopping at Presto on Infirmary
Road. I noticed several ambulances with blue lights on proceeding in the
direction of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

I said to my wife "there in trouble", the car radio had a news report on
about the incident. It was approximately 1600. I then made my way over to
Middlewood Station, the traffic was very heavy. It took me approximately
15 minutes.

I was met at Middlewood b y | ,      another paramedic. she had made ready
a vehicle, so we told Control and took S105 out.              and
     were also on Station. Control told______ and        to stand by, we
were then given a 999 call which was a Liverpool supporter epileptic
patient to a house on Shenstone Road which is opposite to the entrance on
Leppings Lane.

We tried to go down Leppings Lane but were unable to due to the volume of
people and cars. Penistone Road was tried, but the same, total congestion.
Finally we tried the other route into Leppings Lane with some success.

On arrival the patient was not fitting and walked into the ambulance. He
was taken to the Northern General Hospital. The parking was organised,
porters met us and assisted with the transfer of patients.

The next case was a supporter on a coach (Halifax Road), he was taken to
the Northern General Hospital. This patient had been in the crush and had
made his way over to his coach.

We were then given a transfer of an old lady from the Northern General
Hospital to a nursing home in Chapeltown.

We were using Channel 4 throughout the incident, we didn't experience any
radio interference.

In between cases Superintendent             made contact to update us on the
situation.

The next case was an emergency transfer fron the Northern General Hospital
to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital transit. This case kept us tied up for
some time due to the nature of his injuries.

We were stood down and finished at 2015.
            - CONTROL OFFICER

0600 - 1400 Returned to Duty

Date:   18.4.89

Time:   1215-1300

In the morning I had moved a Longley Ambulance and Station Officer P Eason
on to Hillsborough and Middlewood Ambulance to base.

1400 I handed over to R Clarke. I received a telephone call from____     at
1520 saying that there was a 'major incident' and I was to proceed to
Northern General Hospital.

On arrival I found a telephone and contacted Control, confirming my
arrival. I then organised my position, made contact with Consultants,
nursing, admin, police. The biggest problem at this stage was the
telephone facilities.

I made several telephone calls to               updating him of the
position.

On arrival of the crews, I ensured they had sufficient assistance for
unloading, and refreshments for a crew on standby at NGH.

At 1645 I received an update from ___________ saying the incident was
winding down and only walking wounded would be arriving.

1820? I received a call from               saying a fleet of ambulances
would be despatched to collect bodies on the order of the coroner. I asked
Insp/Police to confirm who went with crews around to the mortuary to
oversee loading.
A Longley crew loaded three bodies and set off for Hillsborough.
I received a message from               saying do not release bodies to the
ground as he had been told by a Police Officer that he couldn't cope with
any more, so I stopped all proceedings much to the annoyance of the
mortuary attendant.

Two Police sergeants arrived with constables and the loading was to
continue as he now had a Officer to go with the bodies back to the ground.
I got straight on to            and updated him on the position.

After leaving I returned to A/E I liaised with Mr Wardrope who updated me
on his position which was that they were nearly at capacity and could we
direct further casualties to other hospital. This information was passed
to Control.
SHEET 2 -

I received a request from administration to transport a body from ITU as
the patient had died. I was unsure of the procedure and contacted control
for advice.

After some time I was advised that an ambulance would transfer the body to
Hillsborough.

At the mortuary I was informed that the body had already gone, further
enquiries revealed the body had been removed during the earlier movements.
After the request to move the body, I was approached by             (I I
       assistant) that a press conference was arranged for 1000 on the
Sunday morning and could a Senior Officer attend.

On completing the body transfer I confirmed to her that a senior officer
would attend.

At 2230 I was approached by administration to assist in relaying any extra
work that may come in due to it being A/E night at the NGH.
Supt          was informed and calls from areas within the
Rotherham/Sheffield area cases would be diverted (if appropriate).

I made a final check on admin, Doctors, Police asked if they had any
further requests. The answer was no so I contacted Control and signed off
at 2310.
Personal Observations - Lack of communication, would like radio.     Police
had own room
Station Officer P. Eason




At 1400 hours, myself along with Station Officer Higgins and Qualified
Ambulancemen         and             left Longley Station and proceeded to
Hillsborough Football Stadium. On arrival at the ground, myself and
Station Officer Higgins liaised with Inspector S Sewell of South Yorkshire
Police. This meeting had been pre-arranged earlier in the week by Inspector
Sewell and myself.


The vehicle was parked as arranged within Entrance '0' via Penistone Road.


Both Station Officer Higgins and myself were carrying portable radios which
were serviceable. The crew also had a portable radio which was
serviceable.


Mr. Sewell advised us that no problems had been encountered and that
everything was going according to plan.


We took up our position on the pitch perimeter track and at 1459 hours the
game commenced.


A short time after the game commenced, I noticed a disturbance in the crowd
behind the goal at the Leppings Lane standing area and commented on this to
Station Officer Higgins. It looked as if a scuffle may have been
developing. Myself and Qualified Ambulanceman              walked down
towards the Leppings Lane end to investigate. On arrival it appeared that
some of the crowd were agitated and our attention was drawn to a young man
who had a query fractured leg. He had been brought out of the Leppings
Lane end and on to the pitch near the goal. At this time there was no
indication of what was developing.


I tried to use my pocketphone in order to summon assistance ie for Station
Officer Higgins to send down Qualified Ambulanceman        1with a fracture
pac and a stretcher. The pocketphone did not work. I tried moving
location repeatedly but the thing still refused to work. At this time more
and more fans appeared to be spilling out of a gate within the enclosure
fence and were sitting on the pitch - some of them appeared aggressive and
Station Officer P. Eason.



I was aware of people hitting out and aiming kicks at myself,
and some of the Policemen in the vicinity.     The situation still appeared to
be little more than a minor disturbance.


Owing to the hostility rising within the crowd and the fact that my
pocketphone was useless, I advised                    that we were withdrawing
to our original position and we did so.


Having consulted Station Officer Higgins, all four of us proceeded back to
the Leppings Lane end with first aid equipment.     The idea was to monitor
the situation and treat the fractured leg.


Upon our return to the site, it was obvious that the crowd were even more
aggressive and I believe that myself and Station Officer Higgins were both
assaulted.   More fans were on the pitch as               and          splinted
the mans leg.


We were still not aware of the severity of the incident, although it became
increasingly obvious that more and more fans were coming on to the pitch.
I think I took Mr. Higgins pocketphone and tried to establish contact with
control, but his pocketphone was not working either.     Mr. Higgins decided
to return to the vehicle in order to contact control.    We had decided that
the vehicle on stand by at Middlewood should be brought down to the end of
Leppings Lane as a precaution.   I started towards the Leppings Lane end in
order to assess the ongoing situation.     It was increasingly obvious that
some sort of trouble was transpiring within the enclosure.      As more fans
spilled on to the pitch, Police were arriving in large numbers.


A fan approached me and asked me to look at a little boy who he thought was
dead, he pointed at a group of people surrounding the body of a small boy
on the pitch.   I approached the group and a man claiming to be a Doctor was
working on the boy saying he thought there was a chance for him.      I used
Station Officer P. Eason.



the pocketphone repeatedly but to no avail. I told this Doctor I would
summon assistance and then ran back to our ambulance. Ambulancemen
and             were by now attending to fans laid on the pitch, I think
someone was kicking            . A Policeman told me he thought some of
the fans were dead or dying.


On arrival at the vehicle I contacted control and declared a Major Incident
and was advised to switch to channel one. I think I asked for more
vehicles and I think I was told they were on the way. I think I asked for
them to come to our location.

I then went   to consult Station Officer Higgins and found him in the rear of
the vehicle   surrounded by minor injuries. I told him I was going back
towards the   scene and would radio with an update. He said he would
establish a   casualty clearing post at the gymnasium.

At around this time Leading Ambulanceman Flack arrived on scene and I tried
to direct him to the boy on the pitch, but by this time the pitch appeared
to be covered with people, some of them were carrying people on boards and
I directed them towards the gymnasium.


Failing to see the boy, myself and Leading Ambulanceman Flack took a
stretcher onto the pitch and headed towards where I thought he was. We
found him and he was placed on the stretcher and removed. I advised the
Doctor to attend the gymnasium and consult Station Officer Higgins but I do
not believe he did this.


Once again I approached the Leppings Lane end to assess the situation.
People were literally crushed against the fence, some managed to be dragged
out by police through the gate and through tears in the fencing. Others
were being hauled up into the seating above the terracing. I did not know
at this time that the people crushing into the fence were standing on
Station Officer P. Eason.



people who had succumbed to the crushing - a lot of fans were screaming for
help within the enclosure.

I ran back to the enclosure and was aware that Mr. Hopkins had arrived, we
made our way onto the pitch and I warned him that the crowd were very
aggressive. He said get the incident vehicle to the scene. I think I
radioed this request and I think I was informed it was en route. At this
time I started marshalling vehicles which were arriving. Station Officer
Higgins and myself had earlier agreed that the vehicles would be reversed
side by side in twos up entrance 'O'. The vehicles were arriving in
Penistone Road from the city end and I held them in Penistone Road until I
could get them into the ground.


Station Officer          arrived with the incident vehicle and was
marshalled into the space allocated for him within Entrance 'O'.


Shortly after this Mr. Jones arrived and confirmed what I was doing.

For some reason, Divisional Superintendent Dale arrived and I think the
Police told him that the vehicle loading point had been switched to the
gymnasium entrance 25 yards down the road. I did not make this decision,
nor was I aware of any other Ambulance Officer doing so.


Divisional Superintendent Dale and myself discussed this and decided to use
both access points for ambulance loading.

Qualified Ambulanceman             arrived with a mini bus and I parked him
on the pavement and told him to stay with his vehicle.   I then informed Mr.
Jones of this and told him that this vehicle was available for transporting
walking wounded.
Station Officer P. Eason.



At around this time Mr. Jones asked me to relocate myself and incoming
vehicles to the Herries Road Bus Depot and treat this as an Ambulance
Parking Point.


I took a further pocketphone and assembled a convoy which proceeded to the
Bus Depot. I contacted control and was acknowledged that I was stood by at
Herries Road.


As vehicles arrived I stood them four abreast in an open area at the depot.
I sited sitting case vehicles and a West Yorkshire Incident Vehicle
(equipment) separately within the area. I then gathered Leading
Ambulanceman Flack, Leading Ambulanceman        , Leading Ambulanceman
      and Leading Ambulanceman        and told them Leading Ambulanceman
Flack was staying with me as a relay and advised the others to make sure
the crews stayed together and try to maintain their morale.


I asked Leading Ambulanceman       to complete a list of vehicle fleet
numbers and respective services at the garage.


I was increasingly aware of the numbers of vehicles arriving at the parking
point and I tried to contact control with the suggestion that some of the
vehicles might possibly be stood down in order to be used on other
emergency duties, once again the pocketphone refused to work efficiently.
It would receive but not transmit.


Eventually I established a poor contact with control via a Barnsley vehicle
on site and was asked to contact control on landline.
Leading Ambulanceman Flack having disappeared, I took Leading Ambulanceman
      with me into the garage to find a telephone. With the help of garage
staff, I managed to open a land line in a managers office and I contacted
control and was connected to Mr. Page who instructed me to ensure that
Station Officer P. Eason.

either Mr. Jones or Mr. Hopkins contact him by vodaphone as soon as
possible.


I had no communication with site so I told Leading Ambulanceman       to
despatch a runner to the ground with the message, this was done.

Some time later, Leading Ambulanceman       informed me that the vehicles
at the garage were to be dispersed and that I was required at the gymnasium
at Hillsborough.

I proceeded to the gymnasium and along with other officers I was briefed by
the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer.

Mr. Page decided that Assistant Divisional Officer Morley, myself and
Station Officer          should remain at the gymnasium and carry out a
body removal programme if and as necessary.

Mr. Jones advised me that all bodies were to be removed to the Medico Legal
Centre, Sheffield.

Assistant Divisional Officer Morley, Station Officer          and myself
decided that Assistant Divisional Officer Morley would oversee the overall
plan, Station Officer          would be responsible for the radio
communications and that I would maintain vehicle deployment and appropriate
documentation.

Food and drink was organised via South Yorkshire Police.


Eleven bodies from Northern General Hospital and one from the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital were transferred to the gymnasium at Hillsborough and
after appropriate procedures within the gymnasium we commenced removal to
the Medico Legal centre.
Station Officer P. Eason.



In all we removed and transported 94 bodies and accompanying police
personnel between 2130 hours and 0528 hours.

Mr. Hopkins declared the incident closed at 0530 hours and I returned to
Longley Station to organise equipment cleaning.

I eventually left Longley for home at 0640 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
            - CONTROL ASSISTANT
(Day Off)


Date:   18.4.89

Time:   0945-1005



About 1515 I received a call from        concerning an incident at
Hillsborough and asking me to report for duty.

I arrived at approximately 1530 and immediately manned a telephone
position. Phones were very busy, but people wre methodically answering
them.

Many of the calls were from the Press. As more staff came on duty, the
monarch Switchboard was put into operation and this relieved the pressure,
calls being put on hold.

I did take one call from the Police requesting vehicles to attend at the
'Gymnasium' entrance.
                                \'
I left the unit at one stage to go shopping for sandwiches. This about
1930. My main work was concerned with answering telephones.
I was released from duty at 2045.
 _____ |- CONTROL ASSISTANT
(off duty)


Date:   18.4.89

Time:   1415-1435



I received a phone call at approximately 1545. I had a driving lesson
booked and was advised that I could carry on with this. I did get into
Control at about 1730 to find that the incident was largely under control
and I was mainly concerned with incidental calls: hospitals requesting
transfers, other services making general enquiries.

On my arrival everything seemed to be in hand and under control.
Control Assistant               (0930 - 1800 hours - 15.04.89)



           took a call from the Police asking to speak to the Control
Superintendent. Mr. Clarke was the Duty Superintendent and he took the
call. The Police were asking for a fleet of ambulances to be despatched to
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.


Within minutes of the first call, a second call was received from the
Police and I think the content of the call was along the lines of "people
crushed, bodies everywhere at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground".


At this moment in time, the control room was split and the incident was
taken over onto the ERC channel in the Major Incident Room. Mr. Clarke
told            to restart an incident log. She then went into the Major
Incident Room with Mr. Clarke.


              and            were in control at the time visiting and he
and I began answering the calls.             went into the Control
Superintendents Office to begin calling in control officers and assistants,

I rang             for Mr. Clarke and she was informed that press calls
were coming in very fast with regard an incident at Hillsborough.

The telephones went crazy then, the press were on very fast, the Control
Room was extremely busy - the volume of press calls was very heavy.
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                   REPO R T



NAME:      Qualifed Ambulanceman         (Parkway)

VEHICLE:   S206

SHIFT:     1800 - 0200 hours

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:     Written Statement dated 19/04/89


On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was asked by Control to attend Hillsborough
Football Stadium at the end of my duty, to assist in the removal of bodies
from the Gymnasium to the Medico Legal Centre.


My colleague and I arrived at the above location at 0200 hours on Sunday.
As the deceased were identified they were loaded in threes accompanied by
Police Officers and conveyed to the Medico Legal Centre, where we assisted
the Mortuary staff in removing the deceased from body bags onto mortuary
trays. Several journeys were made during the morning and we eventually
terminated our duty at 0630 hours.


I personally thought the events were well organized, but some of my
colleagues could have shown a little more reverence during the operation.
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                    REPORT

NAME:      Qualified Ambulanceman
VEHICLE:   R601

SHIFT:     0900 - 1630 hours Day Duty (15 April 1989)


DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:     18th April 1989, 1240 - 1430 hours



On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was working on ambulance call sign R601 along
with Ambulancewoman                working day duty 0900 - 1630 hours. At
approximately 1515 hours we were returning from Doncaster and were close to
Maltby Station when control contacted us by radio and told us to proceed
immediately to Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, where there had
been an incident with a lot of casualties.


We arrived at the ground at approximately 1535 hours, after coming down
Herries Road we were not able to turn right, we had to turn left because of
extremely heavy crowd congestion. We entered the Ground by the entrance
off Penistone Road and travelled to a point near the 'Ozzie Owl Club' and
adjacent to the South Stand. A m b u l a n c e w o m a n w a s driving and she
was able to turn the vehicle partially round whilst parking.

I left the vehicle and came across a man who was clutching his chest and
having difficulty breathing.     I was able to walk the man into the
ambulance. I sat him down and gave him Oxygen.


We both then saw a policeman close to the ambulance doing cardiac massage
to a casualty on the floor. He asked me to get a suction unit, I did
immediately and I aspirated the man's airway with the Laerdal unit.




                                                                     /continued
18 April 1989

Qualified Ambulanceman


A stretcher from the ambulance was brought to us and with the help of
several bystanders we placed the casualty on the stretcher and into the
ambulance. Whilst we were dealing with this casualty the other patient
which I had placed on the vehicle earlier had got off the ambulance and
disappeared.


At that stage we left the Ground with one stretcher patient who had a
feeble pulse and was breathing faintly. The Police Officer travelled with
us and assisted me with the patient. We travelled to the Northern General
Hospital with a police motor cycle escort.


On arrival at the hospital we took the patient on our stretcher inside and
were met by a female doctor who examined the patient on our stretcher and
told us that there was nothing else that we could do and that the man was
dead.    The doctor directed us to the Plaster Room in the Casualty
department which was being used as a temporary mortuary. We placed the
body in this room where there already were approximately five other bodies.

We placed the stretcher back in the ambulance and all three of us, myself,
ambulancewoman           and the policeman returned to the Football Ground.
We were able to turn right at the bottom of Herries Road and joined a queue
of ambulances on Penistone Road. The policeman whose first name was
thanked us, shook hands with us and left our ambulance.


We were stood by on Penistone Road for approximately 10 minutes and were
then instructed by an ambulance officer, I think it was Mr Jones, to go to
Herries Road Bus Depot and stand-by there with other ambulances. We stood
by there for quite some time until the West Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire and
Derbyshire Ambulances were returned to their own areas. We were directed
to go the the Gymnasium car park back at the Football Ground where we were
briefed by Mr Jones on what was to happen next.


                                                                /continued
18 April 1989

Qualified Ambulanceman



We remained at this location until 0200 hours Sunday morning, during this
time we conveyed three bodies back from the Northern General Hospital to
the Gymnasium Mortuary at the Ground, and made approximately six journeys
with bodies from the gymnasium to the Medico Legal Centre.      We also
collected the body of a   year old boy from Northern General Hospital to
the Gymnasium Mortuary.


We eventually completed our duty finishing and signing off at Maltby
Station 0300 hours on Sunday morning.
                                                                                                                                                     c^ - t)M^»          \y £ t6 /

         f M c f W e&nesday E C ,
      H ills b o r o u g h           G ro u n d
                                                                                                                    FIRST'AIO


             m
                                                                                                                                  POLICE
Q




                                                                                                H Q fiT H STAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                 <s£ ^
                                                 to 8 2 a £ 4
                                                                                                                                                 i!»feSSv\\              •»_


                                                                                                                                                         >&. \v-.-\wv > p \ ;
                                                                                                                                      I t't'ilv :'•:
                                             ,
                                                  4a
                                                   MB
                                                         w
                                                        «m    mm   im

                                                                                                                                        if r h
                                                       7AND                                                                             II I!'. !•/ i1'1!m '/A \--,v\ \ • • \ v’f
                                                                                                                                                    T|I*V.A ® k \ V A .
                                                                                                                                                          i’
                                                                                                                                                         i1    ,\\* '> ', V ‘ * • A '
    AW A y   f        EiMTtoJtar

      A^D        &ncLcSOii€S-                                                                                                                     lill          y.v      V V *          \    +      \        \




                                                                                                         .S0J//7/ .S7V/Y0              ^     ^    ^      nnXV •
                                                                                                                                             *\U;


                                             POLICE                                                                         < 7- <r     <T
                                         fo//r/?o<

                                                                   I * * A k      £.0w *Jt   o/nccrofi's                                                                                     >■•)9 r^i\ *-
                                                                                             IN TR A N C C                                                        L:it   I
                               • n   j « w       r A    t j             tiA C .
                                                                                                                                                                                            L r £ - A - 2. •..'■Q.,.1

                 ru w sn ics                                                                         ;'v>                                                                                   i » .A i /> I r -.'     «.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          «T~’   f                fiU 2 >   W / L Y b /       Z
f/ra/?/(?ld W ednesday E C .
  H ills b o r o u g h Ground                                    +•     ^
                ______________ •                                      4-e
                                                                                                                                                         •F I R S T
                                            r tM * v c     Im J I m                                                                                                mgm\
                                                         x»c* / /                                                                                                                                                                                     *       W   f
                                                                                                                                                                                             \ \
                                                                                                             G y a m s siurn
                                                                                                                                                           '                 1

                                                                        C
                                                             i i. . L       .................................. .................................................................

                                                          /"“ *"***" *•* T* ** ••••*                                                                    • • •          •               • W   *•> •   M|

                                                          1                                                                                                                                                                                               *

                                                                                                                                                                                   f
                                                                      ■        N Q X T H STAND ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             >&. wr '\w v          -p A ;
                                               'l!:                                                                                                                                                                          fk                \    'i\\
  S C



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :n;i ■* i



AWAY fAN*> ENT^q^e
. AND GNCL0SOG6S




                                                  •              'v ff £

                               'ffl ^
                            ^a/ff                                ornctM .
                           C O N T RROL
                                     OL 1



                                                                       owccm's.
                                                                       LNTRANCS
'S      TURNS TUCS        esrrrw
                                                           ' ,    I



                                                                                                                                                  :;*v : ■
           - FLEET ENGINEER


At approximately 1645 hours on 15th April 1989 I was contacted by phone by
Control and asked to attend a major incident at Hillsborough, Sheffield. I
was informed that we had many out of town vehicles attending the above
incident parked at Herries Road Bus Garage. I also checked if the duty
fitter had also been contacted.

Upon arrival at the bus garage I checked with the L/A in charge. He told
me that no vehicles required assistance. Vehicles parked at the garage
were from SYMAS, WYMAS, Notts, Derby. Soon after Station Officer
         arrived to stand down the out of town vehicles. All SYMAS
vehicles were to go to Hillsborough Football ground. As there was a
Renault vehicle without a driver I was asked to drive this to the football
ground by |          .

Upon arrival at the ground I parked the vehicle up and made contact with Mr
D Jones. Again no vehicles needed attention. I carried out small tasks
like locking the major incident vehicle, shunting vehicles etc. By this
time the Duty Mechanic was on scene,            . Mr Page, CMAO arrived and
informed me that his two tone horns were not working. This was checked and
a new fuse fitted. This was the only work to be carried out by myself and
the duty fitter that day. I was then informed by Mr Page to stand down and
return home, this was approximately 1900 hours.

With hindsight I feel I should have been contacted at an earlier stage,
allowing myself and the Duty Fitter to make our way to Workshops, as the
time when workshops staff are more likely to be needed is when the vehicles
are running, not after the incident is over when the vehicles are no longer
required. This would also allow greater access to vehicles and equipment
in workshops.
STANDARDS AND EFFICIENCY OFFICER -



1509 hours       Arrived at Ambulance Headquarters for a visit.
1530 hours       Call from^orce Control requiring medical teams at
                 Hillsborough Football Ground.
1536 hours       Royal Hallamshire Hospital €eam alerted by using hotline.
                 Hospital already aware, policehad informed them.
1538 hours       Northern General Hospital team     alerted by using hotline.
                 Hospital already aware, policehad informal them.

1539 hours       Barnsley District General Hospital team alerted by using
                 hotline. Hospital already aware, police had informed
                 them.

1540 hours       Call from WYMAS - vehicle stood by at Penistone to cover
                 for us.
1542 hours       Rotherham District General Hospital updated.

1543 hours       Royal Hallamshire and Northern General medical teams en
                 route.

1547 hours       Barnsley District General Hospital medical team en route.
1551 hours       Call from Force Control - all vehicles now to use gate
                 'O' (Oscar).

1555 hours to    Various off-duty staff ringing in offering assistance -
1615 hours       all asked to report to station as soon as possible.
1620 hours       Call from WYMAS, a further eight ambulances and two MAJAX
                 vehicles en-route, asked to stand by at Ml Junction 36.
1629 hours       Call to                  at Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
                 when vehicles are clear at Royal Hallamshire they are to
                 stand by on Netherthorpe Road - traffic congested up by
                 ground.

1633 hours       WYMAS vehicles stood down.
1646 hours       Rotherham District Hospital updated, will probably not be
                 required.

1648 hours       Several vehicles (not SYMAS) broken down at Herries Road
                 bus garage.

1655 hours                   informed and will attend.

1708 hours       Rotherham District General Hospital informed to expect
                 some casualties.
STANDARDS AND EFFICIENCY OFFICER -


1718 hours       Royal Hallamshire Hospital will need to transfer some
                 patients to other hospitals, 'phis information was
                 received from

1730 hours       Five ambulances at Royal Hallamshire Hospital to transfer
                 patients (total of 19 patients to move).

1744 hours       Call from Station Officer Eason at Herries Bus Garage,
                 all crews moving to join Alpha 7 at Sheffield Wednesday
                 Football Club gymnasium.

1814 hours       Call from                 , Royal Hallamshire Hospital is
                 now open for normal accident and emergency work.

1815 hours       Call from                , Northern General Hospital is
                 now open for normal accident and emergency work.
1822 hours       Further call from                  Northern General
                 Hospital is not available for normal accident and
                 emergency work.
1900 hours        Delta extra crews now stood down.

1947 hours       Call from Chief Inspector Beall at temporary mortuary -
                 no bodies to be returned from Northern General until
                 further notice.

2000   hours      Call from                   - Police at mortuary to
                  accompany bodies.

2019 hours       Further call from                , 11 bodies have been
                 transferred from Northern General to temporary morgue,
                 each accompanied by a police officer.




NB                                 and                  rang control every
                  30 minutes with an upWcer
Station Officer Higgins.



1505 hours - A crowd disturbance was noticed at Leppings Lane, I asked
Station Officer Eason and Ambulanceman             to have a look. I then
notified control of a crowd problem at Hillsborough but there did not
appear to be many casualties at this time.


Station Officer Eason returned and informed me that many people were
injured. I informed control of this and then proceeded to the Leppings
Lane end to try to establish the number of people injured. I was still not
aware at this time of the severity of the situation as many of the injured,
and all of the bodies were on the floor behind the Leppings Lane wall.


I had extreme problems with radio equipment at this time, transmitting was
impossible from the location of the incident. The crowd were lashing out
at everyone in uniform, including ambulance staff.

I returned to the vehicle to transmit to control and was told by a Police
Inspector that there were approximately 30 bodies at Leppings Lane end
(they had seen these on video). I passed this information to control. I
used the parked ambulance at Penistone Road by the gymnasium as a base and
asked the Police to make sure that the gymnasium was available as per the
major incident plan.

Shortly afterwards two ambulances arrived.   I directed them onto the pitch
and told them to find Station Officer Eason who was at the far end of the
pitch. At this time Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Morley and Mr. Dale arrived at
approximately 1520 hours.


I was directing Police and fans to the gymnasium area with casualties and
bodies, but the medical resources available at this time were very limited.
Mr. Hopkins asked for the major incident vehicle, which arrived shortly
afterwards with Station Officer          at approximately 1545 hours.
Station Officer Higgins.

We unloaded body bags, canvasses and poles and took them to the gymnasium
area. As more vehicles and staff arrived, I tried to establish the more
serious injuries, make cots available and transport to hospital. Walking
wounded were also put into vehicles were a seat was available.


From the start of the incident, I had tried to make a route available
through the gymnasium area using both entrances, one in - one out, but this
was impossible until later as Police vehicles were parked at the junction
of the gymnasium area.


By this time, Mr. Hopkins had taken control of the incident and I was left
estimating condition and priority of patients, and directing ambulance
staff as they loaded patients.


Mr. Jones had by this time arrived and was dealing with availability of
staff and vehicles.


By approximately 1650 hours, the gymnasium area was clear of casualties and
I was told by Mr. Hopkins to take two vehicles to the entrance area at
Leppings Lane to collect eleven bodies which were at this location and
return them to the temporary mortuary. This I did. I was not aware of
this incident. Upon my return I was told by Mr. Hopkins to go to Medico
Legal and await vehicles arriving, ensure as efficient turn round as
possible of vehicles and return the vehicle complete with body bags to the
temporary mortuary at Hillsborough.


Superintendent Dale took me to the Medico Legal centre at 1800 hours and I
remained there until 2000 hours.


No bodies were received at the Medico Legal during this time as an amended
plan was agreed at the ground during this period.


At 2100 hours I returned to the ground with Superintendent Dale and helped
with the loading of bodies for transport to Medico Legal.
Station Officer Higgins.



I left the ground at 2330 hours to go home.

Conclusions


From the start of the incident we were in the wrong place - at ground
level.


If we had been in our usual place high in the ground we would have been
aware of the incident more quickly and Police Officers would have been more
readily available.


Mr. Eason, myself and static crews could not contact each other by radio,
we could only contact control with extreme difficulty. The equipment was
inadequate.


The Police Officers both men and sergeants seemed unaware of the incident
plan for the ground. They wanted to put casualties and bodies into the
nearest ambulance.


I found in the initial stages of the incident that it was difficult to make
fans and police accept that the bodies they were bringing out to me were
dead. I feel that a team and doctors at the onset of the incident at my
post (casualty and mortuary) in the gymnasium would have helped greatly.

The senior St. Johns staff helped readily but the junior staff who were
children could not cope and should not have been put into this position.

As the incident progressed, St John senior staff were left dealing with
their own cadets and were not available to help with medical teams.


The numbers of off duty SYMAS road staff that attended the ground were
invaluable. They were a major factor in ensuring the incident was dealt
with as quickly as it was.
Station Officer Higgins.

To document events as they happen as per major incident plan is impossible,
unless you have sufficient officers at locations. I found myself directing
the incident and still treating many patients as medical staff in the
required numbers could not have been available.


The response time to the ground by SYMAS officers, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Jones,
Mr. Morley, Superintendent Dale and Station Officer          was greatly
appreciated by Station Officer Eason and myself. The number of officers to
control an incident is as important as the numbers of crews. The jobs that
need to be done in a situation of this level need officers capable of
following instructions from the senior officer.

The parking of vehicles outside the ground should not be allowed, it
greatly hindered the ambulances trying to attend the incident.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



At approximately 1420 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, I attended the
control centre of SYMAS. The reason for my visit was to update myself as
to the situation with regard the football and associated traffic conditions
within the county and particularly Sheffield area.

I asked if the two Liaison Officers had left for Hillsborough, it was
confirmed that they had left Longley Ambulance Station en-route for the
ground. I was informed that the two officers had left with an ambulance
crew who were also going to the ground to stand by. The second additional
cover vehicle had been put on stand by at Middlewood station, a short
distance from Hillsborough.

At approximately 1508 hours Superintendent R. Clarke took a call from the
South Yorkshire Police (Force Control). I got the impression that Ray
Clarke was surprised by the call because he started to explain to the
caller that we had two Liaison Officers in the ground with a vehicle. As
soon as that call had finished a second call came from Force Control, this
time it was answered by

The call Ray Clarke took asked for a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane
end of the ground.   I immediately questioned this as I know from experience
that ambulances cannot gain access from that area into the ground itself.
Mr. Clarke told me he could not get any further details and I said get the
second standby vehicle to Leppings Lane to get some information. I
actually passed this call myself to Middlewood Ambulance Station. I also
told Mr. Clarke to contact the duty Liaison Officer at the ground for
further details.


The call             |answered seconds after Mr. Clarke's confirmed they
wanted a fleet of ambulances to the ground.    Because of the nature of the
calls and the conflicting detail   I decided to make my way to Hillsborough.
This would be approximately   1512 hours.   I left control and together with
Mr. Morley who had just returned from Sheffield, we travelled as an
emergency response to Hillsborough in a marked ambulance car.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



En route I decided it was a strange incident because of the way in which
the message had been vague from the police and because of the manner of
conversation I was hearing over the radio.


I told Mr. Morley to radio control and tell them to make all Trent
Ambulance vehicles available as soon as possible. I heard this message
transmitted b y w h o        finished the message by adding "particularly
Sierra mobiles".

On leaving Headquarters, I decided I was going to attend the normal
rendezvous point for incidents at the football ground which is the
Penistone Road North entrance to the gymnasium. I knew our Liaison Officer
would be there or in that area. I arrived at Hillsborough at 1522 hours,
parked my vehicle and left Mr. Morley with it.   I then went to the only
vehicular access to the pitch, walked down toward the ground and looked
toward Leppings Lane end of the ground. I saw a complete line of Police
Officers right across the width of the ground.


I ran across, went through the police lines where I could clearly see lots
of injured people on the grass. I looked at thestand it was a mass of
faces and it became clear that the ambulances atLeppings Lane could not
get to this incident from the location.

I could not get involved with the injured, my responsibility was to get
resources there immediately to deal with the situation.

I turned and began running back to summon help. I saw a Police Officer
fall down with a little girl in his arms. I picked up the child and
carried on running with her in my arms up the ramp exit. I stopped and
looked at her, she was dead. The crowd at that time were clapping and
cheering and were generally noisy.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



The Police Officer caught up to me and said "she has had it hasn’t she
kid?" I replied "yes, take her into the gymnasium" and gave him the child’s
body.


I saw Mr. Morley stood at the ambulance vehicle, I shouted for our Major
Incident Vehicle and ambulances to attend the Penistone Road end of the
ground, entrance to the gymnasium. I also asked for the Chief Metropolitan
Ambulance Officer to be informed at home, this was approximately 1530
hours.


I then went toward the gymnasium, the first thing I saw was outside the St.
Johns ambulance room a group of what can only be described as children,
they were in uniform and appeared to be extremely upset. I entered the
gymnasium door and it was pandemonium, there were Police Officers and
already some bodies laid on the advertising boards.


There were casualties everywhere and bodies laid on the floor. I turned
around and went back to where the ambulances could back in, we could only
get one ambulance in at a time because of the way vehicles were parked.
The area was full of Police vans and Police horses and one of our
ambulances which had parked before the match kicked off. The cots from
that vehicle had gone and the crew had responded to the Leppings Lane end
of the pitch to help with the injured.


Station Officer Higgins reported to me, he said "it is caos" I said "find
me that crew and get that vehicle moved". I turned to look at the
ambulance and saw it had been filled with dead and injured people who had
been brought there by the crowd. They were laying on the floor and sitting
on the wheelarches as the stretchers had already been removed by the crew.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



I wanted an ambulance onto the pitch. I formed the opinion that this would
let the crowd see that help had arrived. I thought the crowd were clapping
and cheering because they thought help was at a premium.


The Police appeared to be containing and area full of injured people and I
wanted desperately to get an ambulance in.


I got one of my vehicles into position at the top of the ramp ready to
drive onto the pitch when the St. Johns Ambulance appeared at the bottom of
the ramp blocking our entrance. To my horror he appeared to have the
vehicle side wedged against a metal ramp providing wheelchair access to the
stand.


The vehicle was freed by a large group of Police Officers bouncing it
straight. This vehicle then exited from the ground.

We had reversed our vehicles to allow this and then we drove forward again
only to find that our vehicle got wedged on girder work supporting the
gate. Because of the inability to drive in a straight line it was
necessary to bounce vehicles straight to gain access and egress from the
pitch.

The wheelchair ramp was a surprise to me as on my previous visits to the
ground, it had not been there.   I am not aware of any notification of its
prescence.


I then sent a further ambulance onto the pitch as the crowd appeared to
respond favourably to the first one. With the increase of ambulance staff
and fire service personnel we were able to take control of the situation,
removing the injured.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



I stopped at the top of the ramp and was then approached by Leading
Ambulanceman          , I sent him into the gymnasium to attend to the
injured getting them ready to transport. I went to my vehicle and asked
over the radio for the location of the Major Incident Vehicle, I was told
he would be there within minutes.


At the time the Major Incident   Vehicle arrived driven by Station Officer
           Control informed me   that the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer had been contacted and   was proceeding to Headquarters. Mr. Jones
then ran to me and I asked him   to take charge of everything concerning
loading and despatch from that   location and Penistone road.


I then went to return to the gymnasium where I was confronted by a male who
told me he was a Doctor and had three more Doctors with him, but they had
no equipment. I saw one of my staff, I cannot remember who it was but I
asked him to take the Doctors names and take them into the gymnasium
introducing them to Leading Ambulanceman           who had his para medic
equipment with him.


Mr.   Morley then came with an Ambulance Station Officer from Nottingham who
had   four or five staff with him. These people were in civilian clothes and
had   been supporting Nottingham Forrest at the match. Mr. Morley went onto
the   ground wearing our satin yellow ambulance jackets.


I then entered the gymnasium and found Chief Superintendent Addis and
liaised with him. I came out and returned to the ambulance loading party
by this time the match had been abandoned and fans were filing out of the
stands.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



The number of injured coming from the pitch area had slowed down. I was
conscious of the fact that there was a number of seriously injured in the
gymnasium and I was anxious to have these people transported to hospital.
I observed many of them had been infused by our para medics and Doctors.


I had already agreed with Chief Superintendent Addis that the gymnasium
would be the temporary mortuary and I would remove the injured as soon as I
could. We then commenced transferring the injured from the gymnasium to
hospital.

By this time the Police vehicles which were blocking the egress and access
routes for my vehicles had been moved and the flow arrangements        were
better. Mr. Jones and Mr. Dale had ensured aclear passage for ambulances
which had been the initial problem at the earlier stages of the incident.
Mr. Jones came to me in the gymnasium area and told me he had ten
ambulances on Penistone Road outside the ground with a further twenty five
in Herries Road Bus Garage. He also informed me that he was aware of
eleven bodies on the circular road of the Sheffield Wednesday corner of the
ground (Leppings Lane). I questioned this "do you mean outside the
ground?". He could not be specific as he had seen them with a PoliceChief
Inspector who had in fact pointed them out to him earlier. I now know that
Mr. Jones thought the circular road was part of the ground but in fact is a
service road outside the perimeter wall.


The priority at the time was the removal of the living injured not the
known dead. Events began to move quickly and in a short space of time I
despatched three vehicles with an officer to bring these bodies to the
gymnasium.

I lost complete track of time, but I knew the next thing to do was to
liaise with the Police with regard the course of action to be taken with
the bodies.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.



The original arrangements with Chief Superintendent Addis after
consultation with the coroners office was to transport the bodies to:-

     Medico Legal Centre, Sheffield.
     Royal Hallamshire Hospital.
     Northern General Hospital.


and if necessary Rotherham District General Hospital.


I previously agreed to do this as I could complete the transfer of 80
bodies in one exercise.


However, Chief Superintendent Addis informed me that the coroner (Dr.
Popper) had stopped the original plan and was employing an international
London based organisation to remove and prepare the bodies for
identification.


Much later Dr. Popper arrived and we discussed with Chief Superintendent
Addis how to dispose of the bodies. It was agreed that the bodies would be
photographed by polaroid and developed at the top end of the gymnasium. I
set up a screen to obstruct the view of relatives from the mass of bodies.

No body was to be removed prior to positive identification.


Ambulance cover was scaled down to six to facilitate the eventual removal
of the bodies.


I then left the scene at approximately 2000 hours on Saturday 15th April
1989. I proceeded to headquarters and then went home.
__________ f- AMBULANCEMAN - LONGLEY STATION
(off duty)

Date:   19.4.89
Time:    1525-1620


I was off duty on Saturday 15th April 1989 and became aware whilst at home
through the media that there was a serious incident at Hillsborough
football ground. I telephoned Control to see if I was needed. 1
______ spoke to me and asked me to go immediately to my Station. This I
did and picked up Renault vehicle Sierra 484 and proceeded after radio
contact with control to the Leppings Lane area of the football ground. On
arrival I saw a chaotic scene of Police, football fans, three front line
ambulances. My attention was immediately drawn to what appeared to be
approximately sixteen bodies lying on the driveway against the railings
opposite gate ’C’.

Shortly after my arrival I was joined by DDT Lawson who asked me if I
needed assistance, also two nurses came to me, and I instructed all three
of them to get as many injured persons back to the ambulance as soon as
possible. A police officer came to me and asked how many casualties I
could take on the ambulance, I told him as many as he wanted. Shortly
after DDT Lawson and the two nurses returned to the vehicle with several
casualties. We in fact loaded thirteen patients onto the ambulance and
along with DDT Lawson and the two nurses we left the ground being escorted
by a police transit van to the Hallamshire Hospital.

On arrival at the hospital we handed over the thirteen casualties to
hospital staff. I then returned to the Leppings Lane end of the football
ground with DDT Lawson. On arrival back at the ground I liaised with a
police inspector and established that there were no more living casualties
in that area. I then heard over the radio that ambulances were now being
stood by at Herries Road Bus Depot. I then went to this location and
reported to S/0 Eason. After some time at the bus depot we eventually
moved back to the gymnasium car park area at the football ground and
assisted with the transportation of bodies from there and to the Medico
Legal Centre.

I   completed my work and signed off duty at 0615 on Sunday morning.
D JONES - ASSISTANT CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER

I returned home after shopping between 1500/1505 on Saturday 15th April
1989. I had been home approximately 6-7 minutes when I switched on the TV
to see reports of the Liverpool v Notts match. The TV immediately
displayed live coverage from Hillsborough on BBCl where the game had been
stopped after 6 minutes play, the scene changed advising further coverage
would be seen later. At that point I was not concerned with what I had
seen on TV because it merely appeared to be a crowd spill from the terraces
onto the pitch. However in my own mind I felt concerned, TV immedaitely
returned to Hillsborough by this time it was apoproximately 1517, I saw a
massive crowd spillage with bodies laying on the ptich. I did not wait to
watch any more I ran to change into my uniform whilst doing so I asked my
wife to telephone control and tell them i was on my way into Headquarters.
My wife also works for SYMAS as a control assistant and was asked by
Control to report to headquarters with me in order to assist in Control.
We arrived at Control at approximately 1530, I immediately sort out
Superintendent Clarke who was in the incident room, he told me that several
vehicles had been despatched to the ground and that Alpha 3 (Higgins),
Alpha 4 (Eason) Trentamb 2 (DCMAO), Trentamb 6 (ADO Support Services) were
either at the ground or on the way. The M.I. Vehicle was also en route.

I did not wait for any further update and took the keys for a staff car and
left for the scene, this would be at approximately 1540 hours as I pulled
out of Headquarters I met the CMAO who had been called out and was just
arriving. We briefly exchanged informals and I continued to Hillsborough
arriving at 1550 hours.

On approaching Hillsborough I could not get to the pre-arranged and agreed
casualty clearing area in the gymnasium. This was because the Penistone
Road section from Herries Road towards Halifax Road was completely blocked
by Police vehicles, Police Officers, Football fans and traffic going in the
opposite direction to me. Because of this road blockage I knew I could not
clean a path for my vehicle and therefore decided to gain access by the
entrance which leads to executive suite of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club.

I saw ambulances leaving this area and had to manoeuvre my vehicle past
ambulances, police vehicles and fans. I got to Leppings Lane end and
parked my vehicle by the high wall adjacent to the Police control boc (E
Gate).

I immediately informed Control "on scene" and was not acknowledged. I left
my vehicle, and used my hand portable again I received no acknowledgement.
I commenced walking towards Leppings Lane through masses of fans who
appeared to have no pattern of direction. They were trying to go in every
direction.

The situation was completely chaotic, I contacted two ambulances in a short
walking distance from my own vehicle. I very quickly checked them for crew
and patients, they were both fully loaded with patients, police officers
and helpers, in fact I would say they were overloaded as against normal
situations. I despatched them to a hospital, I cannot remember who the
crew members were. At this point I noticed a number of bodies laying on
the floor against the railings opposite the west stand area of the ground
outside the ground. The exact loaction was between E and C gates. These
bodies were partially covered with plastic bags, blankets and items of
clothing. I cannot say exactly how many there were but I would say
approximately eight. These bodies were in a line parallel to the railings.
I continued toward Leppings Lane entrances and passed at least one fire
tarden on the drive close to the Leppings Lane gates.

All of the Leppings Lane and the adjacent area was heavily congested with
people I could see in the distance On Leppings Lane itself that there were
a number of ambulances in a convoy with crews still in the cabs, I believe
there were five ambulances. I had walked from the area of 'E' gate along
the outside perimeter road to Leppings lane itself. I am convinced that
after dispatching the ambulances from the 'E' gate area and walking to
Leppings Lane that no living casualties were in that area. In fact the
area was densely crowded. Because of those reasons I re-deployed the
convey of ambulances to the Penistone Road Gym entrance which is the agreed
casualty clearing area for the ground. During the inspection walk I met
L/A         who appeared to have been organising the clearance of
casualties from that area.

In Leppings Lane I met a Divisional Fire Officer from South Yorkshire who
was stood adjacent to the mobile fire control unit and two tenders. I did
not stay there but attempted to make my way into the ground to get to the
gym, en route I met Chief Inspector Wareing of South Yorkshire Police and
told him to get me to the gym as fast as he could. As we walked he pointed
out more bodies on the floor, we progressed through the ground under the
North Stand with great difficulty due to the agressive nature of fans
leaving the ground. I was approached by a man who introduced himself as a
doctor and asked if he could be of help. I kept him with me and we
continued to head for the gym. As I approached the gym I saw ambulancemen
and police officers both treating and loading patients into ambulances in
the agreed casualty clearing area.

During the process of walking from the 'C' gate area to the gym, the route
I used did not allow me a view of the pitch area as I walked below building
under cover, I know this was the North Stand.

I sent the doctor into the gym and one of my colleagues, who I can't
remember, informed me of Mr Hopkins’ location. I entered the gym and
immediately saw Mr Hopkins, dialogue took place. He asked me to take
charge of the loading and movement of vehicles by the gym.

I despatched vehicles with casualties aboard and then walked onto Penistone
Road North and saw heavy congestion of football fans, police officers,
police transit vans, dog vans and ambulances. I saw a Police Inspector and
informed him that section of road had to be completely clear of vehicles
except ambulances, I think this was approximately 1625 hours. This was
partially achieved as well as clearing the central reservation on Penistone
Road North opposite the gymn entrance 'O' gate in order to allow ambulances
to mount the reservation and turn right. This action allowed free passage
of ambulances to either of the receiving hospitals. I returned to the gym
to update Mr Hopkins and shortly after this it was established that all
live casualties had been cleared from the ground and were in or en route to
hospital. This was approximately 1630 hours.

Mr Hopkisn told me to get as many body bags and blankets as I could from
our vehicles which were lined up in Penistone Road North. I think at that
time I had twelve ambulances in line. I had the blankets and body bags
taken into the gym, whilst this was being done the Barnsley Medical Team
arrived at gate ’O’. The crew who brought them was A/M 1         and A/M
         and also A/M    ~l I sent them into the gym to see Mr Hopkins.
Shortly later they re-appeared back at the gate and I was advised that they
were no longer required. They stayed with me whilst I re-deployed the line
of ambulances to Herries Road Bus Depot. A Nottingham vehicle failed to
start in the line, thje crew eventually started the vehicle, I contacted
Control with a hand portable and requested that the duty fitter be sent to
the Bus Depot to render assistance to the crew. I began to stack vehicles
at Herries Road on standby. I then despatched 3 ambulances along with S/0
Higgins to collect the bodies which ad been left at Leppings Lane and bring
them to the gym. I loaded the Barnsley Medical Team on to a vehicle manned
by S/0         1and A/M           ~| I told S/0          Ito return the team
and for him to remain at Barnsley as Liaison Officer. As I continued to
move the ambulance from Penistone Road to Herries Road, a Police Officer
came to me with two teenage boys who were in a distraught and shocked
condition, I placed them onto a West Yorkshire ambulance and told the crew
to take them to Barnsley District General Casualty Department because I was
aware that this hospital were taking minor injuries from the Incident. I
also told the crew that one that had been done he sould report clear to his
own Authority. I then moved approximately 6 ambulances into the gym car
park area by use of gate between the terraced houses on Penistone Road
North.
I contined to send other vehicles to Herries Road Bus Deport during this
time it was pointed out to me that the Barnsley Medical Team had left their
equipment, this was loaded onto an ambulance and sent back to the hospital.
The bodies from Leppings Lane were brought to ghe gym I then closed the
gates to 'O’ entrance and advised Mr Hopkins that he had 10 ambulances in
the gym car park and 24 ambulances at Herries Road Bus Depot.

I stood down all outside authority vehicles at that stafe. As far as I was
concerned the immediate incident had been cleared. In conjunction with Mr
Hopkins I stood down all SYMAS vehicles with the exception of 7 which were
returned for the transportation of the dead at a later time.

I left the scene to return to Headquarters with Mr Hopkins at approximately
2000 hours.
           - CONTROL ASSISTANT


Date:   18.4.89
Time:   1300-1350


I was watching it at home at approximately 1500 when we realised what was
happening. We phoned in and spoke to           and asked if she wanted us.
The reply was Yes.

David was changed and ready to go. On arrival I dealt with the press calls
and when            was free I would direct calls through.
I received calls from off duty staff offering their assistance.

I received a call from D Jones on scene informing us of the position.
I received a call from the police to say the mortuary was full and could we
take bodies to hospital.

I left the unit at 2100.
A K LAWSON - DDT - MIDDLEWOOD STATION


Date:   19.4.89
Time:   1455-1525

Duty:   Day Off


On my day off I was working in the Hillsborough restaurant as a wine
waiter. I had finished my job at 1450 and went out to look at the match.
I noticed that about 1500 hours that people had come over the barrier with
injuries and were limping, so I went down to see if I could help the St
John's Ambulancemen. As I came out of the tunnel onto the pitch I noticed
that the people they were bringing out were people who were dead or dying.

We (St John's) revived one young chap with CPR and left him with a junior
St John due to the numbers of dying people we tried CPR on another two
patients, whilst working on a third patient a Doctor came over andasked if
I required any help, he took over CPR.

I could only see one Red Cross ambulance so I ran over to the "DugOut" and
telephoned Control. I told our Control what was happening and to the best
of my knowledge I could see 40 people dead.

I ran back onto the field and tried to revive more patients with no
success. The Fire Service arrived and in the absence of a Senior Ambulance
Officer the Fire Service Senior Officer ordered us to take out casualties
to the side of the River side suite (no time).

The patients were all seriously ill but alive. When I arrived there an off
duty ambulanceman had made his way to this point. Me and the other
Ambulanceman made everyone as comfortable as possible.

I noticed that when ambulances came past they were all full, so I walked
aroung the corner and noticed ambulances parked at the top of Leppings
Lane.

We carried the patients from this point up to the parked ambulances, when
we got up there I s a w w i t h a Renault vehicle. He then said you
stay with me and we loaded the Renault with patients - 13 patients and 3
nurses. With a police escort we went to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

We were sent back to the scene firstly to Leppings Lane end where there
were no more casualties but a temporary mortuary at the side of the Lane.

We then went to the gym, I was told I wouldn't be needed any longer and I
rejoined my family.
Control A s s i s t a n t 1400 - 2200 Saturday 15th April 1989.



About 1510 hours I took a call from the Police who said "I want a fleet of
ambulances to Leppings Lane". I passed this information to
as we had already had at least one call from the Police.         told me
that further information was also coming in from Hillsborough.

We mobilised vehicles to the scene. Ray Clarke told me to open up an
incident log. Mr. Hopkins was in control and instructed the second
Middlewood vehicle to be mobilised and then informed us that he would be
going to Hillsborough to assess the situation.

We started to mobilise other vehicles, most of these were through radio
conoaunications via           I. As best I could, I logged the vehicles
booking mobile straight away.


              informed the hospital casualties about the situation and
started to notify people for calling in. I then went with Mr. Clarke to
operate from the Incident Room on ERC.


I rang Nottingham, they were unaware of the situation, I informed them
about Hillsborough and asked if help was available if it was required, they
said "you only have to ask".


From then on, everything happened at once.


I rang Mr. Smith and informed him of the incident at 1535 hours. The
incident log was opened at 1512 hours, this being the time I received a
call from Force control. The Policeman was panicking, I did not get any
information other than "I want a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane". I
explained officers and ambulances were located at the ground already, he
did not give me any further information. I do not think the Police knew
what was happening when I spoke to them, he just wanted to get off the
telephone.
                    SOOTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                               R E P OR T


NAME:        Leading Ambulanceman

VEHICLE:     R608

SHIFT:       1400 - 2200 hours


DATE AM) TIME OF INTERVIEW:              18th April 1989 @ 1230 - 1420 hours



I received the call at 1515 hours from Superintendent R Clarke who told me
to   proceed     to       Hillsborough     Football        Ground,     Sheffield,       query     major
incident.     We set off and                               drove.    When we switched to ERC we
immediately      realised      we    had       a    communications     problem,     we    maintained
reasonable communication on Sheffield Parkway.                      One problem could have been
the amount of air traffic at the time we were trying to transmit.                               When we
established contact on Parkway, we told Control where we were and that we
were heading for Hillsborough.


Later,    towards        the end    of   the       Parkway a message      from Control        for     all
vehicles to proceed to the Leppings Lane end of the Ground was received.
We   proceeded      on    Middlewood     Road       and   entered    Leppings   Lane,    we     had   no
traffic obstruction on the approach at all.


We arrived at Leppings Lane and were directed by a Senior Police Officer to
proceed    to other Ambulances parked                 in Leppings     Lane.     As we approached
behind approximately three Ambulances which were parked up,                          I noticed to
our left at least         36 casualties in various conditions, ie, conscious, semi­
conscious,     unconscious, everything              appeared   to be    going well,       Ambulances
were being loaded with patients.                    As the Ambulances were loaded they were
leaving the scene in the same direction.



                                                                                          /continued
%




    18 April 1989

    Leading Ambulanceman



    Once we had established a parking area for our vehicle there appeared to be
    a lot more patients coming from the area of Gate 'C'.            I was the attendant
    and was already carrying with me a resuscitator and portable radio.              I told
    Ambulanceman             that whatever he did he must stay with the vehicle in
    the driving     seat and not     to open his   doors.    At that moment a Police
    Officer possibly a Sergeant came up to our Ambulance and pointed to where a
    casualty was    laid.    I told Ambulanceman                  to follow the line of
    Ambulances until he got to the one in front.


    I left the vehicle and went with the Police Officer to the patient, who
    apparently was not breathing, he was a young male of approximately 16 - 17
    years.     I glanced    around   the   immediate area   and   could   see no    further
    casualties laid about.      I attempted to resuscitate the patient by Oxygen
    therapy, which was forceably administered by the resuscitation unit.                The
    second injection of Oxygen resulted in a gasp and the patient started to
    breathe.    I shouted    to the Police Sergeant who had directed me to this
    patient,   to go to my Ambulance and fetch my colleague with a stretcher.
    When he arrived back we immediately loaded the patient onto our cot and
    then proceeded to our vehicle and loaded him on.


    Once we had loaded this patient, 1 was conscious of someone shouting at me,
    whom I recognised as L. Yoxhall, an off-duty Ambulanceman from Barnsley.              I
    continued to maintain our patient's breathing and at that time was made
    aware by someone, of a further patient in severe distress immediately to
    the rear and side of our vehicle.        I told L Yoxhall and                  to bring
    the patient onto my vehicle, and told L Yoxhall to stay with me and attend
    to that patient, whilst I administered to my original patient who was in
    need of constant attention.




                                                                              /continued
18 April 1989

Leading Ambulanceman



I then told            to close the rear doors and proceed in the direction
of the traffic flow to the Northern General Hospital unless indicated
otherwise.   As we arrived at the Northern General, both patients were
breathing for themselves and their conditions were stable.


Immediately after discharging our patients, I drove back to the scene and
told L Yoxhall to stay with us, and for him and ________ to have the rear
of the vehicle made ready for our next patients. Whilst at the Northern
General a motor cyclist escorted us back to the scene. Whilst returning to
the scene I contacted Control and told them of our position and was
instructed to return to Leppings Lane and contact the Incident Officer. On
our approach   a number of vehicles were parked in various positions and I
then assumedattendant duties after parking my vehicle and instructed C
Beighton as previously mentioned.


From my position at the rear of all the parked vehicles it appeared that
there was some problem at the front of the line as no vehicles were moving
off. I proceeded on foot with my handset towards a Leading Ambulanceman
who I identified as J Flack from Parkway Station. I asked him what was
going on up front and who the Incident Officer was. He told me there were
more casualties and it was chaotic. The reason for this statement was the
vast number of walking casualties, which were difficult to assess due to
being mostly shocked.    I estimated the number at 200 to 300 people.    I
noticed that    the casualties in situ, where I previously noticed the
unconscious casualties on our first pickup, were now all in a conscious
state.


                                                                /continued
4

18 April 1989

Leading Ambulanceman



I then told Leading Ambulanceman J Flack that I would take charge of the
Incident until relieved by a Senior Officer.                     I then returned to my vehicle
informed                           to remain where he was and instructed L Yoxhall to
be his attendant and to follow the flow of vehicles as it proceeded.                              I
went directly to the front of the line to ascertain what the problem was
causing the congestion.


I found that an Ambulance had been abandoned at the front of all the other
vehicles.     I found the rear doors open in the vehicle, the resuscitator was
still    in   situ and       a portable       radio was    laid on a stretcher.            In   the
attendants     seat    was    an    Ambulance    observer       travelling with     this vehicle
which was from Derbyshire.                 I asked the observer where the crew had gone
and she replied that they had gone into the ground.                           I told her to stay
where she was as she appeared to be upset.                      I told her we would be using
the vehicle to accommodate the walking wounded.


I then     turned     to direct      the Ambulance       that    had been obstructed by         the
vehicle away        from the       scene    to hospital as        they were     fully loaded    and
directed each vehicle to an alternative hospital.                    I then returned down the
line and met up with ACMAO D Jones.               He asked if my handset was ok, I told
him it was and we exchanged radios.               I told him what was happening and what
I had done.       He instructed me to carry on whilst he went to Leppings Lane
and called control to inform vehicles to attend at the G ym n asiu m .


I returned back to supervise the loading of patients onto vehicles.                             At
this time only one Ambulance remained that was the Derbyshire Ambulance.                          I
loaded several patients onto this vehicle and I was assisted by a Nursing
Sister to administer oxygen and give general reassurance to the patients.
The     vehicle     attendant        then    returned,      he     was   an     extended   trained
ambulanceman who had obviously been employing his skills inside the ground.
I asked where the driver was and he replied that he did not know.



                                                                                       /continued
«




    5

    18 April 1989

    Leading Ambulanceman




    At that point my own vehicle returned and I told                         to attend on the
    Derbyshire vehicle and told the Derbyshire attendant to drive to the Royal
    Hallamshire    Hospital.     This   vehicle    leaving    the   scene    cleared   Leppings
    Lane.


    I then returned to attendant duty on my own vehicle and was informed by
              that we were now to proceed to the Gymnasium on Penis tone Road.
    Whilst on Penistone Road we were re-directed to the Bus Depot on Herries
    Road by a Senior Ambulance Officer.


    We   liaised with    the other vehicles       at the Depot and stayed there under
    Station    Officer    Eason's       instructions,    until      we      received    further
    instructions    to proceed   to the Gymnasium.           On arrival at      the Gymnasium
    briefed by Mr Jones as to what was to happen next, we were subsequently
    released from the scene and told to contact Control and return to our own
    area or Station.
                                                                                                                                                                      DM^>   W £ t6 /
 t i c ///<?/</ IVec/neso'oy E C .
                                                                                                                      ■\
  H il l s b o r o u g h          G ro u n d
                                                                                                                ’F I R S T ' A I O
                                                                                                                    ROOM

                                                                             ,                 -.
                                                                                                                                                   QQM




                                                                   ij...           L.................K p f r ;
                                                               I

                                                                                    H O f i T H STAND           ■        O
                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                         i

                                         '‘lit.                                                                                                                                         /Jfe
                                                                                                                                                                                        9r0.\*- »£■*'' 7

                                                                                                                                                                                              igfen

                                                                                                                                                        |i l-jll-'l




                                                          ■1


                                                    11!;i
                                                   Ihi
                                                  '•It!



                                                                   F G             C.        SOUTH STAND
                         ^ V i.



ytx * " <                             pouce
                                     CONTROL
                                                                    o r n c iA L                                                 CA/t
                                                                                                                                     *+   111- - * *,* - - L ~
^ b} I                                                                           MCCfOfi'S.
                                                                                           £3s.

                                                                                 iMT/rAHCe
                                                                       ft
         TURNS r i f t s .   ^     r '- r n ,                      t.'1:
                                                                       j,;              !«■.¥-■\H yrafefSgi.J <i'
                                                                                                                                                        —        ^                            W A Y */
?SA o/ jxiQ/d Wednesdo y E C .
       H i/ h b o r o u q h Ground
                                                                                                                           FlP.ST'AIO

       ©                                                                                                                                       POLICE
                                                                                                                                                 OH




                                                                                            H O X T H STAND
                                     ■ /• •US-    #       «• ■"■ ■■ "

                                         saS W gE                                                                                                  r      0              'K\                                             /if1?
                                         MaiAi
                                                                                                                                                   j!,
                                                                                                                                                     i!l III,.-!i»!Mfec\ l\\ \               -53 .            <&*"
                                                                                                                                                                , m                 \ \         ? \                  ™
                                                                                                                                                                •I1! V,lvA\\ v .W                               •' rv»^
                                fi
                                                                                                                                                                      «y’\Vr-*\W v                       -?
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -jL
                                                                                                                                                                                     r, A v          v
                                        p a r

                                                                                                                                                                     ,i,v ‘\ \ ' l ✓ X    V .- . \   \




                                                                                                                                                                 i i'-                         Xl"'       \
   Aw*y    f   AA15
       AN5 eNCtdSORi
                                                      I                                 .■; _-- —                           ---------- • ■ / .              -. 'J I ...,/                                        A \w i

               1            w               -..
                                                  _ V J                         -
                                                                                F G         G.
                                                                                                 S E £ L _ 2 ! 1 ^ jU ',
                                                                                                       S0UTH * TANB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           V . w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hi     X
                                                                                                                                                                                                     STtytW PM
                                                                                                                  j                     ■ Aj   L
                                s        yC                                                                                  wfuraiiiirfljfej.m te'
                                                                                                    11/ .                                                     >a**
                                . /w /c F )^                                     orr/c/AL                                           c^*/?
                                 CONTROL j
                                                                        *   ..                     Ao t «^ ■ ■ i . . - t

                                                                                        owccm's.
                                                                                        LNTfiAHCC
                                                                            »       •                                         •
. 'N
               TURUSTU.CS
Duty Controller           1400 - 2200 hours.

Alpha 4 (Paul Eason) radioed from Hillsborough Football Ground with the
following message "ground restless, can I have a vehicle to standby nearer
the ground". This was before we received any emergency call, I think it
was about 1500 hours.

The request for a further vehicles on standby was in addition to two
vehicles he had on scene. I told him I had one vehicle at Middlewood did
he want this nearer and he replied "no it’s ok there".

Alpha 4 (Paul Eason) radioed again asking for the Middlewood vehicle to be
despatched as an emergency call to Sheffield Wednesday Football ground.


At approximately the same time, the Police rang asking for a fleet of
vehicles, Superintendent Clarke informed me of this call. Mr. Hopkins, who
was in the control unit, asked me to get Alpha 4 to investigate this
request with the Police because we did not have any further information.
At this time I think another call came in from the police, but I do not
know the detail.

Alpha 4 reported back regarding the requirement for a fleet of ambulances
he told me "people have been crushed, there may be fatalities". I
immediately despatched all vehicles available at that time. That being
four or five emergency vehicles from:-

     Parkway
     Batemoor
     Middlewood
     Maltby
     Rotherham

and then later I despatched vehicles from


     Barnsley
     Hoyland
Duty Controller



I told Superintendent Clarke that things were getting out of hand and we
had better operate ERC from the Incident Room. I gave out two or three
general calls over the radio telling vehicles responding to the
Hillsborough incident to go onto ERC. Superintendent Clarke went into the
incident room with            to operate the ERC channel.


            was in charge of the day vehicles on outpatient duties, most of
these were on station. He mobilised all his available vehicles to the
scene from throughout the county.


As volunteers arrived on stations, they were asked to mobilise as soon as
possible to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground and change to ERC channel.
         - LEADING AMBULANCEMAN - BATEMOOR STATION
Date:   19.4.89
Time:   1530-1645

Duty:   1400-2200

Call Sign:   306

Crewed with Ambulanceman


Our first case of the afternoon was an admission from Skyedge to Nether
Edge Hospital. Whilst on the ward at Nether Edge I caught a brief glimpse
of what I took to be crowds of people on a football pitch.

On returning to the ambulance the volume of radio traffic made us aware
that something had occurred at Hillsborough Football Ground.

On contacting Control we were directed to the Penistone Road entrance of
the ground, I was driving. As we joined Infirmary Road a Police car
escorted us to the ground.

On arrival at Parkside Road, I attempted to turn into Parkside Road
intending to approach the Football ground at the Penistone Road entrance,
but could not due to a large number of Policeman who directed us to
Leppings Lane. This we did.

We turned into Leppings Lane and then into the Perimeter Road. There was
huge crowd, Police and civilians pointing to what we shortly saw to be a
group of casualties. We drove forward between two lines of casualties.
There were no other emergency vehicles in view, neither ambulance, fire or
police, but police were in attendance.
Upon leaving the vehicle, my attendant and I stayed together and began to
examine the casualties. The exact number I was unable to estimate, we
quickly became aware that the casualties were unconscious. We removed the
nearside stretcher and placed it next to a casualty. We were so near to
the casualties that we hardly had to move any distance with the cot.

We loaded the stretcher and patient and immediately took the other
stretcher out of the vehicle. We asked one of the crowd to stay with the
patient whilst we loaded a second casualty. He looked in a critical state
All this took only seconds.

As we attempted to load the second casualty, a group of people rushed
forward and loaded a further unconscious casualty onto the ambulance. I
told the crowd to lay him down and folded a blanket to make a pillow.
Whilst this was in progress my attendant and some police officers were
holding the stretcher. Immediately this patient was laid down, we loaded
the patient still on the stretcher onto the ambulance.
SHEET 2 -         - LEADING AMBULANCEMAN - BATEMOOR STATION

We then began to operate the resuscitator on the first patient we had
loaded. My colleague administered oxygen to the other two casualties. On
closing the ambulance doors my attention was drawn to a further male
casualty who was lying at the edge of the road. He was breathing and I
instructed the person who had called my attention to him to stay with him.
I turned him into the coma position. He was breathing. At the same time
my attention was drawn to a further casualty who appeared to have an arm
injury. I confirmed this by speaking to him and since he was able to walk
I instructed him to get into the cab of the ambulance. I fastened the seat
belt around him and asked him if he was all right. He said he was and then
drove the ambulance forward along the Perimeter Road towards Penistone
Road. I believe I saw an ambulance as I drove past the Director's
entrance, but cannot be sure. This was some way from the location where we
had loaded the casualties.

There were crowds of people everywhere. As we joined Penistone Road I saw
at least two other ambulances, being escorted by a police motor cycle. I
followed on and carried on to the Northern General Hospital Accident and
Emergency Hospital as part of the column of vehicles.

I tried to radio Control on the ERC Channel but was unable to get through.

At the Northern General we quickly unloaded, as there was a large number of
staff awaiting our arrival.

We began to return to the ground and on the way a radio broadcast advised
us to report to gate 'O' on Penistone Road which we did.

At the ground we joined a small queue of ambulances being filtered in turn
into the ground, near what I found out later was the gymnasium. We were
directed into the casualty loading point by Station Officer P Eason. I
also saw Superintendent T Dale and in the distance, Station Officer P
Higgins.

We loaded a patient, and immediately began adminstering oxygen. I was
assisted by Ambulanceman Tony Edwards, who had initially come to our
vehicle requesting supplies of bandages.

At this point my attendant took our second stretcher and assisted by
Ambulanceman              went to collect a second vehicle.

At this point Ambulanceman Edwards returned to his own vehicle and I stayed
with the patient, still administering oxygen. Shortly afterwards my
attendant returned with a patient on the stretcher on a drip. He was
accompanied by             . He had obviously been treated and I was told
he had a fractured femur.
SHEET 3 -          - LEADING AMBULANCEMAN - BATEMOOR STATION

We loaded this patient, reversed out of the ground on to Penistone Road and
set off back to the Northern General Hospital. We once again quickly
unloaded at the Northen General and returned to Gate 'O'. We parked in a
queue of ambulances and shortly afterwards we were directed by P Eason to
standby at Herries Road Bus Garage. Which we did. We stoodby at Herries
Road for half an hour or more, before being directed back to Gate 'O' at
the ground.

Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer D Jones was present, who after a short
interval stood down all crews present who were on normal duties. We
contacted Control and were returned to base. We carried on normal duties
and finished duty at 2205.

Whilst waiting at Gate 'O' before proceeding to Herries Road many
spectators approached the crews to offer thanks for their help.
Shc/ jxiald Wqdnesdoy F, C,
  /•///AsAo ro ugh Gro u n d
                                                                                                  •   FIF.ST'A/O
                                                                                                        ROOM
                                                                                                                                                                 cnvAO
                                                                                                                             POtW
                                                                                                                             RQQM
                                                                                    CymnssiL'/n


                                                                      i         _
                                                         -_ i—

                                        ^-                                 N Q X T H STAND '




                                             Wll.                                                                                    *-.!? !
                                                                                                                                                'I•
                                                                                                                                K        f
                                                                                                                                ■iW*S
                                                                                                                              imb#...
                                              i*i                                                                               ■/

                                                    ir                                                                                         I 1'
  AW AV   F   AAii
  . AND ENCt^S-Oi^S                                                                                                          1/!'
                                                                                ~ ^ r
     ■           *                                                                   SOUTH STAHO
                                                                                                                                                                          \   ,\K V
                                                                 G         XL                                                                               .J           »M

                                                                                                                                             PA**
                                   POLICE
                              r   CONTROL
                                                             o rn c fA L

                                                                                       i£SL».
                                                                       owccm's.
                                                                       LNW ANCe
                                                                                                                         V S , <3' 0 o                .«•
               TURNSTILCS ,                                                                               ,...•*'.v■:v
             - AMBULANCEWOMAN - LONGLEY STATION

Date:   19.4.89
Time:   1315-1500

Call Sign:   Sierra 407

On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was on day duty 0900-1730 along with my
colleague Ambulanceman          i. Throughout our shift up to just before
1500 we were busy on normal domestic duties and were returned to base for a
break.
At approximately 1510 when we were close to Longley Station, Control
radioed us to proceed to an incident at Hillsborough Football ground
Leppings Lane end. We arrived at this location in approximately 3 minutes
and I saw several police officers on horses and several officers on foot at
the entrance to the ground, there were very few fans outside the ground at
this time and we were the first ambulance to arrive at Leppings Lane.

We asked some police officers were we needed and they seemed surprised and
were not aware that ambulances were required at Leppings Lane, at this
stage we were directed onto the driveway to a barricade of approximately
four or five moveable metal barriers which were moved by police officers to
allow us to get in.
We stopped adjacent to gate 'C', I left the ambulance through the rear
doors and the gate 'C' was partially open, in a split second the gates were
opened fully and I saw a group of people carrying on an injured person
towards me and the ambulance. They carried the injured man straight onto
my ambulance. We placed him, on the stretcher and he was making a lot of
noise and breathing quite freely, a girl also got on the ambulance with an
arm injury. I turned to go and close the doors and saw three bodies lying
on the driveway at the rear of the ambulance, they were not breathing so I
told                  to take our two casualties off the vehicle because
the other three required more urgent attention.

At that point I saw two other ambulances behind us. I told             from
one of the other ambulances to take one of the three bodies. As we did so
I saw that the rear doors to              ambulance were already opened. I
found that a body had already been placed on one of the stretchers, a
policeman then jumped in the ambulance and started to work on the patient.
I cleared the man's airway and used an automatic resuscitator on the
patient. I then left the ambulance with the patient being treated by the
policeman and by now a fireman was assisting.
SHEET 2                - LONGLEY STATION

I went back to my ambulance where there were now two stretcher cases on
board being treated by two policeman and Ambulanceman           j One of
them was breathing with difficulty. I immediately placed him on his side
and administered oxygen and left him in the care of one of the policeman.
I turned to the other casualty who was not breathing, I started to clear
his airway and resuscitate him and A/M            jumped in the driving seat
and we set off for the Northern General Hospital.

We arrived at the Hospital and we were assisted by casualty staff to unload
our patients and we handed them over inside the casualty department. We
loaded our stretchers into the ambulance and contacted control by radio.
They instructed us to transport the Northern General Medical Team to the
football ground and take them to the Penistone Road entrance. We arrived
back at the ground with the teamand they quickly disappeared to what Inow
know was the gymnasium. We thendrove our ambulance onto the football
pitch where we saw a doctor working on a casualty. We loaded the patient
onto the ambulance and I noticed that he had been intubated. I connected
the bag and mask to our oxygen supply and the doctor continued to ventilate
the casualty. By now there was another doctor doing cardiac massage. We
drove off the pitch and on towards the Northern General Hospital.
We arrived at the hospital and the casualty was taken off us by hospital
staff. We loaded our stretcher back onto the ambulance and proceeded back
to the football ground. On arrival back at the ground on Penistone Road we
were now in a line of ambulances, the stretchers were taken off most of the
ambulances and taken to the gym. I left my ambulance to assist at the
treatment area and was assisting with the treatment to a young man whohad
pelvis and internal injuries. We loaded this patient onto an ambulance,
the attendant was missing so I took over as attendant and crewed up with
A / M p r t i o drove the ambulance to Hallamshire Hospital.

Throughout the journey I was assisted by a policeman. We arrived at the
Hallamshire and handed the patient over to a doctor. We then contacted
Control by radio and were told to go and standby with other vehicles on
Netherthorpe Road.

After some time we were returned to the Hallamshire to start transferring
patients to the King Edward Hospital. After transferring four patients
Control then gave us a transfer from ITU Northern General Hospital to CT
Scan at the Hallamshire, on completion we radioed green and were returned
to base signing off duty at 2030.
                                                                                                                           I g V DM^>   W   & b /
                   d PVec/nesdoy F .C ,
                                                                                                                                                                 %
    H /i/s b o ro u Q f) G ro u n d
/ Ath   vl   »UHC<                                                                       FIRST'AID

                                                                                                       POLICE
                                                                                                         m




             \

                                                                     h q x t h   stand




                                                                                                                                                    & k < f
                                                    '“V                                                                                                rOfetf'
                                                                                                              [Lwi                          o
        # //Y
    / V                                                                                                  I.
                                         stam   T
                                                                                                                       p:n:i




    AN5 eNctosaR(




                                                                            SOUTH STAND


                                                                                                                     p > fi*
^T*eW        T u l> o   ^oJrv-a^W   j poticE
                                    \C0l1TR0l             ornc/At.                              CAft

                                                                owccm's.
                                                                ENTRANCE
S A e ///g /< /' W ednesday F ,C «                                            /

                                                                                                              \           4
   H t//$ b o r o u q f) G ro u n d
                                                                                                -WST'AI0\
            <                                                                                     ROOM    '                                         v

                                                                      •   •

                                                                                           ____________   !       ,           POLICE                                    jTi           *
                                                                                                                              l R oqm                                   Ner\-»#-v\. jourt^eu
                                                                                                                                                        \ \
                                                                                                                                                              \     -|-f'©«*<v K3®rL CSca.

                                                        11                                                                                                         3^e-i«u     «,y-c*|




                                                                                                                               ii




 AWAY TAAI5 Ertfr^^                               i r
 • AND   B N C L O S O fa S

                                                                                                                                                        ^ Z r r -a w r %
                                              4
                                                                                      jj.l. .      r ***T7            .

                                                                                                                                               /M \\U V                                      V\
                                              ?         F    n        tr          SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                  .     v U   > '             .i   3 t a ^ p s p m\
                                                                                                                                                                                      \\ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                 v\ ,\
                                                                                                                              *.x\                                                           V     \\
                                                                                                      * ^ "i r .
                                   ./’Od/ff
                                   av/r/?ai             o rn c /A L
                              /•



                                                                 omccm's.
'N       JuQ usTn r   c
                                                                 ENTRANCE
                                                                               -*«*
f pS/i(?///<?/& W ednesday F .C ,
            H il ls b o r o u g h            G ro u n d
    A -*.   u    cuvce                                                                                                 FIRST'AIO
                                                                                                                        ROOM

                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                        GvainssiL'ia




                                                                                                  HOXTH S ttiV ') ■
                                                       f ■ *V / .   #   «


                                                      M                 m                                                           ArrO„. J




                                                         7>'/VJ
                                                                                                                                    0 wr*

      Aw,4y     jtaais     CNt^^;>
      • AN5 eNCtoSoR€S.




    2 *u|                                                                         ^      6       (7.              57>wp            A    I M
 I rcuw v -p© '“V cJ            ® *«     Cxauvo c J ^                       - - - V ^ . ^ ' -           ■                a

'■fro** "“YU^              p'»4-oU             .P O L I C E
                                                                                      orncjAi.
•
    "t’c>      n
                   I                 I          CONTROL
                                                                                                                               *** . -j.
                                                                                             om cm 's.
 %                 T u Q u s ritrc
                                                                                             lntbancc
             - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD AMBULANCE STATION

Date:   19.4.89
Time:   1130-1310

Duty:   1000-1800     (Extra crew)
Call Sign:     S102

Crewed with


I was on duty on 15th April 1989 as part of an extra crew rota in for the
football match, and during that morning we did several admission cases,
before being brought back to Middlewood Station on standby at approximately
1330.

From the Station we could see the build up to the match, one thing worried
me, that was the majority of the young men were drinking on their way to
the ground. I expected trouble if they returned after the match and
started fighting outside the ground.

We were watching TV when a news flash interrupted the programme, at the
same time the telephone rang approximately 1510. We were told to proceed
down to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, not on red or urgent, just
proceed down to that entrance to standby nearer the ground.
As we approached Cathcar Lane we could see down to Leppings lane at the
same time we received a call to proceed down to the Sports Hall.

Due to the road network we went down Parkside Road now with the blue lights
on due to the crowds and build up of civilian traffic on Penistone Road.

On arrival at the gate a policeman met us and directed us to the Sports
hall entrance (time from station to Sports Hall approx 3 minutes).

We reversed to the first- aid room at this stage I didn’t see any
casualties.

 ___________ went into the first-aid room, several people assisted by
Police Officers came limping into the area.
A stretcher case was carried round, I looked into the first-aid room, my
crew member was attending to a patient with a badly fractured arm, the room
seemed full with people having difficulty breathing.

I asked the St John’s to blanket the floor area to receive casualties. I
then tried to contact Control, all I managed to obtain was static but could
make out Control Officer        saying change to Channel 1. I wanted to
update them of the situation.
SHEET 2 -           - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION
I finally made contact with Control and asked for an Officer because we had
an incident that was developing. Control reported back that officers were
present within the ground and would contact them.
More and more casualties came into the area. A large number of Police
Officers rushed out from within the Sports Hall. I knew at this stage we
had a major incident.
Patients were being placed on blankets, an off duty ambulanceman made
himself known to me and offered his help. I carried out a further
examination of the first patients who seemed stable at that time.
A large wave of casualties came, some of the casualties who had come on
stretchers got up and walked, I placed them in one corner out of the way.
The ambulance was moved by             to make more room.

A stretcher with a young person on was brought round, his face was covered
up, the police carrying the stretcher said he was dead. I removed the coat
and examined him, he was dead.

I told them to put him into the Sports Hall. From now on it was a
continual stream of patients on stretchers, boards etc carried into the
area.

The ambulance was stripped of blankets, equipment, dressings. A woman in a
red track suit asked for the Frac Pacs.
Police Officers began to stay and assist me with the casualties. Urine
came through cracks in the roof as we were performing CPR. I don't think
it was done on purpose but it made conditions unpleasant.

I radioed to ask for assistance from an officer, I was informed that the
casualty clearing point was at entrance 'O’ (Thats where I was).

Doctors came and assisted, drips were put up, where the equipment and
doctors came from I don't know.

Patients brought round on stretchers with Police Officers performing CPR.
I used the Pneu-pac on patients for a period of time until it was evident
that they wouldn't respond.

In between CPR attempts, I placed airways into unconscious patients and
turned them into the recovery position.

I could see ambulances pulling in and saw ADO Morley. I made my way
through to him and asked for ambulances, he said that he would send
support.
SHEET 3 -           - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION
On returning a Police sergeant was sat in the driving seat of the
ambulance. Two cases one with a drip in situ and a Doctor in attendance
and another stretcher case. Mr Hopkins told me to get off to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital.

On arrival the parking was organised and I was directed to the Orthopaedic
department. The doctor stayed at cas to assist.

On clearing the cases we were directed to Netherthorpe Parkway and onto
Herries Road Garage.

Returning the traffic and crowds were extremely heavy with cars at a
standstill.

S/0 Eason at the garage sent us back to entrance 'O'. I then met up with
my crew mate. ACMAO Jones met us and updated us on the situation.
We were returned to Middlewood Station for other duties and to equip the
ambulance. We then did 3 urgent transfers from the Northern General
Hospital to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

We finished at 2145.
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                 REPORT


HAME:    ADO - Support Services, Mr Roger Morley
         Duty Officer


DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:   19 April 1989, 1430 - 1639 hours

Following a routine patrol of the Sheffield area to ascertain the general
traffic and crowd situations, I was returning to Ambulance Headquarters
when I heard radio messages from Control to Alpha 3, relating to a fleet of
Ambulances being required at the Leppings Lane end of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Ground.


Shortly afterwards, I arrived at Headquarters at the same time as Mr
Hopkins was leaving the Control Unit. He approached me and said there was
trouble at Hillsborough.        He drove the vehicle and we proceeded to
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.


Enroute, at Mr Hopkins request, I contacted Control to have vehicles clear
and available as soon as possible, in anticipation of large numbers of
casualties. I heard a radio message informing all vehicles to change to
ERC.

We arrived at the Ground at 1523 hours. We went directlyto the recognised
Casualty Clearing Point at the Gymnasium. We parked        our vehicle with
difficulty near the top ofthe slope leading directly onto the pitch. The
area was heavily congested by Police Horses and Police vehicles.


I informed Control of our arrival and asked for as many vehicles as
possible to be made available. Mr Hopkins went into the pitch area to
assess the situation. I stayed with the vehicle to maintain communications
with Control.   ERC proved to be un-usable.



                                                                 /continued
19 April 1989

ADO - Mr R Morley




People from the crowd were constantly approaching me for help.                              Casualties
were    being brought up            the    slope    from    the pitch      to the area under            the
Penistone Road end of the North Stand by spectators to the vicinity of the
First Aid room.            Many of the fans were extremely distraught.                  I was trying
to stay in a position where I could give help and direction to as many
people as possible.


Mr Hopkins returned from the pitch and asked me to ensure that the Major
Incident vehicle was attending.                    I supervised the marshalling and loading
of     vehicles.          There    was    still     a     lot   of    aggravation    from     extremely
distraught people.           I was anxious to shield Ambulance crews from as much of
this as possible.


Due    to    the    restricted      access    to     the    area,     it   was   inevitable      that    on
occasions Ambulances actually caused obstruction due to the length of time
that crews were away from vehicles rendering aid.


I was approached by Doctors, Nurses and volunteers from all areas of the
ground.          These    I directed to the most appropriate area as indicated by
their skills.             This    involved Ambulances           and staff from Nottinghamshire,
Derbyshire and West Yorkshire.                Red Cross volunteers were also directed to
the First Aid room.


Arriving         crews   were     directed    to    the    most      seriously   injured    cases.        I
attempted to keep myself informed as to casualty locations.                                As the back
doors       of   Ambulances       were    opened,       spectators     were   attempting    to    remove
anything from            the vehicle which          they thought would be of use.                 This    I
restricted as much as possible.                Vehicle crews were inevitably split up and
in some cases not re-united until much later.


                                                                                            /continued
19 April 1989

Mr R Morley



After most of the living casualties had been moved, I handed over the
marshalling role to an Officer from West Yorkshire.     The operation was
eventually transferred to the Gymnasium yard and by this time all the live
casualties had been moved to Hospital.

I was asked by Mr Hopkins to ascertain how many bodies were at the
receiving hospitals. This was in order to establish how many bodies would
eventually require disposal and to where this might be.    I visited the
hospitals to find out this information. There was uncertainty as to where
the bodies would eventually be taken. There were 11 bodies in the 118
casualties taken to the Northern General Hospital and 1 body in the 80
casualties taken to Royal Hallamshire Hospital.


Staff at the Royal Hallamshire were expecting the imminent arrival of a
large number of bodies. I ascertained that the bodies were going to the
Medico Legal Centre and I informed the Unit General Manager at the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital of this.


I returned to Hillsborough, plans were made to recover bodies from the
Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General. Most crews were then stood
down.

I was then briefed by Mr Hopkins in the presence of the Coroner, as to the
plan of action for identification and eventual removal of bodies from
Hillsborough to the Medico Legal Centre.     I had three crews, plus one
reserve plus             and Mr Eason at my disposal.


Station Officer           coordinated movement inside the morgue after
identification. He was also instructed to report progress to Control every
30 minutes.
                                                                /continued
19 April 1989

ADO - Mr R Morley



Station Officer Eason was   put    in charge   of transport     and documentation.
Each body was accompanied by a Police Officer whose collar number      was
noted, together with the patient’s name if known, and number.


I took overall charge of this      operation overnight and      attempted tolook
after the welfare of staff as best as possible.


The operation was concluded at 0550 hours on Sunday 16 April 1989.
 _____ |- CONTROL ASSISTANT
(off duty)


Date:   18.4.89
Time:   1440-1500



I received a call from                         wife at 1540 asking me if I
had been called in to a major incident, as I hadn’t I phoned        , the
phone was answered by my niece who said she had gone into HQ.
On putting the phone down it rang it was             requesting me to
proceed to HQ due to a major incident.

I arrived at 1600 along with               Entering Control I sat on 204
extension answering telephone calls mainly from the Press, also Doctors,
Nurses, a nurse who said she couldn’t get through to the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital and could I use the tie line to cas. I was unable to make contact
and advised her to go in.

Several Doctors phoned in offering their services.   Ellis, Son and Paramore
phoned offering further supplies.

I received more Press calls and some from off duty ambulance crews.

I rang |               and asked him to proceed to Barnsley District General
Hospital,         ~J, no reply,             to go to A/E Rotherham District
General Hospital.

I received a call from police (time?) saying they didn’t require any
further ambulances, I informed             and then            in the
incident room Mr Page asked where the information came from.

I received a call from WYMAS asking us to contact their ambulances to stand
down.

I was then contacted by Royal Hallamshire Hospital and Northern General
Hospital regarding transfers which were urgent.

It started to die down and I left at approximately 2100.
         - AMBOtANCEWOMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION

Date;   19.4.89
Time:   1300-1330
Duty;   Off Duty


I was at home listening to the radio and became aware of a disturbance at
the Hillsborough Football ground. 1 telephoned Control, but receiving no
      j reported for duty at Middlewood Station, arriving at 1615.

^pto^,,;there' met Ambulancewoman          who contacted Control and told
         were available. We were instructed to standby. My crewmate was
                     I ^ were not yequired to attend at the Football
 ground, but did assist with Domestic emergencies, one of which involved a   'mss.




wfcouotcmsu ii.uiu I.UB nujtuuctu wuettti to tae noyai naxiaiBsaire scan     mmmm
Department was a victim of the incident.
                                                                             SilSfSl8

Note: Details of patients conveyed are at HQ
           - CONTROL OFFICER

Date:   18.4.89

Time:   1500-1525


I had a phone call from Control saying that there had been an incident at
Hillsborough (approx 1530) with fatal injuries and would I come in.

On arrived I was met by Mr Page who directed me into the incident room.
There were problems with the radio communications. I was detailed to listen
into the domestic channel. Both            and R Clarke made attempts to
rectify the problem.

I received a telephone call from WYMAS (1600?) saying that they were
sending down two vehicles and gave me their call signs.
R Clarke was still having problems so I asked should I listen in with him
to which he said he would like me to take over the position.

I diverted vehicles to Netherthorpe Parkway and Herries Road Garage.

A4 maintained in contact with me by radio to stop ambulances arriving at
the Garage.

A problem then arose with the A4 radio, so I passed a message via a
Derbyshire crew who were making their way there.

A call came from a WYMAS vehicle and I directed him to standby at
Tankersley. WYMAS Majox came on, and after consulting Supt Clarke I
despatched him to scene, because of a request for further body bags, with
Supt Dale looking out for him.

Some confusion arose regarding the mortuary. Some-one said 'The mortuary's
full' and Station Officer Higgins said it wasn't as he was at the MLC and
nothing was moving.

I maintained radio watch as the incident began to wind down and then
detailed to answer telephone calls from the Press. I left the unit at
approximately 2300.
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                       REPORT


HAME:       Extended Trained Ambulanceman -

VEHICLE:    S401

SHIFT:

DATE AMD TIME OF INTERVIEW: Written Statement - 19/04/89



On Saturday 15th April 1989 along with my colleague Qualified Ambulanceman
           I transported a maternity case to the Northern General, Labour
and Delivery Suite. After handing the patient over to the relevant staff
we returned to our vehicle code sign Sierra 401.

The   radio was     busy   and we    noticed   that call   sign Alpha   4 was passing
messages.    From the conversations that could be heard we understood that an
incident had occurred at Hillsborough Football Ground and we heard mention
of a barrier or barriers collapsing and the fact that a Police task force
had been sent to the scene.          Armed with this information and the fact that
we still could not get air space to transmit, we decided to go across to
the Accident and Emergency Department and inform them of our understanding
of the situation.


This was done and I left the vehicle, leaving Qualified Ambulanceman
on radio watch.      I met               the Charge Nurse on duty and informed him
of what information I could, he replied that he had just been informed by
the Police that an incident had occurred at Hillsborough and in view of
both sets    of information,        he was going to implement the Major Disaster
Plan.




                                                                           /continued
19 April 1989

Extended Trained Ambulanceman -



I returned to my vehicle and heard Control ask for all Sierra vehicles to
come green as soon as possible. At this stage I was able to transmit my
message that I was 'Green* at Northern General Casualty and in view of
radio messages I had heard, I had informed Casualty that there was an
incident at Hillsborough and that they were standing by for casualties.
Control replied "Roger, stand-by".

I was then despatched to Burncross Road for an urgent leg injury not seen
by a doctor. This patient was treated and transported back to the Northern
General Hospital and I called green as soon as possible.


I was then told by Control to "Stand-by", this I did and after a period of
approximately ten minutes, I called Control to remind them of my position
and state, and I was then told to return to base.

My information to the Accident and Emergency Department regarding the
incident was given about 1510 - 1515 hours.
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                   REPORT


NAME:      Leading Ambulanceman

VEHICLE:   S404

SHIFT:     1400 - 2200

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:     Written Statement - 19/04/89


On Saturday 15 April 1989 I ws on 1400 - 2200 hours duty.          We were
attending on a *999* call at Kyle Crescent, when I heard over the air that
an incident had occurred at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.

On arrival at the Northern General Casualty I informed charge Nurse
that an incident had occurred. He told me that Ambulanceman _____ had
informed him. Within a couple of minutes of this my attendant Ambulanceman
      told me that it was now a major incident with some deaths. (Time
approximately 1525).

I went in and told ______ to forget what I had told him and that it was
now a major incident with some deaths. He then put the Northern General
Plan into operation. (Time approximately 1527). I then told Superintendent
Clarke on the radio that the Northern General was ready. I also asked the
porter to go down the drive and stop all traffic including buses coming up
the drive.    I then asked people whose cars were in Casualty Car Park to
move.


Myself and Ambulanceman       assisted the first Ambulances to arrive at
the Northern General (at approximately 1530), then we were dispersed on a
*999* call in the City Centre and continued with other ’999* calls for the
rest of the shift.
        -           CONTROL ASSISTANT

Date:   18.4.89
Time:   1130-1215


          and I arrived at Control at approximately 1505, our intention
being to check some computer tapes. We were met by Mr A Hopkins who was
leaving, apparently to go to Hillsborough Football Ground to investigate
reports of a disturbance. We reported to Control and were asked to assist.
I was instructed to advise WYMAS that a major incident had occurred at
Hillsborough Football Ground.

I was then instructed by the Control Supt to contact off-duty Control staff
and request then to attend at Control.

I worked from a list of numbers, contacting some people first time and
others later.

I contacted 4 Control Officers and 4 Control Assistants and they agreed to
attend. Several others, on the advice of Mr A Smith., I asked them to
standby and I would contact them if required.

I also contacted ___________ and                     to attend at the RHH (L
      1) and NGH (          ).

I then assisted with the operation of the Monarch Switchboard.

Most of the calls were from the Press, though some were from staff
volunteering their services.

Things did not begin to ease off until after 1800.

I continued in this vein, finally leaving at approximately 2300.
                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                   REPORT

        O

NAME:       Leading Ambulanceman

VEHICLE:

SHIFT:      Off-duty

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVXEN:    19 April 1989 - 0940 - 1010 hours


I was off-duty on Saturday 15 April 1989, I became aware through local
radio at approximately 1530 hours, that there was a serious incident at
Hillsborough Football Ground. I telephoned Ambulance Control offering my
services and was t^ld to report to my Station (Longley).


I arrived on Station at approximately 1600 hours and crewed up with off
duty Ambulancewoman               on Renault Ambulance S482. We travelled
from Longley to the ground via Herries and Penistone Road, and arrived at
the entrance to the gymnasium. I went immediatley to the gymnasium with
all my equipment which included defibrillator, I & I box and all the fluids
which had been stored at Longley.

I saw Mr Hopkins in the Gymnasium and he told me to get all the body bags
that I could lay my hands on. I collected approximately five body bags
from vehicles that were standing by on Penistone Road and took them back to
the Gymnasium. I then went back to Penistone Road and liaised with both Mr
Jones and Mr Eason and assisted with vehicle organisation and movement. I
also assisted with the evacuation of the last minor injured casualties.

Mr Jones then sent me along with other staff and Station Officer Higgins to
collect bodies from the Leppings Lane end of the ground and we brought them
back to the temporary mortuary in the Gymnasium.       I assisted with the
transportation of six bodies from that area in two ambulances.
19 April 1989

Leading Ambulanceman _________



Mr Jones then asked me to walk up to Leppings Lane and collect his staff
car from that area and bring it back to the Gymnasium Car Park. Mr Jones
asked me to check all the fuel levels on all Ambulances that were parked in
the Gymnasium Car Park. Shortly after this I took with other crews two
Ambulances to refuel at Longley Station.     I returned to the ground and
eventually left the scene and signed off at Station at 2040 hours.
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                    REPORT

NAME:      Qualified Ambulanceman

VEHICLE:   S209
SHIFT:     1400 - 2200 hours (15 April 1989)


DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:     19th April 1989, 1015 - 12200 hours


We had just radioed green at Northern General Casualty and we got an order
to stand-by, listening to the radio I was aware something was happening.
The next instruction was to proceed and stand-by at Herries Road Football
Ground.   Due to the fact that I realised something was happening we
proceeded as quickly as possible.


At the junctions with Moonshine Lane we got a command to proceed Red to the
Gymnasium entrance at Hillsborough Football Ground due to the fact we had
both heard Leppings Lane mentioned we queried with Control whether it was
Leppings Lane or Penistone Road. At this point we were still unaware of
the type of incident on arriving at the ground it was very difficult to
approach due to mass congestion of non-civilian vehicles, we had to cross
over the central reservation to get to the Gymnasium entrance and the
Police were finding it extremely difficult to hold back the crowd at this
entrance.


When we got inside I saw Station Officer Higgins he was waving me towards
him. Leading Ambulanceman Flack then alighted from the vehicle, at this
point either Station Officer Higgins or Station Officer Eason told me that
there was a youngster arrested at Leppings Lane.      At this point I was
concentrating on the vast amounts of people milling arcund so as not to
cause any further incident. Station Officer Higgins then told me to get
our Ambulance on the pitch and drive up towards Leppings Lane to which I
replied that the entrance looked a little tight. Station Officer Higgins
said that he thought I Would be alright because a St John’s Ambulance had
just gone through.
                                                               /continued
19 April 1989

Qualified Ambulanceman




So due to the position I needed to reverse to swing the front end round to
get down the slope to which Station Officer Higgins watched me reverse.                     As
I started     to go   down the     ramp it did     infact become very       tight,      but I
eventually got onto       the pitch.      When I got to the bottom of the slope, I
looked right and saw complete mayhem.            It appeared we were the first SYMAS
vehicle on the pitch.


I saw a blue light on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end, which was totally
swamped by people surrounding it.           I then concentrated on locating Leading
Ambulanceman Flack which I managed to do.              He was pulling a cot across the
football pitch with a patient on it, assisted by Station Officer Eason and
a Police Officer.       I did not proceed any further than the extent of the cop
end penalty area, because of a potentially dangerous situation due to the
amount of people running around on the pitch and not wanting to be in a
similar situation to the vehicle in obvious difficulties at the Leppings
Lane end of the goal mouth.


I had    locked   the door of my vehicle         to maintain      a safe   position.        As
Leading Ambulanceman       Flack    approached    my   vehicle    I   unlocked    the    door,
removed the keys and got out.           I ran to the back of the vehicle and opened
the doors and because the casualty was already on a cot, I removed the non
made up    right-hand    side cot and pulled       it onto       the pitch where        it was
immediately    commandered.        We   loaded   the   patient    amidst   lots    of    eager
helpers,   Leading Ambulanceman Flack jumped in the saloon with the Police
Officer and continued to resuscitate the child.               I closed the rear doors
returned to the drivers door and got in to the vehicle.                The passenger door
opened and    I noticed    Station Officer       Eason who was wanting           to use    the
radio.     I pulled him into the cab and told him to shut the door.                     I then
manoeuvred to negotiate the ramp to leave the ground.
/continued
19 April 1989

Qualified Ambulanceman


As I approached the ramp I told Station Officer Eason to ’bail out’ as I
was ready to leave, this he did.     I then commandered a Police Officer,
whilst approaching the ramp, to watch me up the ramp and managed it without
incident.    I had great difficulty leaving the ground due to enormous
amounts of people milling about and experienced traffic congestion on
Herries Road.


At some point we were told by Control to change to ERC channel I attempted
to call on ERC with no reply.      I reverted back to Channel 2 and gave
details of the casualty and to which hospital we were going to. Control
then told me again to go back on ERC.


We discharged our patient as fast as possible whilst Leading Ambulanceman
Flack continued resuscitation by CPR. I cleaned our vehicle and equipment
and we were mobile back to the incident within minutes.       We contacted
Control on ERC which was still a bad reception and they told us to go back
to the Gymnasium entrance on Penistone Road, doing this we experienced
worse traffic and crowd congestion than we had previously.


We entered the ground through the Gymnasium Car Park entrance as,directed
by the Police, Leading Ambulanceman Flack alighted from the vehicle, I went
to the rear of the vehicle collected a cot and located my colleague. We
placed a casualty on the cot and returned with him to our vehicle. I asked
a Police Officer if he would back me onto Penistone Road which he did and
then proceeded to the Northern General Hospital.


On our arrival at the Northern General their ’MAJAX’ procedure was in
operation. We were met at the resuscitation door by a doctor who told me
to take the casualty to the Plaster Room. We returned our equipment to the
vehicle and started to return to the incident.     We called Control who
instructed us to return to the Leppings Lane entrance, Gate ’O’.
/continued
Qualified Ambulanceman

On arrival at Leppings Lane we were confronted by mass crowds and had to
proceed with extreme care. I noticed two fire appliances, one had ’Control
Unit’ written on it. We pulled in behind the queue of parked vehicles.
Police Officers were attempting to load patients on our vehicle, but we
advised them to take them to the front of the queue. A Renault vehicle
pulled up behind us and I told the Police Officer that if he had any
walking wounded he was to put them on that vehicle. The reason for this
was all the vehicles in front of me were front line ’E’ vehicles.


As the queue started to move down, we were told a casualty was ready to be
moved at the front of the queue. We collected the casualty with a minor
delay, and also conveyed a doctor and a paramedic with the patient. We
conveyed the patient to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.      Upon radioing
clear at the Royal Hallamshire, we picked up a West Yorkshire vehicle and
escorted him back to the ground to which again we joined a further queue of
Ambulances on Penistone Road.

We gave our body-bag up and from there we were directed to park up and
stand-by at Herries Road Bus Garage. We were then called to the Gymnasium
entrance at Penistone Road. We were briefed by ACMAO Jones and because we
were a 1400 - 2200 hours crew, we were returned to base. On our route back
to base we dropped some clothing off at the Northern General that belonged
to one of our previous casualties.
                                                                                                                               -                           w       m      /
 S/>o///c/</ Wec/nesday E C .
      / i/ Z /s b o r o u q h G r o u n d
                                                                                               •m S T 'A t O
                                                                                                  fiOOM
                                                                                                                      POLICE

                                                                              Gy/anaslug




                                                                    r t o x r f y s T A A 'o         !
                                                                              v J W k V«>U2-
                                     S      #   f ^ =
                                                                                                                                                           rs



                                                                                                                               I


                                      Z7AH0



  AW^y fANi                                                                                                                                   i.   ,i\\*y
                                                                                                                                                         /\n
      AND CNCLOSORfS                                                                                                                                  iVy V' v                  . >   \'. * *


                                                                                                          w    n v .                                                                      \   v
                                                        f\   G    C.         &M lU iU M
                                                                                                                                                               '3 T * n p s -   p,^   \
                                                                                                  |*<UJi.Jia/iiKSf.
                               .   AOd/ff                                                                                          p/*-                    .                          /       V
                               CONTROL                  ornc/AL                                           CM                        .; • ,•        J __ _____ V

                                                                 owccm's.
                                                                 iHTftANCC
' N
                                                                                                                                                                     3PV           W       & b /
SA a / / / s / d W e d n e s d a y F, C,
   H ills b o ro u g h               G round
                                                                                                                   'FtP.ST'AtQ ,
                                                                                                                     ROM Zv,

                                                                                                                        — iv        \r°
             3 l > vV
                                                                                                                        h4    /*?N\
                                                                          i[.   •      L...... .......... .

                                                  >«*>#'•.*•'ill*•'   r
                                                  j                                                                                                                                                         ^      ■
                                                                                                                        /           '-V-                                                                    ft
                                                                                           /✓0 ;?7W STaA'a •


                                                                                                                                                                                                        x C .tf'
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘V   &



                                           a w                                                                                            ■wi-fii'
                                                                                                                                          MtJ f iHftftrii/jrt/iiii


                                          17ANQ



 AW^y        F A N *,    6/MT^ti^c
   A   n d     g n c    testifies



                                                                                                                             rvrx^' \                         /AI/,,f-,y\#^ , 0 "^
                                                                                                                                                                                t\\ s,, •>
                                                                                                                                                                                         )


                                                                          K 6          n           &0UTH AIM P                                                             \
                                                                                                                               /✓    v/ri      \ ^ ‘ A VAV-**1^                        3TAHM
                                                                                                                                                                                       •




                                       «H/ff
                                      av/r/?c?d                           o /t v o u
                                                                                       ***• •■ Z ? * ' 1 L. *«*L

                                                                                    o m c m 's
                                                                                    ZHTfiANCi
               T n onrrii re
                                                                                                                                             isrv                   W   & b /
SAc/j'/e/d Wednesday F .C ,                                                            /

   rt/Z /s b o ro u q f) G r o u n d
                                                                                                             FIRST'A/0




                              xJ    O    a   VV>XX>^ \ j




                                                                                       A'O/prv sr^/vs •            P.




                                                                                                                                                             A ''   *       V    ,    ^
       i y>      '•                                                                                                               tuwi
       p/                                                                                                                                                               <
    (fj
   V                                                                                                                     I    I


                                                                                                                                                 ... , . •. IX,

 Aw a y       f an$    g t f r n i i7^                             ii'M
                                                                                                                         ic                  l& A
 ■ AND ENCtdSORes                                                                                                                                *K                         'f/i .>   V^v.

                                                                                                                                                     ;Co'V              7       :'W       W \ '
                                                                                                                                                 W     a V"..^                                Y-
                                                          C'7 v
                                                                          ^ G       (7.            301/77/ STAND
                                                                   r       \ 7
              '^''* ° " ^          v-VX
          ^       3v^                             r—
                                                   p a     .1
                                                          /f f                                                                           f>A**
                      'XiAA.                 /•   IC O N T R O L          orr/CMt


                                                                                 o m c rn 's
                                                                                 L N T R A N C E
           -STANDARDS AND EFFICIENCY OFFICER
Based at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

Date;   18.4.89
Time:   1030-1115


I received a call at home asking me to report direct to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital unsure of time. I thought it was an exercise,
confirmed on car radio incident at Hillsborough. I parked on OPD apron,
there were ambulances everywhere discharging at A/E and Orthopaedic door.
I organised parking within yard. Found telephone to confirm arrival, spoke
to D Hartley. Checked on parking. David Hartley informed me to route
empty ambulances to Netherthorpe Parkway. Crews were arriving in a state
of shock.

Casualty started slow down and directed arriving ambulances to Door 10
(hospital triage area),

I was informed by Control that no more casualties to Royal Hallamshire
Hospital to go to Barnsley District General Hospital. I relayed the
message to Sister in charge of Triage and Dr i
                                             fenroaoer. Second thought
hospital to bursting point, checked with admin who didn't know. Asked to
shunt out 20 stretchers and 5 chair from FI and F2. Sister Wright on G2
discharged 5 chairs to KEH, 22 patients made their own way home.

I informed           and went to 'B' reception to organise crews,
ambulances arrived within minutes. Also in between times I visited
administration.
Mr            asked to see someone from the ambulance service, I briefed him
of Lim aj.m a tion. There was then a lot of activity within the department
involving trollies and staff due to a message that bodies would be
arriving. I confirmed with              the position who said that the
Ambulance Service would not De transporting bodies to the RHH.

I checked the mortuary, many staff were awaiting for bodies, but were
unsure where the message had come from.

I reviewed the situation in A/E and contacted Control.   I was told of a
fight in Ecclesfield.

Mr       ]said they could accept more casualties, unable to get concrete
information from the Police for Admin.

Admin was in a state of shock and lacking information from the Police, so I
contacted Control to ask the Police on our tie lines to speak to admin
personnel.
SHEET 2            - Standards and Efficiency Officer


I reviewed the situation and contacted Control. Control said an ambulance
would collect a body in the temporary mortuary as the Coroner had taken
reponsibility.

1720 ___________ phoned saying the Mr______ and team at RDGH are on
standby and would they be receiving any casualties. Mr     said he
could cope.

During the incident fire alarms went off adding to the events.

Personal feelings - Inadequate - a radio would have helped.
                                                        £k& ±s>               -
                                         *r~'~

            S > .o o           -       .-O/V .          's /n /n




''ZcQ                  T                                    /

^oO .                      1                            y
                                   .
                                   _
'Z .o 'b                   <Z.'                     i           ..................

< 2 .0 ^ .                                       W     1
                           tH-                   HIV
%Ob                                               rHL
<2j o ~ ?                  \i                    ru^ tUl
ZO £                       10                     mt               \\.

2 £ > °f                   T                     o h iu
Z ,K O                                               VI"
                                                 tH A -

                           *zS                          /
                           CL.fc -                                                              < -p   v-,“               » U i.      % V =>


                                                                                            <z>JZi




                                                    W>      fQV«>-




                                                             A-,                       Jc




                                                                                                       "C-.VX.    ^I ^        V—o.                  -o|o^V
                                                                                   X"
     L




                                                                                   f



                                                                                       ^>..WO
                                                                                                                                                             *y
                                                                                        O^^-CA                ■T vjlX.



C X A iW         it   -1      _ . A < t O'




QD^V^7                                        f*lf




                                                                                                                     -< P ~




                                                                      '-5t^i\>



                                                               ‘k * —es    «-Q<?
         1   /
   zm                                                 c^~
                                             ^ ,C   ^ _            4 W      -          jjJ3 rP "TW.«?'5             W<,        irW ^ rC -      *i      ^ W.L,
                                                                           iA!
                                         »-- C2--1         ' D\E'eite^’                  pA***'




                                                       „sp

                                                                             - ......... .>_2*- .^ ^ X l A




                                                           jstIsl <=ys_ !3=?— «^h-..S>i-ft S               ty




_fco£Ku^_                       -T?!StvP         .VD.^Jl-..                                                           iter"
                                                                                                                    <**
                                     rt        _St     "& ^ ->            Q *w A i-^gf’—
                                                                                       *■»- _         C*

                                                                -
                                                                                 sJkW,

                                o'
                       .-   2                               jTEja-V               -                 V,.



                                     _                 _ \          _ c»i—                      ^ky J O
                                            C\j2.C




              H'fctiVL, r.v                          ?2>




            ( O '* '
            Ni



                                     o-                                                 JkJK          iS * S   ..




                                                                                                    .^(rfSr-r.
I




i
         A        ££Co£C>               o f        EMEfLQ-EN C y             And       u£6.6N T                 CALLS           WI TH-       fftT ie tv T S .
         C A ^(£D           6 £ T \ aJ 6 £ kJ           (Sooht-s              I^ooWk          (3y       SouTH           YORKSHIRE                    A m 8<JLAn C6
           ie ^ v \c C                  on         SA T u £ d #W            TH£          I O        F           APRIL.               \ c\ g ci


      _S(E^^A                                   feQoeSTi1                                               R   o m       6.0       ,     (?SQo 6              s t     '^
ene^CreNcy
ISOO To /&CO ty/^ 7                           <Scq *T<2 /6ooUrs 3                   t^OO To ( ( a c o U\rs 1 f S c r c T o /(tco Um O
tto o      To      l l o o k r i       a      ( (o arc To (~1®oK^S o                f(ooo T o I I oo K m £f- 1 c» o-o To n (TO k t-5 O
ll o o       To    1 ^ 0 0 Uhs         5      ("7 fl-D To I $ o~c V\ f's I          H oo T o i ^ o o k i ^ s Lb   o-o T o l * 0 0 Ur* 5 O


c a lls        ^ £ c (£ v £ d      M c C a lls               £eci&vj&& H T c .a lu s £ e c . ( e u £ &                  I^ c A lls           i?eci6u£'D            W

fa n a rlT S       CAtf£l£C> ^ H f A T / e M T S CAAti-lBD j ^ ^ A T i e i N T S C A ^R teD |7 T / f t T < £ i \ J T C CflffRiEn lO



               BRAVO                       ^ e      q   u 6     $> T -S                                 D£(-TA-                      (? £ Q u £ S T S
tF T £^ 0-6N C                                 CJ (3. G - £ r \ i T

fSoo T o          ((ooot^f^^           t      iS cro T o     / G o o Uf^s           ( STcrO     T o ( to c o U f>^               tSoo        T o I bCO 1^5 I O
l(oo o"To                           1         Ifeoo T o      i"? «TD hi^s           I cs"€>    "To |") <f-oK m                   Koo^o       T o O<ro              | I
                                       o
                                                   O
                                              _/




t~l 0 Q T o        i£oo                                 To   l 5 00 U^^             H ero       T o \-i o -o U h s l             lire        “To i~i q-qi>\N5| f
                                              o




                                   , _                                                                                                                             ■
CA L L S       ^ 6 C i6 \J c O                CALLS, R e C i 6 v € D | 9 J CA L u S            £ £ C ie v /6 D          M j J C A L<- i      /?£C(£V6P             j i


/^TiervJTS                         [Z j^T ievM TS CAR£l6D f o j fA T iS r m                         C M £ (6 D         O P ftT t£iN T S CAR£<£D




          •fo T rtu                                      cy           c a l l s        e^-rw jeE r-o                  ISoo          T<b        t3
                                                                                                                                          I (q O o    K r S   -

                                                                                                                      j<ooo To n o o Kf*S s \ *7
                                                                                                                      1l o o To i ? o o K k : J l 3
                                                                                                                            JTot^l-^       - S ^f-3

           T    ot   Ai          U(2(rfMT                         CALLi                eervsjeeNi                     iSoG T o            (Qsco             & rr         3
                                                                                                                       ( (aQo T o ( ”1 OQ h NS ?                          1
                                                                                                                        I l o o T o l 8 o o KfS_=                        2_
                                                                                                                                 ”"T© T A L_

           T © t & l-            o f            au_            c a lls            ^ e c ie v e o            -     if ° [ r



           T o ta l             ri-0-         of         P a tie n ts             c *-£ # \e o          on       6 M e / e t £ ^ cy              c a lls =         3©
                                                               ■—<<*—                 —m—                             utf.G £ n      t                 -      -          5T



           "to T ^ L             of           P A T ie is jT S            C A ^/?(eD          F fo M            AU-          C A L L i,     ~        3S .
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE



A training and operational profile for personnel currently serving within
the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

Note


SYMAS operate a progressive career development structure for all grades of
staff which ensures individuals are exposed to operational incidents in the
pre-hospital field before being considered for promotion.

Cadets


Cadets are super numery to SYMAS for a two year period. During this period
the are seconded to every department within the service and undertake
practical exercises as part of their cadetship, for example a mock major
incident exercise. They also spend time seconded to stations within SYMAS
and form part of front line emergency crews, acting as observers. The
cadets receive regular practical and theoretical examinations on a
pass/fail basis.

Dedicated Day Transport


These are adult entrants into the service who undertake the N.H.S.T.A.
entrance examination and driving test. The adult recruits are required to
successfully complete a three week induction course, two weeks which
consists of ambulance aid and a further one week driving course. The two
weeks ambulance aid consists of anatomy and physiology, basic trauma
management, resuscitation, lifting and handling, service procedures for
example, major incident and infectious diseases.


At the end of the two week ambulance aid course a pass/fail examination is
sat prior to undergoing the driving course. Skill and service procedures
are consolidated and developed by Station Officers as an on going programme
when new recruits reach station.
The dedicated day transport personnel are responsible for the safe and
effective movement of elderly patients in and around the county to day
hospitals,

Aabulancenan/Woman (full tine)


This status is gained by a promotion from dedicated day transport duties
for SYMAS personnel. Newly promoted staff undergo a further one week
intensive training course with the objectives of reinforcing existing
skills and updating individuals with recent changes and trends.

Core subjects such as resuscitation, role at large scale incidents etc are
studied. The course is on a pass/fail basis with the pass mark being 70%.

Individuals are crewed with qualified members of staff and are rostered to
work with outpatients and attend urgent and emergency calls as required.

Ambulanceman (qualified)


These are personnel who respond to 999 and urgent calls. They undertake a
six week residential ambulance aid course at a regional school. Students
skills and knowledge are taken several steps forward in readiness for the
demands of front line duties. Anatomy and physiology, advanced trauma
management, childbirth, major incident, special incidents for example
chemical, all form part of the indepth syllabus.


A two week driving course follows the six week course. The driving course
is to the standard of that in the H.M.S.O. Roadcraft handbook.


Students undertaking this course must achieve satisfactory results in order
to obtain a pass result.
A probation period follows the formal training which concludes with a full
day assessment which is sat in the services In-Service-Training-Unit.

HB United Kingdom ambulancemen-women have to requalify every five years.
   SYMAS personnel undertake a one week updating course every 2.1/2 years
   The syllabus includes resuscitation, anatomy and physiology, major
   incident procedures, drugs and service procedures.

Ambulanceman/Woman (Paramedics)


Individuals are selected from volunteers within the service.     They must
meet the following service criteriaj-


(a)   must be qualified personnel;


(b)   have 18 months experience in the full range ofambulance duties;


(c)   receive a written recommendation from their StationOfficer.

The individuals are trained to N.H.S.T.A standard which includes:-


(a)   a formal entrance examination;

(b)   interview by a Doctor and two senior ambulance officers;

(c)   Stage I


      Eight days pre-clinical training within the In-Service-Training-Unit

      One week break for consolidation.
(d)    Stage II


       Three week pre-clinical within the In-Service-Training-Unit.


(e)    Stage III


      Four week secondment for clinical training at a District General
      Hospital.


Paramedics must also requalify every year on a pass/fail basis.

Leading Ambulanceman/Woman


These are first line supervisors who have gained promotion from within the
ranks. They form part of an emergency crew and receive training in
supervisory studies and procedures. At the scene of any incident the
Leading Ambulanceman/woman will assume responsibility until such time as
they are relieved by a more senior officer.


Training courses for Leading Ambulancemen/women include major incident
management and exercises.

Station Officer (A.O. Band 1)


Station officers are responsible for the effective management of an
operational ambulance station. They are experienced ambulance personnel
who have obtained their current position after promotion through the ranks.

Station Officers have an "on-call" duty officer rota. Whilst on duty this
means that they respond to incidents and scenes where the prescence of an
experienced ambulance officer is required.


Station Officers receive updating lectures as an on-going programme.
Control Officer/Planning Officer (A.O. Band 1)


These are officers who are responsible for the efficient deployment of
crews to nationally laid down response times. Like the Station Officer,
they have also spent part of their careers on operational duties.


Control Assistants (Support Control A.O. Band 1 and are adult recruits)


These are officers who receive and accurately document incoming calls for
ambulance services. They also have the responsibility of ensuring that the
information they have is drawn to the attention of the appropriate officer.


They are required to accurately pass information as directed by the
responsible officer to ambulance stations, crews etc.


Control Assistants undergo on the job training during a formal induction
programme within the control complex. They also spend time as observers on
a front line emergency ambulance.


Training Officer (A.O, Band 1)


Leading Ambulancemen/women are seconded to the role of Training Officer and
"act up" to A.O. grade. Whilst attached to the In-Service-Training-Unit
they are responsible for nationally set standards and training.


Superintendent, Control (A.O. Band 2)


Control Superintendents are responsible for the overall management of the
Control Unit during any eight hour period. They are accountable to the
Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, Control and Communications.


Control Superintendents are required to have a broad base knowledge of the
service, therefore all control superintendents are on a par with A.O. l's,
qualified and experienced ambulance personnel.
Superintendent, Standards and Efficiency Officer (A.O. Band 2)


Standards and Efficiency Officers are based within the Headquarters
complex, but with the majority of their time spent at local hospitals
ensuring the effective liaison between hospital departments and the
ambulance service.


Superintendent, Divisional Co-ordinator (A.O. Band 2)


Divisional Co-ordinators are responsible for the co-ordination of
management and operational activities within a specified division.


The Divisional co-ordinator also forms part of the Duty Officer "on call"
rota, thereby updating his operational experience.


HB A.O. 2 officers attend updating courses for example British Rail
    electrification plans, as and when required.


Assistant Divisional Officer (Assistant Senior Officer)


The Assistant Divisional Officer is responsible for the overall monitoring
of finances and standards of the service. He undertakes research into
areas affecting the provision of ambulance services within SYMAS and
specified functions relating to support services.


The Assistant Divisional Officer is part of the senior ambulance officer on
call standby rota, attending incidents as and when requested.


Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer (Senior Officer)


An Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer heads a specific department within the
service.
Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer - Operations


This Ambulance Officer has overall and continual responsibility for the
management of all aspects of the operational provision of ambulance
services within the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service,

The Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer - Training


This Ambulance Officer is responsible for the overall management of the
training unit, including the identification of training needs within the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the development of
training programmes as well as the evaluation of all training undertaken.


Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer — Research and Development


This Ambulance Officer provides support to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer and his assistant in specific management areas, particularly
related to planning and monitoring of resources.


Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer - Control, Planning and Liaison


This Ambulance Officer has overall and continual responsibility for the
management of all aspects of the control, planning and liaison within
SYMAS.


NB   Assistant Chief Ambulance Officers form part of the stand by rota,
     responding to incidents as and when required. As part of their career
     development, Assistant Chief Ambulance Officers attend external courses
     on managerial and operationally related subjects.


As a group, the Assistant Chief Ambulance Officers are responsible to the
Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer and the Chief Metropolitan
Ambulance Officer.
Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Principle Ambulance Officer


The Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer assists the Chief
Metropolitan Ambulance Officer over the whole range of his duties and has
specific managerial responsibility for co-ordinating and monitoring the
operation and control aspects of the service. He deputises for the Chief
Metropolitan Ambulance Officer in his absence.


Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer


The Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer is managerially responsible for
the effectiveness of the whole of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service.

HB   Both the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer and the Deputy Chief
     Metropolitan Ambulance Officer provide an on-call standby rota where
     they can be called upon for advice or action when requested from the
     Assistant Chief Ambulance Officers.
                                                                         APPENDIX 4



                        STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE

                                                              Standard Values


      Measu re of Performance     Percentile
                                                     M etropolitan           County
                                                        Service              Service




Emergencies

     Activation time                  95              3 minutes            3 minutes

     Response time                    50              7 minutes           8 minutes
                                      95              14 minutes          20 minutes




Urgent Cases

     Arrival tim e in relation
     to scheduled arrival tim e       95              5 minutes            5 m in u te s
                                                         late                 late




Arrival t im e in relation
to appointm ent time

a)    P la n n e d *                  50             30 minutes           30 minutes
                                                        early                early

                                     95              30 minutes           30 m in u te s
                                                        late                  late

b)    Special                        50              30 minutes           30 minutes
                                                        early                early

                                     95               Punctual             Punctual

c)    Day Patients*                  50             Not more than       N o tm o re th a n
                                                     30 minutes           30 minutes
                                                        early                early

                                     95              Punctual or          Punctual or
                                                    not more than       n o tm o re th a n
                                                     30 minutes           30 minutes
                                                         late                 late


Dependent on funding a n d methods o f operation.
