DATE OF BIRTH OVER 21

QUALIFIED AMBULANCE NAN (SYMAS)



1.   I have been with the ambulance service 26 years.       I am an
     ambulance driver and attendant.      I have been on various
     training courses and am trained to Miller standard.           I
     mainly work outpatients on the day rota.        The hours are
     ordinarily 0900 to 1800 or 0800 to 1630 hours.      I work a 14
     week rota and am based at the Moorgate ambulance station in
     Rotherham.      I alternate between driving and being the
     attendant.


2.   On the outpatient duty there are advance bookings by
     hospitals and Doctors and you are either assigned a double
     handed crew or a single crew for walking patient.      The work
     involves admissions discharges and transfers.


3.   On Saturday 15th April 1989 there was a double man crew and
     also a one man vehicle on outpatient and two emergency
     vehicles.    I reported on duty at the station and booked in.
     My partner that day was                         On arrival we
     awaited for control to phone through our work list for the
     day.   On Saturday the work is mainly casual and there is no
     advance booking sheet which we have during the week.    As far
     as I can recall we had a couple of admissions to Rotherham
     District General and a return home from casualty.
We had an admission to Badsley Moor Hospital.     We collected
the patient and transported him to Badsley Moor.           On
returning to the vehicle we put the stretcher in the back
and we received a call from Control.    As far as I can recall
it was about 1515 hours.       We were on channel 3,      the
outpatients channels.


Controls message was to report to the gymnasium at Sheffield
Wednesdays Football Ground as there were a number of
casualties and believed fatalities.       We acknowledged the
call and told them we were on our way to the ground.


We proceeded at speed with lights and siren and approached
the ground turning right from Herries Road South on to
Penistone Road.    At the junction with Penistone Road the
police had cleared a route and we went straight to the
entrance of the ground.


On arrival there was a duty officer directing us to park an
wait until the vehicle which was loading had moved.     There
were two vehicles inside and when they both moved out we
reversed in ready to load casualties.    There appeared to be
four or five bodies laid out near the entrance to the pitch
at the side of North Stand Deputy Chief ambulance man
Hopkins pointed a patient out for us to load.    We picked up
the stretcher and loaded the patient.     We found our other
      stretcher had been taken out of the vehicle.            Some people
      brought a child of about ten to us on an advertising board
      and his breathing was poor.    We loaded him onto the floor of
      the vehicle and I attended to both the patients while
                drove.   We were told to go to the Northern General.
      Police motorcycles were escorting ambulances.


8.    At arrival at the Northern General it was already busy with
      football casualties.     There was a doctor who was sorting
      casualties out and directing them to the relevant places.


9.    We then called clear to control remaining on channel 3 and
      were told to return to the gymnasium at the ground.         We were
      escorted by a police motorcycle.


10.   We returned down Herries Road South to the same place.           As
      soon as the entrance was clear we reversed in to load
      patients again.


11.   By then the scene was more orderly.        We took a stretcher out
      and transferred a patient onto it.         We were informed that he
      had been administered morphine for crush injuries.              On
      return with this patient to our vehicle we found that
      another patient on a stretcher had been loaded.         I went into
      the back with both the patient and                Jji We received a
      message    from Control    telling us to go         to the Royal
      Hallamshire because the Northern General was full.



                                     r   3   Q
                                     eJ 4
12.   The police had an escort bike and at all junctions the
      police had traffic organised allowing us a clear passage.
      We had no problem getting through.


13.   On arrival at Royal Hallamshire the scene was less chaotic
      than the Northern General although it was busy with football
      casualties.


14.   We off-loaded the patients and radioed Control that we were
      clear and were told to stand by at a large dual carriageway
      nearby.


15.   We stood by for about 10 to 15 minutes.        We were told to
      return to the Royal Hallamshire to transfer patients to King
      Edwards Hospital in Rivelin Valley.    We returned to Royal
      Hallamshire where a liaison officer,                      was
      present.   We collected two stretcher patients from F ward
      and put them onto the vehicle.


16.   We told Control we were mobile and informed them of our
      arrival at King Edwards.   The hospital was not too busy and
      we took the patients to the allocated wards.


17.   We radioed clear to Control who told us to return to base,
      but to contact them before going off duty.
18.     On return to Moorgate we contacted Control who told us to
        stand down.   We booked off duty at 1845 hours.


19.     We did not experience any difficulty in getting the vehicles
        through to the ground.    The only problem on sign was the
        number of people bringing each casualty.




Signed




Dated
