DATE OF BIRTH 5.3.1948

STANDARDS AND EFFICIENCY OFFICER
DONCASTER AREA (SYMAS)


1.   I have been with the service since 1971.   Initially I was on
     ambulance duty at Corporation Street, Sheffield.    I obtained
     the Miller certificate in 1973 and then moved to Longley
     Station as an ambulance man.     In 1978 I was promoted to
     Leading Ambulance man at Parkway ambulance station.   At that
     time I attended a course at Keighley and obtained the
     ambulance aid instructors certificate.     This enables me to
     teach ambulance personnel.


2.   In 1984 I was promoted to station officer at Longley
     Station.     I was there for three years and in 1987 I was
     promoted to the present post based at Symas H.Q. in
     Rotherham.    I am also registered for teaching staff first
     aid under the Health and Safety at Work Scheme.


3.   My duties at present mainly involve liaising between the
     Ambulance Service and hospitals and the district.


4.   At present I work 0900 to 1700 Monday to Friday.


5.   In July 1986 Mr Wilkinson, now deputy chief at Hampshire, P
     Higgins and I attended Hillsborough liaising with the ground
     staff to evaluate the ground.     At that time we had the
Bradford incident in mind. The purpose was to prepare a plan
for a Major Incident at the ground.           Representatives of the
police and fire service also attended.            We were introduced
to the club secretary who left us with the groundsman who
showed us round.


Whilst going round the ground we decided that the gymnasium
building was best suited for a casualty holding area as it
had good vehicle access from Penistone Road.           Also it was a
sufficiently large building to double as a makeshift
mortuary.       Another advantage was that the Herries Road Bus
Depot could be used as a holding area for ambulances.


F o l l owing    the   tour   we   were    taken to   see the Club
physiotherapist, Mr Smith, in his room.            At that point I
believe that the Police and Fire Service representatives
left.   Mr Wilkinson, Mr Higgins and I spoke to Mr Smith
about Ambulance Service cover.            Mr Wilkinson told Mr Smith
that we could provide Ambulance Service resources for the
ground, but that this would involve a charge.          Mr Smith said
that the Club would not wish to pay a fee and that they were
happy with their current arrangements with the St. John's
Ambulance Brigade which attended their matches and which
gave first aid training to the Club's personnel at the
beginning of each season.          He said that whenever the Club
had needed the ambulance service they had relied upon making
a 999 call.
8.    Mr Wilkinson told Mr Smith that, if we could not actually
      provide an ambulance at the ground we would like to have two
      officers inside the ground in the interests of crowd safety.
      He said that if an ambulance was required they would be able
      to contact Control to arrange for an ambulance more quickly
      than the Club could do so.


9.    Mr Wilkinson suggested that the Club should provide us with
      two tickets in order that we could put liaison officers in
      the ground so that we could get resources to the ground as
      quickly as possible if the need arose.                                             Mr Smith said that
      if Mr Wilkinson wrote to the Club then he could arrange for
      two tickets to be provided.


10.   We discussed where these complimentary seats should be.                                                                      Mr
      Smith offered us two seats at the back of the trainers box
      at pitch level but we asked for seats in the stand from
      where we could see more and communications would be better.
          /VO                fr r       <4*0                  ho                                        ot- ia G C U tu -,g o .
                       Aj»-aC                                                /3rCtJL-                                              Ka .
                 TCjtU CU sAa                                      UJTsfU, A ctt/e.                                                a*-s£>(
           fctn_ Q sQ jJhx* >*1 , y i y i & tuu u y w jf t/s ’H.-vf-crg               M - j i a s - / o t-y k i'* ?
11.   Following the meexing Station Officer Higgins ana I received \
                                    ^          H j l l0^   /ST7                                                                         ^
      two season tickets A                           The tickets were in row T, seats 152
      and 153/^       Season tickets do not cover cup matches and when
      the first cup match came along I contacted the club who
      p r ovided       complimentary                               tickets;                since               then               two
      complimentary tickets have been left for collection for all
      cup games with the exception of the F.A. Cup semi finals.
12.   In 1987 I was transferred to SYMAS headquarters.     Paul Eason
      replaced me as Station Officer at Longley and he took over
      joint responsibility for Hillsborough with Mr Higgins.


13.   Following the meeting in July 1986 Mr Higgins and I
      completed the Hillsborough Plan which included points
      discussed at the meeting as well as routes to and from the
      hospitals based on access, traffic flow and the priority
      hospital.     Priority was Northern General followed by Royal
      Hallamshire.


14.   In the week leading up to the Hillsborough incident I worked
                       j
      the normal Monday to Friday. On Saturday the 15th I was off
      duty and returned home at about 1650.      On arrival my phone
      was ringing and I answered it and spoke to
      control assistant.         She asked me to go to Rotherham
      District General to liaise with the casualty department as
      they   were    expecting   taking    casualties    there   from
      Hillsborough.


15.   I immediately changed in to uniform and left.        I went to
      Rotherham ambulance station to a staff car in order to make
      radio contact with control.      I proceeded straight across to
      Rotherham District Hospital.      On arrival at casualty I saw
      a police car and parked alongside in order to liaise with
      the officers inside.


                                 335
16. I called control on emergency channel to confirm my arrival.
      I asked what channel they wanted me on and they said to
      remain on channel two.     I introduced myself to the police
      officer inside the police car and I then went in to
      casualty and introduced myself to the Sister in charge.      She
      seemed a little surprised saying they had been told they
      would not be receiving any Hillsborough casualties.


17.   I proceeded down to reception and tried to contact Control
      by phone, but I was unable to get through.        I decided that
      the switchboard must be busy and did not try any further.


18.   I then returned to my car and turned up the radio and
      maintained contact with control and with the two police
      officers.     After a few minutes another police car arrived
      and the officer introduced himself as P C
      continued to stay with the SYMAS vehicle and the police car
      remained.


19.   After a while I went into casualty and found that P C
                  had a telephone extension and had a link with
      police casualty. At that time it did not appear that any
      casualties would be brought to Rotherham General after      all.
      I radioed control to tell that P.C.              had established
      a phone link and that they could contact me on extension
      316.   I then returned to the office with P.C.


                                 33 &
20.   At 1926 P.C                received a call from
              who is a fellow Standards and Efficiency Officer who
      was located at the Hallamshire Hospital.
      The message was for us to stand down as we would not be
      receiving any casualties.


21.   P.C.            informed the hospital staff and I then
      returned the Car to Rotherham station.            On arrival   I
      telephoned Control and spoke to the Control Superintendent
      and informed him that we had been told to stand down.


22.   I proceeded down to Control.        I had no further involvement
      with the incident itself and left for home at approximately
      2050.


Dated this          day of   i/i/l            1989.




                                     3V
