10 / UNIT 7 ; Acute cardiac conditions Extended trainin g in am bulance aid - Background notes




                                                                                         X   s z ju L   ^   u   *-u

                                                           y to ^ tjL o




Cardiac arrest
If   the patient is unconscious you must decide whether it is:
•     ventricular fibrillation
•     asystole
•     EMD
•     other arrhythmias.

Ventricular fibrillation (VF)
The ECG recording reveals absent QRST complexes. These are replaced by
broad irregular undulations of varying height and shape. The unresponsive,
unconscious patient has no palpable carotid or other large puises, an
unrecordable blood pressure, and absent or abnormal gasping breath.

                                                                                                                      KEY DECISION
Can you be sure the arrest happened in the last two minutes?

YES IF
» you- saw it happen
• you have reliable evidence from a witness.

Hf YES
Deftbriflate immediately (see Protocol below).

H ? K 0
Perform CPR first to oxygenate the heart, followed by defibrillation if
appropriate.
   If there is evidence of electric activity returning on ECG cardiac output
verify it by feeting for a carotid pulse and making clinical observations.
   Continue CPR if patient remains pulseless.


     Remember
     Do not move the patient to the ambulance. Only do so in very unusual
     circumstances (such as rain and uncontrollable crowds). It causes ie la y
     and Every second c o u n t s .
     BLUE HEARTS NEVER START; CPR after two minutes.


Defibrillation
The quicker you defibrillate a patient in VF the better the chances of success.
Start basic life support (CPR) as soon as possible while you prepare the
equipment.
   If a patient has no pulse and there is no history or a history o f sudden
collapse assume primary VF, rapid tachycardia or asystole rather than cardiac
arrest secondary to left ventricular failure etc.

Preparations
Steps
1 Remove clothing.
2 Apply conducting gel (br pads).
3 Diagnose ECG rhythm within a minute from chest paddles (with firm
   pressure). Put electrodes on quickly if necessary.
               SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


The Physio Control Life Pak 5, currently deployed within the South
Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service has the following settings

 20   Joules
 50   Joules
100   Joules
200   Joules
300   Joules
360   Joules

The protocol used in the management of ventricular fibrillaiton is to
administer a 200J shock.

In "Layman’s" terms this can be equated to 3,000 volts.
