               will say as follows


1.   I was born on 16th May 1930.


2.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman,       and joined theambulance
     service In 1968, and I am based at Doncaster.


3.   I have been based at this station throughout mycareer       with
     the ambulance service.


4.   I was initially trained at Cleckheaton ambulance school, and
     undertook a residential training course over a six week
     period.


5.   I became a qualified ambulance man after completion of this
     course in or about 1969.       Subsequently I have attended a
     number of refresher courses at Markfield Training School at
     Leicester, but I have no paramedic training.


6.   I was on duty on Saturday 15th April 1989, when my shift was
                                                           t

     0900 to,1630.   I drove to work directly from home.   Prior to
     my involvement with the Hillsborough incident, my day was
     fairly routine, with a couple of emergency calls,           some
     transfers and one house fire.


7.   I was at Doncaster station when I became aware of the
     Hillsborough incident.   Leading ambulanceman             took a
telephone call from Control some time between 1500 and 1530.
           Informed me that I was required at Sheffield
Wednesday Football ground, at the Lepplngs Lane end.        My
colleague, qualified ambulance man        and I got into our
vehicle and left the station immediately.     I was attendant
at this point in time whilst            was driving.   We had
travelled approximately one mile when our vehicle broke down
due to overheating.      We informed Control who told us to
return to base and pick up another vehicle.        It took us
approximately 5 minutes to return to base and pick up
another ambulance vehicle, at which point in time Control
informed us to go back to Hillsborough.


The journey back to Hillsborough took approximately 20
minutes and we approached the ground via Herries Road south.
Even though there was a sizeable crowd leaving the ground up
along Herries Road,       our access through the crowd was
relatively unhindered.    At the junction with Penistone Road,
our vehicle was directed across the central reservation, and
we turned right on to Penistone Road.     A little further up
Penistone Road,           reversed the vehicle into the ground
through the entrance marked A on the attached plan,
manoeuvered the vehicle to one side to allow other ambulance
vehicles inside the ground to leave at point A.


I got out of the vehicle and I directed           |to a point
where by other vehicles were given sufficient access into
         the ground.   After directing our vehicle to a point marked B
         on the attached plan, and on walking a couple of paces I was
         able to see the football pitch itself.


10. I initially recall seeing a number of supporters either sat
         up or laid down, along-side the north stand and against some
         nearby railings.   I went over to some of the supporters and
         asked them how they were feeling, and all were capable of
         telling me their relative conditions.     I considered that non
         of these supporters were in grave danger.


11   .   There is a tunnel going underneath the north stand at point
         marked C on the attached plan.        At the entrance to the
         tunnel,   I noticed police officers stood two or three deep
         across the entrance.   I returned to my vehicle some ten or
         fifteen yards away, where I rejoined              who had been
         requested to stay with the vehicle.     As I returned, a number
         of police officers had brought out two stretcher cases from
         the pitch itself, through the gap between the North Stand
         and the Spion Cop.     One casualty was laid on a hoarding,
         whilst the other was on "scoop" stretcher.          The police
         officers asked me if I could take both casualties, and upon
         a quick examination I decided that they both required
         immediate hospital treatment.      I believe both casualties
         were conscious to some degree,        and they were quickly
         transferred on to the vehicle cots inside the ambulance with
         the assistance of the police.



                                  i7 6
    12. I remained In the back of the ambulance with both casualties
          whilst         drove the vehicle.      I continued to monitor
          both patients and made them as comfortable as possible.     One
          of the casualties was extremely distressed, and continually
          coughed and reared up whilst laid on the cot.      From inside
          the back of the ambulance, one can see into the drivers cab
          itself, and when I glanced up as we were leaving the ground,
          I saw' another casualty sat in the attendants seat.
#
    13.            had a police escort up to the Royal Hallamshire
          hospital, and I would say there were probably another three
          ambulance vehicles with police escorts travelling to the
          Royal Hallamshire at the same time as ourselves.     On arrival
          at the hospital,           drove the vehicle to the orthopaedic
          entrance.   When the rear doors were opened, I noticed that
          medical teams were waiting to receive the casualties on
          board our ambulance.              and I helped to off load the
          patients on the cots, and took them into the hospital one at
          a time, where a doctor checked each patient before     transfer
          onto hospital trolleys.           The doctors asked me what I
          believed the casualties injuries to be, and I indicated that
          they appeared to have mainly chest injuries.      In particular
          I recall seeing marks on the chest of one of the casualties.
          The other casualty who was sat in the attendants seat was
          checked by a doctor whilst sat in the cab and was presumably
          taken into the hospital.



                                      177
14.              and I reloaded the cots Into the back of the
      ambulance.                 radioed   Control    for    further
      Instructions.    I am   not sure whether we received a reply
      from Control.


15.   Two police officers, one male and one female, asked me If
      they could have a lift back to Hillsborough, which I agreed
      to.   On leaving the entrance of the Royal Hallamshire
      hospital, our ambulance vehicle broke down and we pulled up
      on to some waste ground.    The police officers then left the
      ambulance and presumably made there own way down to
      Hillsborough.    We Informed Control of our situation and our
      location.    By chance, two mechanics from a garage around the
      corner appeared on the scene, and asked If they could help.
      After twenty minutes or so, the mechanics had managed to
      repair our ambulance.   We then radioed Control, who Informed
      us to standby at the Royal Hallamshire hospital.      As we were
      virtually stationed outside the hospital, we remained where
      we were.     It was envisaged that we were going to have to
      transfer patients to the King Edward VII hospital In
      Sheffield.


16. After approximately 15 to 20 minutes, Control advised us to
      drive round to B road at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in
      order to collect some casualties for transfer up to the King
      Edward hospital.    There were a number of other vehicles In



                                    17E
      front of us waiting to collect and transfer patients.           Mr
          and I picked up one casualty from a ward, who was a
      stretcher case, and transferred this patient on to one of
      the vehicle cots.     Two other casualties were put into the
      back of our ambulance with our assistance, although they
      were not stretcher cases.     It should be noted that these
      three patients had not been involved with the Hillsborough
      incident.           and I then drove up to the King Edward
      hospital, and transferred the three casualties into various
      wards as directed.


17.   Thereafter,    we     radioed Control       asking   for   further
      instructions and were told to return to Doncaster base.
      Upon arrival back at our station, we informed Control again
      that we had arrived,        and   I would    say   the time   was
      approximately 1950.    There was nothing further to do, and so
      we locked up our ambulance, signed off and I went home.


Dated this        day of                 1989.




                                  17?
                                                                                                                        »
                                                                                               Main Police Access       i
  Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                           Police
                                                                                      Room
      Hillsborough Ground                                                    Room



                                                                 Gymnasium




                                                             NORTH STAND




                                                                                                                    \




                                                            P layer's
                                                            Tunnel
Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures


        Police Control     19-22                           SOUTH STAND


                                   o n /c ia i   2 3 -2 & L ,                       2 9 -3 2 33—3.6     Pnt
                                                                                     Car

      KEY

      TURNSTILES   rzw i                         Directors Entrance
