          I was born on 3.11.1952, and I am a Qualified Ambulanceman

     with SYMAS, I have worked for them over 5 years.



     2.   On Saturday 15th    April 1989 my tour of duty was 1400 to

          2200.   I work from Maltby.   At Svl5 p.-nr. we received a phone

          call from Control    to proceed to Sheffield where there had
          been a "major".



     3.   My Colleague                   and   I went   by ambulance to
          Sheffield.  En route we were told -to go to Hillsborough. We
                               ^   cm . I (*4 ^ 7)
          arrived at a&etrt 153^ we were to id by Control to go to the

          Leppings Lane end of the ground.


     4.   As we arrived there seemed to be people everywhere and we
          progressed very slowly into the perimeter of the ground.
          Inside a policeman indicated to us to stop which we did.      I

          noticed people lying on the floor all over the place.     Other

          people were looking after them.



     5.   Someone indicated to us a patient whom it was said needed

          urgent medical attention.         The patient was put in the

          ambulance, together with another stretcher case.



     6.   We were joined by an off duty ambulance man and then set off
                                         I   ( i M. 14 & ~i(L 11, j
          for Northern Generali     We went to Penistone Road and a

          police motor cyclist escorted us to the hospital where we



                                   6$

57
      handed over the patients.


7.    Aftor that Ift/e went straight back to the Leppings Lane end of
                                      I£>          ^               t-e-a.    OlOv_>- ^««i
      the ground^         Again as we approached people were milling
      about all over the place and we go into the ground only with

      difficulty.


                                                                            !
                                                                            —0^3              —
8.    Once inside, people were lying on the floor.                      There^did nofr

      "SjeenLjto-^ae— anyone in charge,       no one to say who was most
      seriously hurt, and needed to go to hospital first.

                  /I   ________
9.    My colleague^realised this and said he would try and sort it

      out and got out of the ambulance to                        remain with the
      patients.


10.   We put two stretcher cases and two sitting patients into                          the
      ambulance.       The- of f duty ombttjhanee m a n i as still rfchore—and

      I was joined by a woman who said she was a nurse.



11.   Again I set off for the hospital,                 this time it was                the

      Hallamshire.          I was    advised       to go        there       by another

      ambulance man who said Northern General was full.



12.   I went to Hallamshire this time without an escort, but all

      the junctions were controlled by the polica and we got
                                       <X<VTAA/^   l(t |Q   /                 ’Zl I J
      through without difficultyT             I discharged the patients at
                                                       [   IG     ~l J
      the   hospital      and     radioed     " gr ee n" and r e t u r n e d to




                                     (A
      Hillsborough.



13 . Because of vehicles I had difficulty in getting back to the
      ground,     but once there    the crowds   of people       made    it
      difficult to get through to the ground itself.


14.   Inside the perimeter of the ground I picked my ooliengufe up

      and he informed me we were to report to the gymnasium.              I

      found my way to it and met Mr Jones on Penistone Road.             He
      said he wanted all our blankets, and I handed over to him.


15.   He then directed us to go to Herries Road bus station and

      stand by.     This we did and then after about 40 minutes we

      were verbally told to go back to a car park inside the
      ground near the gym.


16.   This we did and after handing over our body bags waited for

      about 15 minutes before we were spoken to by Mr Jones.             He
      asked us where we were from, and directed us to return to
      our home station.



17.   During the entire incident I found that I was not able to

      pick   up   messages   properly,   although   a p p a r en tl y   our

      transmissions were received.


18 . When I made my first visit to the ground inside the
      perimeter with the ambulance I saw casualties on the floor



                                   70
      on both sides of my ambulance.      I was called to deal with
      those on the left of the ambulance nearest to the stand.



19.   I did not have the opportunity to go to those casualties who
      were on the floor on the other side of the ambulance, on the
      Inside of the outer fence.



20.   I can't remember If It was the second time I went back or

      the third time but I do recall that there were green screens
      erected around the casualties were, I did not look over the

      screens, but I still think the casualties were still there,
      behind the screens.



21.   When the screens were up there were police officers near
      them


Dated this                         1989
