               will say as follows


1.   I was born on the 4th January 1952.     I am a Station Officer
     based at Doncaster, and I joined the ambulance service in
     1973.    I only remained with the service for a few months and
     then left, but in January 1975 I rejoined the service when
     it was known as Symas.       I was initially based at Bentley.
     When I returned to the ambulance service, I was initially a
     driver, and then I became a Leading Ambulance man in 1982
     and finally became a Station Officer two or three years
     later.    I moved to Doncaster station as Station Officer in
     February 1987.


2.   My training involved attending a six week residential course
     at Markfield.       I have    also undertaken an advance
     resuscitation course at Markfield, a life saving course, and
     a number of refresher courses over the years.       I have no
     formal paramedic training although as I am in charge of
     paramedic staff I have taken a basic induction course into
     all aspects of this particular extended training.


3.   I was off duty on Saturday 15th April 1989.      I was at home
     watching Grandstand when I became aware of the Hillsborough
     incident,     shortly   after 1500.       The pictures from
     Hillsborough came up on the television, and I could see that
     the football match had just stopped as a result of a police
     officer running onto the pitch.         I observed what was
happening on the television, and after a couple of minutes I
was aware that something was wrong and it was not just a
matter of crowds invading the pitch.    I called my wife into
the living room and said I was going to put on my uniform in
readiness, anticipating a phone call from work.     Rather than
telephone work, I drove straight down to Bentley which is
approximately three miles from home.           When I arrived,
ambulanceman                    , who was also off duty, had
already come into the station.


I telephoned Control and asked them if they had a Duty
Officer at Hillsborough and whether they wanted me to take
over as Duty Officer for the rest of Syinas.    Alternatively I
suggested that I team up with Mr Humphreys and take a
vehicle down to Hillsborough.    It should be noted that there
is no one specific Duty Officer within Symas, rather all
Station Officers work the rota and take turns as Duty
Officer.   Control informed me to take a vehicle with Mr
           and drive down towards Sheffield.       Mr
drove the ambulance, and I would say that we left Bentley at
approximately 1530.     Before we had arrived at Tinsley
Viaduct,   we heard a message over the vehicle radio
requesting all vehicles who were approaching Hillsborough to
locate at gate 0 on Penistone Road.


We approached Hillsborough via Herries Road South, and as we
were driving down,    I noticed a large number of people
walking all over Herries Road in every direction.      We were
only able to gain access through the crowds slowly, and
shortly afterwards I noticed a stationary ambulance vehicle
at the junction with Penistone Road.     Mr           pulled up
behind this vehicle,     and immediately behind us was a
Nottinghamshire ambulance vehicle.     Very shortly afterwards,
another three or four vehicles pulled up behind the
Nottinghamshire vehicle. I would say that the time was
approximately 1545 or 1550.     From this position I could
observe a number of Symas vehicles alongside the ground
perimeter on Penistone Road, which is marked with a red line
on the attached plan.    I also specifically recall large
numbers of the crowd chatting and also smelling of alcohol.


Whilst stationary, I heard on the vehicle radio that all
vehicles were requested to locate at Herris Road Bus
station.   Penistone Road was full with all types of motor
vehicles and people.    As the number of vehicles parked on
Penistone Road began to diminish, presumably having picked
up casualties from within the ground, I realised that more
vehicles would be required shortly to enter the ground at
point A marked on the attached plan.          I got out of my
ambulance and spoke to a police officer who was stood at
point B marked on the attached plan.     I informed him that a
message had been relayed advising that all ambulance
vehicles were to go to Herris Road bus station.     I could see
an ambulance officer organising the loading of ambulances
     outside gate 0 - It should be noted that gate O is a
     turnstile and it only allows access for pedestrians not
     vehicles.   I informed the police officer that I required my
     vehicle and all vehicles behind to have access across on to
     Penistone Road.   I prompted the police officer to stop all
     traffic coming down Penistone Road from a northerly
     direction which allowed my vehicle and those behind to cross
     over the central reservation and turn right on to Penistone
     Road.   When Mr               pulled up on Penistone Road,   I
     would say that there were only two ambulance vehicles ahead.




7.   At this point I noticed David Jones speaking to the crew
     inside the first vehicle in the queue, and then he went to
     the second vehicle,     by which time I could hear him
     requesting the crew in the second vehicle to take all
     blankets off their vehicle.    When David Jones arrived at our
     vehicle, he acknowledged me, and then asked me to take a
     medical team, who were stood alongside him, up to Barnsley
     District General Hospital and to establish a liaison point
     at that hospital. The medical team were three     strong, and
     got into the back of the vehicle and Mr            then drove
     straight to Barnsley District General, and arrived outside
     the casualty department.         I would say that we left
     Hillsborough shortly after 1500 hours and arrived at the
     hospital at approximately 1620/1625 hours.



                               m
8.    When we arrived at Barnsley District General I noticed the
      entrance to casualty was full of medical staff, presumably
      awaiting admissions.      I informed Control that we had
      arrived.   I then got out of the vehicle and went across to
      the medical teams and enquired who was in charge.           I
      informed the person in charge, who was a sister, that I was
      her ambulance liaison officer for this incident.       I then
      went back to my vehicle, at which point in time the Station
      Officer            arrived.     He had also been requested by
      Control to attend Barnsley District General.


9.    During my time at the hospital, I only recall seeing three
      casualties from Hillsborough being admitted.    I continually
      kept in contact with Control, and my main concern was the
      anticipated number of casualties, but as time elapsed I was
      continually informed that the Northern General and the Royal
      Hallamshire hospitals were coping.


10.   I left Barnsley District Hospital at 18.10 hours when
      matters were generally under control, and there     was also
      the fact that Mr          was present and he continued to be
      the liaison officer.     When I informed Control that Mr
                 and I were leaving, I was requested to ascertain
      whether a patient was still at the Barnsley District General
      (nothing to do with the Hillsborough incident), and if so,
      to take that patient home on our way back to Doncaster.



                                3S0
11.   The patient was still at the hospital, he was loaded on to
      the ambulance and after dropping him off,            H and I
      arrive back at Bentley at approximately 70&G .      We then
      cleaned the vehicle, reported to Control that we had arrived
      and were released to go home.




Signed




Dated this   t'G   day of May 1989




                                381
                                                                                           Main Police Access

 Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                        Police
                                                                                  Room
   Hillsborough Ground                                                  Room



                                                            Gymnasium
                                                                                                                7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                   73-76
                                                                                                                   ’5-72
                                                      NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                           1 ft /




                                                                                                                           LA 4 9 -5 4
                       1-16                                                                                                  ^43-48

                   W ut



                                                     P la y e r's
                                                     Tunnel
Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures


        Police Control        19-22                SOUTH S TA N D
                                      wan                                         B.Ol
                                                                               2 9 -3 2 3 3 -

      MI
      TURNSTILES    EZ7771            D ire c to r * E ntran ce
