               date of birth 5th May 1950, states:-

1.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman of 20 years service,    all of
     which has been with Sheffield Corporation/SYMAS.


2.   I hold the Miller Certificate and have in addition been
     trained to assist a paramedic if necessary.     I completed
     this training just over a year ago.   Normally I carry some
     extra equipment on my ambulance for this purpose but on
     Saturday the 15th April 1989 I was not on duty and did not
     have my usual vehicle.   Therefore I had no extra equipment
^    with me when I attended the ground.


3.   I am involved only with front line duties,    i.e. emergency
     work, and all crews in this part of the service alternate as
     driver and assistant. My training to assist a paramedic is
     additional to the normal training for an ambulance crew
     assistant.

4.   I work from Longley Ambulance Station.


5.   On Saturday   15th April,   I had been out shopping and as I
     arrived back at my home I heard on the radio that there was
     trouble at the Hillsborough ground. It must have been about
^    1505.  On hearing this I went into the house and put on the
     television, which was showing live coverage. I realised at
     once that it was more than just a bit of crowd trouble and
     telephoned control at Heather Close.    Superintendent
             answered and I asked if he wanted me to come in. He
     said "yes, get into work".   I did not change into uniform,
     but drove as fast as possible to Longley.       I officially
     signed in at 1515 and took a Renault vehicle, which is a day
     vehicle with about 10 seats.


6.   There was no one at the station when I arrived so on my own
      initiative I took the vehicle with the most seats.   I did
not know what sort of injuries I would be dealing with but
expected there would be a large number of casualties.

I had been given no information whatsoever and __________
had not told me which part of the ground to go to.     I set
the radio automatically onto ERC channel because I regarded
it as a major incident, even though this had not actually
been specified.   I recall radioing in the fleet number of
the vehicle as I left Longley Station - Sierra 484.        I
immediately cleared the channel because it was very busy. I
took a conscious decision not to block the channel further
by attempting to obtain instructions but to listen to other
messages being given out and to make decisions according to
what I heard.


I approached Hillsborough along Herries Road and from this
direction it is difficult to get into the ground          on
Penistone Road because of     the dual carriageway.   Becauseof
this I drove straight on      at   the roundabout at the endof
Herries Road and then turned left into Leppings Lane. I had
no other reason for going to the Leppings Lane end. In fact
I had heard on the radio that ambulances were to proceed to
the designated pick up area, but as I had not been on duty I
had not been briefed    as    to   where that was.    I did not
encounter any traffic problems until I turned into Leppings
Lane when I met up with the crowd.   The Police assisted me
to get through the fans and I drove up to gate C. I am not
sure what time it was but the journey took only 5 minutes or
so, so it must have been about 1520.


On arriving at gate C I saw what I estimated to be about 16
bodies lying along the railings to the right of the gate. I
parked opposite these bodies and could see ahead of me three
front line vehicles parked inside the ground on the service
road. Leading Ambulanceman               from Maltby Station
       was there organising the three emergency vehicles. I saw
       him shortly after I arrived, by which time I was already
       thoroughly busy.

10 . I got out of the Renault and tried to take stock of the
     situation.  I spoke to a nearby Police Inspector who asked
     me how many I could carry.    I simply said - "As many as I
     can get on" and he left me to it.

11 .   Then D.D.T. Lawson (dedicated day transport) came up to me
       and asked if I needed assistance. He was not in uniform and
       said he was with his wife and children, but wanted to help.
       We knew each other by sight.    I asked him to stay with me
       and instructed him to walk down past the emergency
       ambulances and bring back any walking wounded to the
       Renault.

12 .   Just as he went    off two women came up to me and said they
       were nurses and    wanted to help.    Ihave  no idea who they
       were.   I simply   said -" Yes. Stay with me".    I then sent
       them to look for    walking wounded in front of gate C, which
       they did.

13.    I remained to deal with casualties beside the van.    The
       first person I spoke to was a teenage boy with a shoulder
       injury who was sitting amongst the bodies. I said "Come on
       let me get you out of here", not realising he was with
       anyone.   He refused saying, "I'm not leaving my father".
       Apparently his father was one of the dead beside him.   I
       could not persuade him to leave and so I asked a Police
       Officer to stay by him and comfort him.     He was not
       seriously injured.

14 . I turned to help others.   I lifted a number of people into
     the vehicle and settled them down. I did not administer any

                                   302L
       treatment but simply assisted them into the vehicle.   The
       nurses then returned with more casualties and I asked them
       to get on board.


 15.   Meanwhile I heard on the radio that the Northern General
       Hospital was full.     Therefore I decided to take my
       casualties to the next nearest alternative hospital which
       was the Royal Hallamshire.   I told the nurses to come with
       me and I would leave them at the Royal Hallamshire to assist
       there.


^6•    D.D.T. Lawson then came back with more walking wounded and I
       asked him to accompany me to the Hallamshire to make a
       record of names and addresses of the casualties we had
       picked up on the way. By this time the vehicle was full. I
       had 13 casualties on board, together with myself the two
       nurses and Mr Lawson.


 17. I   drove   down    the   service    road   to   get   out.      The   three
       ambulances had gone by now but in any case I would have had
       room to get past.    I left by the South Stand exit.    The
       Police guided me out onto Penistone Road.                   I do not know
       what time this was.


^03.   After   leaving   the   ground    the   traffic was     heavy    and   the
       Renault had no flashing lights or siren.    I saw a Police
       transit van behind me and beckoned to him to pull in front
       so that he could escort me.    This police vehicle did have
       lights and he was able to pull in front. After this we made
       better progress, although the journey was still very slow.
       I cannot remember how long it took to get to the hospital.

19.    On arriving at the Hospital I did not drive up to casualty
       because I assumed stretcher cases would be arriving there.
       Instead I decided to go to the orthopaedic side, which is

                                    3 «3
next tocasualty but has a     separate entrance.  I told
everyone   to stay in the van until I found out what was
happening.  There were a lot of other vehicles around but I
was able to get near the door.    I went in and spoke to a
Sister, explaining that I had 13 walking casualties and two
nurses with me who would stay to assist.        While I was
speaking to her I spotted a free bench next to the x-ray
department and said - "Shall I put them all on there?" She
agreed.      I did notdetain her longer      as she was already
very busy.


I went back to the vehicle and instructed the two nurses and
Mr Lawson where to take the casualties and all three of us
then helped them into the building and settled them on this
bench.  Some of them had to be carried but it did not take
long.


I then drove back to the Leppings Lane end with Mr Lawson.
This time we were approaching from the opposite direction
and the crowds were terrible.  Progress was extremely slow
and the crowd seemed unprepared to part to let the van
through.  The Police simply told me to keep going forward
slowly, which I did.  I leaned out and folded in the wing
mirrors on both sides.   It took several minutes to get down
Leppings Lane, but I eventually pulled up in the same
position at gate C. A Senior Police Officer was there and I
asked if he had any reports of walking wounded.       I also
asked D.D.T. Lawson to look around.    However there did not
seem to be any casualties to collect so after a few minutes
I decided to move into the South stand area. At this point
Mr Lawson asked if I would mind if he left to get in touch
with his wife and children and I agreed.


I drove down the service road alone and pulled up by the
South Stand for about 2 minutes.   No one approached me and
there were no casualties waiting to be collected so I moved
to the end of the service road (marked position 3 on the
plan).   Again no one approached me.   While I was there I
heard on the radio a request for all vehicles to go to
Herries Road bus station and stand by. I decided I would go
to the bus station and after a few minutes I moved off.   I
did not make contact with Control.


I drove up Herries Road South and from there to Herries Road
bus station where I reported to Station Officer Eason.     I
did not note the time.   He told me to stay with my vehicle
and I waited with a group of other drivers.     Later I was
paired up with another colleague, Qualified Ambulanceman
               |, to crew a front line vehicle.   I left the
Renault at the bus station.


A group of about 8 or 9 vehicles were instructed to go back
to the gymnasium yard. I do not remember what route we took
but we had no problem in getting there.   We drove into the
main police access point and parked in the yard.   Mr Eason
had also travelled to the gym and was there when I arrived
with Mr Jones and other officers.


A message was received that there were    11 bodies at the
Northern General Hospital and one at Hallamshire Hospital
and a decision was taken to bring them back to the
gymnasium.        and I were instructed to go to Northern
General, I think by Mr Eason or by Mr Jones.


Again there were no traffic problems in getting there but I
have no recollection of what time we arrived. We went round
to the mortuary and loaded two or three bodies and brought
them back to the gymnasium.   We carried them together into
the gym.         and I then congregated round     the parked
vehicles   outside with other ambulancemen.         All the
casualties were well    cleared   by   now   and   there   was   no
activity in the yard.


It soon became clear that it was pointless having fleets of
ambulances standing by because the process of identifying
and bagging the bodies was likely to take some time.      I
think it was Mr Eason who came and explained this. Then Mr
Jones gathered us round and said they would keep three or
four ambulances to deal with the bodies and the rest would
be stood down.       and I were one of the teams chosen to
stay on duty.


After a while we heard that relatives were on their way and
they arrived in a South Yorkshire Transport vehicle and went
into the gym to identify the bodies.           Once formal
identification of three bodies had been completed and the
paper work done the ambulance crews were called on in turn
to transport them to the Medico Legal Centre.       A police
officer was designated to each body so that on each trip we
carried three policemen and three bodies. We did many trips
and did not have to keep a log as Mr Eason was updating
information as bodies were dispatched and informing Control.
We only radioed in to confirm our departure from the Medico
Legal Centre on our way back to Hillsborough.


I think      and I carried about 30 or 33 bodies in addition
to those we brought back from the Northern General.


At 0200 the evening shift, which began at 1800 would
normally have finished but at this stage some crews which
were coming to the end of their normal duty were asked to
stay on to relieve crews who had been working all afternoon
and were still dealing with the bodies.        and I decided
to stay on as we just wanted to see the job through.
After our last journey to the Medico Legal Centre we radioed
Control and were instructed to return to base.We returned
the vehicle to Longley and logged out at 0615 on Sunday
morning. I was aware that a major incident plan existed and
conscious of this being put into effect through the day.
The very fact of using ERC channel and of off-duty officers
reporting in in the first place was part of this plan.     I
was also conscious of following the plan when I joined the
group of vehicles collected at Herries Road bus station.
The whole operation was meticulously carried out and every
one remained very calm.


The only difficulty I had was in driving through the crowd
which was not prepared to move out of the way.


I did not encounter any St. John's Ambulance staff.   I did
see a Red Cross Officer in the gym area who asked me for
paracetamol for someone who had a headache. I was amazed at
this request and said we did not carry paracetamol.


As regards communications, as I have explained, I took a
conscious decision not to block the ERC channel with
unnecessary enquiries and gained information by listening to
messages being passed to other officers from Control.      I
could clearly hear messages coming through on the vehicle
radio and did not encounter problems with interference even
after I moved to the gymnasium end.     It may be that the
radio had     been switched back to the ordinary emergency
channel by    this time.  I did not personally attend to this
but it may   be that     |had changed it over. I did not have
a hand set   with me.


The passenger vehicle I was driving was unequipped but I had
brought with me a First Aid box and surgical collars from
the station.   In fact I did not use any of this equipment
     and was not asked for it.

Dated this   0 ? * , Hav nf             1989.
Signed........ .




                                 3 VS
                                                                                                 .oin Police Access

 Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                         Police
                                                                                            v\


      Hillsborough Ground                                                     Room\V/3>&
                                                                                                 y      'V/O.X
                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                            >\     \
                                                                                                      .<5       \    \
                                                                                                            ‘ 'S-'x ''
                                                                                                                         77-88
                                                                                                                           73-76
                                                               no rth stand
                                                                                                                             -72         ++S       cS
                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                           _e»




                      1-16

                                                                                                                                             \V\
                                31                                                                                                   \'\\ \'VS'
                                                                                                                                            \\
                                                                                                                                         \ '      '\3*
                                                                                                                                          \\ 's'x>
                                                                                                                                                t* s\
                                                                                                                                            • x' v\x'x'
                                                              Player‘a
^way Fans Entrance                                            Tunnel

 and Enclosures


        Police Control       19-22                          SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                            ‘I ^ -
                                     Official   23-                                                         37-42
                                                                                                         Perk
                                                                                 Car
      IfCK
     TURNSTILES   r7777i                        D ire cto rt Entrance
