               states :
1.   I was born on 21st December, 1955.


2.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman employed       by SYMAS.     I have
     been with SYMAS about 8 years.       I am based at Hoyland and
     on Saturday 15th April 1989 my tour of duty was 1000 to
     1800.


3.   At about 1500 we were sent from Station to a 999 call at
               Golf Club, the call having come from Control at
     Rotherham by direct line to Hoyland.


4.   We had collected a patient,   who was not seriously ill and
     were en route to Barnsley General Hospital when we heard
     Control over the radio contacting Barnsley      Base.     We were
     at that time on channel 2.


5.   The message indicated that transport was required to take a
     medical team from Barnsley General to Sheffield.         Since we
     were close to Barnsley Hospital my colleague,
     used the radio to tell Control we were approaching Barnsley
     Hospital and offered our help.


6.   We were told that we would be contacted when we went "green"
     and went as quickly as we could to Barnsley Hospital.        The
     patient was escorted to casualty, a walking patient.
            I contacted Control by radio about the medical team.     I was
            told to stand by.    Control then told me that the medical
            team was being organised.   A Barnsley ambulanceman attended
            the Hospital and Control told us that he would take the
            medical team through to Sheffield and we were to proceed to
            Hillsborough.


8   .       We went to Sheffield as quickly as we could.     I do not know
            what time we arrived at Hillsborough.          We entered the
            perimeter of the ground and enquired for the medical room.


9.          We asked police for directions and eventually arrived at the
            gymnasium.      The medical team and their equipment were
            transferred from the second ambulance.


10 . In the gymnasium I spoke to Mr Hopkins and told him we had
            brought the medical team through.      He said he thought they
            were no longer required.


11      .   Someone needed body bags so I went round the ambulances and
            collected about ten of them.        I gave them to one of our
            officers who took them into the gymnasium.


12      .   I was told to wait for a while and shortly told to go on
            standby at Herries Road Bus Station.         This I did and I
            think   I was the first vehicle on but other ambulances
            quickly joined me.   We remained there until we were told to




                                        mo
      return to the ground where there was a small de-briefing
      period.


13.   I did not hear radio instruction to use the emergency
      channel.       I could hear radio use and because it was
      obviously busy did not use it myself.


14.   I am aware of the Major Incident plan and know what I am
      supposed to do.


15.   Before we were sent on the 999 from Hoyland Base we were the
      only persons at the Base, the other crew already   being out
      on a call.




Dated this       <T day of   M'/V   1989.
