                       states:-


1.   My date of birth is 7th November 1945



2.   I am the Station Officer at Wath and a fully qualified

     ambulance man.      I have   19 years   experience   with the

     ambulance service.       Prior to 1974 this was with the West
     Yorkshire area but I came into the SYMAS district after the

     re-organisation of the Metropolitan boroughs.     I have been a

     Station Officer since 1982, first at Hoyland and since 1987
     at Wath.



3.   I hold     the Miller certificate    and   also   the National
     Examination Board in Supervisory Studies qualification.



4.   I was not scheduled to be on duty at all during the weekend

     of Saturday 15th to Sunday 16th April 1989, having worked a

     normal shift pattern during the previous week.     On Saturday

     afternoon I was coming in from the garden at about 1630

     hours when the telephone rang.    I had not been following the

     match and was not aware of an incident.     The call was from

     Control    and   I was   instructed to stand by at Barnsley

     District General Hospital, Casualty Department to act as

     liaison officer.     Control said there was a major incident

     taking place at Hillsborough and the hospital was to expect
     casualties.
I understood resources would be stretched and they were
calling in all off-duty staff.      I knew there was a major

incident plan and my role in this plan depended on the

location of the incident.     Sheffield was too far away from

Wath for me to be of direct assistance.     In any event I had
received specific instructions, which I followed.



I changed quickly into my uniform so as to be recognised and

drove to the hospital.    This took about 5 to 6 minutes.     On

arriving I noticed there was an ambulance already there and
a fellow station officer         from Doncaster    Station,   __

             I went across to him and asked what the situation
was.   He said there was a major incident at Hillsborough but

he did not know how many casualties to expect.       He did say

that Sheffield Hospitals were filling up rapidly and he was
expecting some casualties to be brought to Barnsley.



I went into the hospital and found a team of staff who had
just returned from the ground with                      in his

ambulance.   They were standing by in casualty waiting for an

influx of wounded.    However,    it did not appear that any

patients had arrived at that stage.



I made myself known to a senior sister and told her that I
would act as liaison officer.         Meanwhile,               ~

telephoned control on the direct line from the hospital to
inform them that I had arrived.     We were both told to stand
      by.                  was in any event on standby for domestic
      emergency duty.



      We waited by the ambulance because we could get better

      reception on the radio than on our hand sets.      We listened

      on channel 1 (ERC) automatically without being instructed to

      do so.   However, we also left the hand sets on channel 2 to
      gain as much information as possible.


10 . I remained at the hospital until approximately 1830 hours

      During this time one West Yorkshire Ambulance came         in

      carrying two fans from Hillsborough who were in a state of

      shock as a result of the death of their brother.


1 1 . I took these patients     into casualty and explained to the

      nurse on duty what had happened to them from the report
      given to me by the driver.       The patients themselves only

      spoke to me to give me their names.


12 . This was the only event of the entire afternoon.     Every ten

      to fifteen minutes               or I telephoned into control

      to check the situation.      We were concerned that so many
      Barnsley Staff were waiting while       no casualties    were

      arriving.   Control just asked us to keep standing by.


13.   At about 1750 hours.                and the ambulanceman with

      him from Doncaster took an outpatient to Brampton and I was
        left alone.   I telephoned in at about 1820 hours and was

        informed that no further casualties were expected,       save

        perhaps an over-flow from domestic emergencies for which the

        Sheffield hospitals might not have room because of the

        influx from Hillsborough.   I was instructed to stand down.


14.     I informed the casualty staff and went home at about 1830
        hours




Signed




Dated
