__________ - AMBULANCEMAN - LONGLEY STATION
(off duty)

Date:   19.A.89

Time:   1525-1620


I was off duty on Saturday 15th April 1989 and became aware whilst at home
through the media that there was a serious incident at Hillsborough
football ground. I telephoned Control to see if I was needed.
        spoke to me and asked me to go immediately to my Station. This I
did and picked up Renault vehicle Sierra 484 and proceeded after radio
contact with control to the Leppings Lane area of the football ground. On
arrival I saw a chaotic scene of Police, football fans, three front line
ambulances. My attention was immediately drawn to what appeared to be
approximately sixteen bodies lying on the driveway against the railings
opposite gate 'C'.

Shortly after my arrival I was joined by DDT         who asked me if I
needed assistance, also two nurses came to me, and I instructed all three
of them to get as many injured persons back to the ambulance as soon as
possible. A police officer came to me and asked how many casualties I
could take on the ambulance, I told him as many as he wanted. Shortly
after DDT        and the two nurses returned to the vehicle with several
casualties. We in fact loaded thirteen patients onto the ambulance and
along with DDT        and the two nurses we left the ground being escorted
by a police transit van to the Hallamshire Hospital.

On arrival at the hospital we handed over the thirteen casualties to
hospital staff.  I then returned to the Leppings Lane end of the football
ground with DDT       |. On arrival back at the ground I liaised with a
police inspector and established that there were no more living casualties
in that area. I then heard over the radio that ambulances were now being
stood by at Herries Road Bus Depot. I then went to this location and
reported to S/0 Eason. After some time at the bus depot we eventually
moved back to the gymnasium car park area at the football ground and
assisted with the transportation of bodies from there and to the Medico
Legal Centre.

I completed my work and signed off duty at 0615 on Sunday morning.
