                  CONTROL OFFICER


0600 - 1400 Returned to Duty

Date:   18.4.89

Time:   1215-1300


In the morning I had moved a Longley Ambulance and Station Officer P Eason
on to Hillsborough and Middlewood Ambulance to base.

1400 I handed over to R Clarke. I received a telephone call f r o m _______|at
1520 saying that there was a 'major incident' and I was to proceed to
Northern General Hospital.

On arrival I found a telephone and contacted Control, confirming my
arrival. I then organised my position, made contact with Consultants,
nursing, admin, police. The biggest problem at this stage was the
telephone facilities.

I made several telephone calls to                   updating him of the
position.

On arrival of the crews, I ensured they had sufficient assistance for
unloading, and refreshments for a crew on standby at NGH.

At 1645 I received an update from               saying the incident was
winding down and only walking wounded would be arriving.

1820? I received a call from               saying a fleet of ambulances
would be despatched to collect bodies on the order of the coroner. I asked
Insp/Police to confirm who went with crews around to the mortuary to
oversee loading.

A Longley crew loaded three bodies and set off for Hillsborough.

I received a message from               saying do not release bodies to the
ground as he had been told by a Police Officer that he couldn't cope with
any more, so I stopped all proceedings much to the annoyance of the
mortuary attendant.

Two Police sergeants arrived with constables and the loading was to
continue as he now had a Officer to go with the bodies back to the ground.

I got straight on to                and updated him on the position.

After leaving I returned to A/E I liaised with Mr Wardrope who updated me
on his position which was that they were nearly at capacity and could we
direct further casualties to other hospital. This information was passed
to Control.
SHEET 2   -


I received a request from administration to transport a body from ITU as
the patient had died. I was unsure of the procedure and contacted control
for advice.

After some time I was advised that an ambulance would transfer the body to
Hillsborough.

At the mortuary I was informed that the body had already gone, further
enquiries revealed the body had been removed during the earlier movements.

After the request to move the body, I was approached by
       assistant) that a press conference was arrangedfor 1000 on the
Sunday   morning and could a Senior Officer attend.

On completing the body transfer I confirmed to her that a senior officer
would attend.

At 2230 I was approached by administration to assist in relaying any extra
work that may come in due to it being A/E night at theNGH.

Supt           w as informed and calls from areas within the
Rotherham/Sheffield area cases would be diverted (if appropriate).

I made a final check on admin, Doctors, Police asked if they had any
further requests. The answer was no so I contacted Control and signed off
at 2310.

Personal Observations - Lack of communication, would like radio.     Police
had own room
