Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




At approximately 1420 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, I attended the
control centre of SYMAS.   The reason for my visit was to update myself as
to the situation with regard the football and associated traffic conditions
within the county and particularly Sheffield area.


I asked if the two Liaison Officers had left for Hillsborough, it was
confirmed that they had left Longley Ambulance Station en-route for the
ground.   I was informed that the two officers had left with an ambulance
crew who were also going to the ground to stand by.   The second additional
cover vehicle had been put on stand by at Middlewood station, a short
distance from Hillsborough.


At approximately 1508 hours Superintendent R. Clarke took a call from the
South Yorkshire Police (Force Control).   I got the impression that Ray
Clarke was surprised by the call because he started to explain to the
caller that we had two Liaison Officers in the ground with a vehicle.      As
soon as that call had finished a second call came from Force Control, this
time it was answered by            |.


The call Ray Clarke took asked for a fleet of ambulances to Leppings Lane
end of the ground.   I immediately questioned this as I know from experience
that ambulances cannot gain access from that area into the ground itself.
Mr. Clarke told me he could not get any further details and I said get the
second standby vehicle to Leppings Lane to get some information.    I
actually passed this call myself to Middlewood Ambulance Station.       I also
told Mr. Clarke to contact the duty Liaison Officer at the ground for
further details.


The c a l l a n s w e r e d   seconds after Mr. Clarke's confirmed they
wanted a fleet of ambulances to the ground.   Because of the nature of the
calls and the conflicting detail I decided to make my way to Hillsborough.
This would be approximately 1512 hours.   I left control and together with
Mr. Morley who had just returned from Sheffield, we travelled as an
emergency response to Hillsborough in a marked ambulance car.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




En route I decided it was a strange incident because of the way in which
the message had been vague from the police and because of the manner of
conversation I was hearing over the radio.


I told Mr. Morley to radio control and tell them to make all Trent
Ambulance vehicles available as soon as possible.      1 heard this message
transmitted by           who finished the message by adding "particularly
Sierra mobiles".


On leaving Headquarters, I decided I was going to attend the normal
rendezvous point for incidents at the football ground which is the
Penistone Road North entrance to the gymnasium.       I knew our Liaison Officer
would be there or in that area.   I arrived at Hillsborough at 1522 hours,
parked my vehicle and left Mr. Morley with it.        I then went to the only
vehicular access to the pitch, walked down toward the ground and looked
toward Leppings Lane end of the ground.     I saw a   complete line of Police
Officers right across the width of the ground.


I ran across, went through the police lines where I could clearly see lots
of injured people on the grass.   I   looked at the stand it was a mass of
faces and it became clear that the    ambulances at Leppings Lane could   not
get to this incident from the location.


I could not get involved with the injured, my responsibility was to get
resources there immediately to deal with the situation.


I turned and began running back to summon help.       I saw a Police Officer
fall down with a little girl in his arms.     I picked up the child and
carried on running with her in my arms up the ramp exit.       I stopped and
looked at her, she was dead.   The crowd at that time were clapping and
cheering and were generally noisy.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




The Police Officer caught up to me and said "she has had it hasn't she
kid?" I replied "yes, take her into the gymnasium" and gave him the child's
body.


I saw Mr. Morley stood at the ambulance vehicle, I shouted for our Major
Incident Vehicle and ambulances to attend the Penistone Road end of the
ground, entrance to the gymnasium.    I also asked for the Chief Metropolitan
Ambulance Officer to be informed at home, this was approximately 1530
hours.


I then went toward the gymnasium, the first thing I saw was outside the St.
Johns ambulance room a group of what can only be described as children,
they were in uniform and appeared to be extremely upset.     I entered the
gymnasium door and it was pandemonium, there were Police Officers and
already some bodies laid on the advertising boards.


There were casualties everywhere and bodies laid on the floor.     I turned
around and went back to where the ambulances could back in, we could only
get one ambulance in at a time because of the way vehicles were parked.
The area was full of Police vans and Police horses and one of our
ambulances which had parked before the match kicked off.     The cots from
that vehicle had gone and the crew had responded to the Leppings Lane end
of the pitch to help with the injured.


Station Officer Higgins reported to me, he said "it is caos" I said "find
me that crew and get that vehicle moved".     I turned to look at the
ambulance and saw it had been filled with dead and injured people who had
been brought there by the crowd.     They were laying on the floor and sitting
on the wheelarches as the stretchers had already been removed by the crew.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




I wanted an ambulance onto the pitch.    I formed the opinion that this would
let the crowd see that help had arrived.     I thought the crowd were clapping
and cheering because they thought help was at a premium.


The Police appeared to be containing and area full of injured people and I
wanted desperately to get an ambulance in.


I got one of my vehicles into position at the top of the ramp ready to
drive onto the pitch when the St. Johns Ambulance appeared at the bottom of
the ramp blocking our entrance.    To my horror he appeared to have the
vehicle side wedged against a metal ramp providing wheelchair access to the
stand.


The vehicle was freed by a large group of Police Officers bouncing it
straight.    This vehicle then exited from the ground.


We had reversed our vehicles to allow this and then we drove forward again
only to find that our vehicle got wedged on girder work supporting the
gate.    Because of the inability to drive in a straight line it was
necessary to bounce vehicles straight to gain access and egress from the
pitch.


The wheelchair ramp was a surprise to me as on my previous visits to the
ground, it had not been there.    I am not aware of any notification of its
prescence.


I then sent a further ambulance onto the pitch as the crowd appeared to
respond favourably to the first one.    With the increase of ambulance staff
and fire service personnel we were able to take control of the situation,
removing the injured.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




I stopped at the top of the ramp and was then approached by Leading
Ambulanceman              I sent him into the gymnasium to attend to the
injured getting them ready to transport.     I went to my vehicle and asked
over the radio for the location of the Major Incident Vehicle, I was told
he would be there within minutes.


At the time the Major Incident Vehicle arrived driven by Station Officer
           Control informed me that the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer had been contacted and was proceeding to Headquarters.     Mr. Jones
then ran to me and I asked him to take charge of everything concerning
loading and despatch from that location and Penistone road.


I then went to return to the gymnasium where I was confronted by a male who
told me he was a Doctor and had three more Doctors with him, but they had
no equipment.   I saw one of my staff, I cannot remember who it was but I
asked him to take the Doctors names and take them into the gymnasium
introducing them to Leading Ambulanceman              pho had his para medic
equipment with him.


Mr. Morley then came with an Ambulance Station Officer from Nottingham who
had four or five staff with him.    These people were in civilian clothes and
had been supporting Nottingham Forrest at the match.     Mr. Morley went onto
the ground wearing our satin yellow ambulance jackets.


I then entered the gymnasium and found Chief Superintendent Addis and
liaised with him.     I came out and returned to the ambulance loading party
by this time the match had been abandoned and fans were filing out of the
stands.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




The number of injured coming from the pitch area had slowed down.        I was
conscious of the fact that there was a number of seriously injured in the
gymnasium and I was anxious to have these people transported to hospital.
I observed many of them had been infused by our para medics and Doctors.


I had already agreed with Chief Superintendent Addis that the gymnasium
would be the temporary mortuary and I would remove the injured as soon as I
could.    We then commenced transferring the injured from the gymnasium to
hospital.


By this time the Police vehicles which were blocking the egress and access
routes for my vehicles had been moved and the flow arrangements were
better.     Mr. Jones and Mr. Dale had ensured a clear passage for ambulances
which had been the initial problem at the earlier stages of the incident.
Mr. Jones came to me in the gymnasium area and told me he had ten
ambulances on Penistone Road outside the ground with a further twenty five
in Herries Road Bus Garage.     He also informed me that he was aware of
eleven bodies on the circular road of the Sheffield Wednesday corner of the
ground (Leppings Lane).     I questioned this "do you mean outside the
ground?".     He could not be specific as he had seen them with a Police Chief
Inspector who had in fact pointed them out to him earlier.     I now know that
Mr. Jones thought the circular road was part of the ground but in fact is a
service road outside the perimeter wall.


The priority at the time was the removal of the living injured not the
known dead.     Events began to move quickly and in a short space of time I
despatched three vehicles with an officer to bring these bodies to the
gymnasium.


I lost complete track of time, but I knew the next thing to do was to
liaise with the Police with regard the course of action to be taken with
the bodies.
Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A. Hopkins.




The original arrangements with Chief Superintendent Addis after
consultation with the coroners office was to transport the bodies to:-


        Medico Legal Centre, Sheffield.
        Royal Hallamshire Hospital.
        Northern General Hospital.


and if necessary Rotherham District General Hospital.


I previously agreed to do this as I could complete the transfer of 80
bodies in one exercise.


However, Chief Superintendent Addis informed me that the coroner (Dr.
Popper) had stopped the original plan and was employing an international
London based organisation to remove and prepare the bodies for
identification.


Much later Dr. Popper arrived and we discussed with Chief Superintendent
Addis how to dispose of the bodies.       It was agreed that the bodies would be
photographed by polaroid and developed at the top end of the gymnasium.       I
set up a screen to obstruct the view of relatives from the mass of bodies.


No body was to be removed prior to positive identification.


Ambulance cover was scaled down to six to facilitate the eventual removal
of the bodies.


I then left the scene at approximately 2000 hours on Saturday 15th April
1989.     I proceeded to headquarters and then went home.
