              - EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN -

Date:   20.4.89

Time:   1145-1330

Duty:   Off duty


On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was off duty and at home cleaning my car from
approximately 1445, as I was doing I heard on the radio that there were
some crowd problems at the semi-final match at Hillsborough and that the
match had been stopped. My girlfriend works at the Northern General
Hospital and was due to finish work at 1600 hours. I decided in view of
any traffic problems to go to pick her up. On my return I noticed several
ambulances including a Notts ambulance travelling towards Hillsborough and
also one ambulance travelling from Hillsborough to the Northern General.
They were all in an Emergency state. I realised that there was a serious
incident at Hillsborough and immediately reported to Longley Ambulance
Station and there was no-one in. I contacted Control through the external
emergency phone and offered my services. I was told that my help was
needed, and at that point              arrived at the station as did
Ambulanceman              teamed up with          on ambulance call sign
S542.

We contacted Control via radio and were advised to switch to ERC Channel.
This we did and were instructed to proceed to Hillsborough Football ground,
the Penistone Road entrance. This was about 1600.

On arrival at the ground, we were met by Station Officer P Eason who told
us to wait until an ambulance which was already in the ground being loaded
had left. This took just a few minutes, we were then instructed to reverse
into the ground. This we did, my colleague          driving.

We were approached by Superintendent T Dale and were informed "walking
wounded only". He told me that every seat was to be used for patients
only, no escorts or relatives. It took a matter of minutes to load the
vehicle to maximum capacity of 10 patients. We were then guided back onto
Penistone Road by Police. A Police motorcycle escort then guided us via
Leppings Lane to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

On arrival I told my colleague not to unload until we found out where the
patients had to go for treatment.

I spoke to a sister whose name I think is 1   |and she told me to take the
patients into what is normally Fracture Clinic.

Once green, all patients handed over, we reported back to control and were
advised to proceed to Netherthorpe Road and standby. As we approached
Netherthorpe Road we saw about nine ambulances already on standby. As we
approached we were told by Control to proceed to Herries Road Bus Garage
instead to standby.
SHEET 2 -           - EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN

We returned to Penistone Road and had to negotiate spectators leaving the
ground, some of whom began hitting the sides of the ambulances. One of the
wing mirrors was deliberately knocked from its normal position into the
side of the ambulance.

On arrival at Herries Road Bus Garage, we were told by Station Officer P
Eason to park. Already there were at least 15 front line emergency
vehicles in rows of three waiting to be used as necessary. Periodically a
row of three were despatched to the ground by Mr Eason.

Shortly after arrival I was instructed by L/A _______ to proceed on foot to
the gymnasium entrance of the ground, which is the same location I had
already attended. I was to inform Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer A Hopkins
that Control was not receiving any communications from Hillsborough itself.
On arrival I was met by Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer David Jones. I
relayed my information to          , who advised me that they had already
been able to sort something out. He then instructed me to take some
refreshment, which I believe the police had laid on, which I did.
Following this I teamed up with A m b u l a n c e m a n , who had been there
some time. We teamed up in a front line emergency vehicle from my own
station and stood by.

By this time there were eight or nine ambulances in the vicinity of the
gymnasium, parked in a semi-circle, awaiting casualties.

Shortly after this          called us all together and we categorised into
groups. Those on duty, those off duty, what shifts they were working. I
was on evening duty 1800-0200.

All afternoon crews were told to return to Station to resume normal duties
which they did. Most of the vehicles had to be re-equipped before leaving.

Myself, ________ and L/A        returned to Station, without moving any
further casualties. We arrived back at Station at 1840. I teamed up with
Ambulanceman             and resumed normal duties.

At about 0100, Sunday morning, we received an enquiry from Control to see
if anyone wanted to stay on duty after 0200 hours and assist at
Hillsborough to move the bodies from the temporary mortuary to the Medico
Legal Centre. Ambulanceman              and I volunteered and left for
Hillsborough at about 0150.

We reported to Station Officer P Eason, who showed us where to park our
vehicle and then briefed us on what was happening. The ambulances were
parked in a semi-circle. We took our stretchers into the gymnasium and
place one body on to each. A Police Officer was assigned to each body. We
had to wait until the bodies could be released, and in the meantime we had
a drink.
SHEET 3 -           - EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN

When the bodies were ready to be released, two were conveyed on the vehicle
stretchers and a third was placed in the centre aisle. All the bodies were
in body bags and each one was accompanied by a Police Officer. Each
journey comprised three bodies, three policeman and two ambulancemen. We
were instructed to be on the lookout for Press and make best possible
progress, but without using sirens or blue flashing lights.

At the medico legal centre, we reversed inside, and were met by four
technicians with trolleys ready. The three policemen got out of the
vehicle and the bodies were removed one at a time. Each body was removed
from the body bag and identified. The body bags were checked for
possessions. As the bodies were stripped, the Police Officers identified
the property with the individual body. Once this was complete the next
body was removed, the procedure complete and the third body then removed.

Once all three bodies had been unloaded, body bags were placed in the
ambulance and aNy Police Officers who wished were returned to Hillsborough.

I cannot recall the exact number of journeys we made, but it was four or
five. Some of the bodies on the later journeys were unidentified.

We returned to Hillsborough for the last time at 0550. Police were present
but no Ambulance Officers. We contacted Control and were instructed to
return to base, which we did. I finished duty at 0600. My colleague
dropped me off at home and returned to base.
Sfyc/ j'/a/d IVsdnesdoy F. C,                                                                                            v
   H i i /shorouql) Ground
                                                                                        FIRST'AIO

                                                                                                               POLICE


                    /                                                      CymnasiL'm
                                                                                            J3
                                                                N Q X T H &TANO



        /;#                                                                                                                      0,k{\\\ o \                          r ' cU

                                                                                                                                 ^v- ' V ' * X \ \ V     -fc \.
                                                                                                                                 I k 'fe--aA \ ~ t\\
                                          WiST
                                                                                                                                 I,li€
                                                                                                                                     ’ w »a''X \ W..-A
                                                                                                                                                  ^ v\     \          v '*
                                                                                                                                                                      \ • v£



  AWA Y    PANS E N T ^ q ^ '

     AND     EHCLCSOftes
                                                                                                    ~ r fi7              'ii'1




                                                                           3067W s n w
                                                                                                                                                       3 T * H W pM
                                                                                           y.        k\
                                                                                                                .♦S s1
                                      potrce          ornc/AL
                                     CONTROL                                                               J -
                                                                                                          a*

                      >tyxx
                                                            owccm's.
^ ' SSs> ^ '^VCV.VV.CXAM^S Vvv^g*              C xA         i N T f iA N C C

              TUMSr.'LCS            f»r—**wy
