                     states:
I am 50 years old, born 11.11.38.


I am employed by SYMAS as an ambulance man, I have worked
for them for seventeen years, and I am fully qualified to
ambulance training standards.


I am based at Batemoor Station, and work shifts.      My shift
on Saturday 15th April was 1400/2200.


At about    1415 we were contacted by radio and told to
collect a patient from Totley and go to Netheredge Hospital.
My driver was ambulance man               I.   He is a leading
ambulance man.


We took the ambulance out and I informed control over the
radio that we were mobile.      Reception was good.


We collected the male patient from Totley and went to
Netheredge,   and it would be about     1430 when we go to
Hospital and we conveyed the patient to a ward.


Upon return to the ambulance we reported to control we were
"green" that is, empty and available.          We were given
instructions over the radio to go to Hillsborough football
ground.    We were told there was a problem, but we were not
given details.
8.    It would be about 1500 and we were told to go to Penlstone
      Road entrance to the ground.    The radio message was quite
      clear.


9.    We headed towards Hillsborough and as we were going we were
      told to change to the E.R.C.Channel that is the Emergency
      Channel.   We changed over and reception was good, to start
      with, but then there seemed to be a break in transmission.


10. The messages were a bit broken.       We arrived at the ground
      and the police directed us to the Leppings Lane entrance.
      There were a lot of spectators around and progress was slow.


11. We entered the perimeter of Hillsborough off Leppings Lane
      and turned right;     I saw another       ambulance   and many
      spectators.    There were a number of persons sitting and
      lying on the floor near the wall.       It was not obvious that
      they were injured.


12. I saw other persons being carried from the actual ground and
      placed on the floor with these I had first seen.      Some were
      carried on boards and some bodily, with arms and legs.


13.   I did not see any medical attendants.


14.   I got out of the cab and ascertained which patients were



                               72
      most seriously hurt.       No one was in charge directing
      operations.   I would say about fifteen patients were there
      to start with, but they were being brought out all the time.


15.   Some police officers were there and between us we put four
      patients into the ambulance, three on stretches and one
      walking wounded.


16.   The patients were taken to Northern General, with two more
      ambulances and a motor cycle escort from the police.      We
      travelled without difficulty.


17.   En route I tended to the patients .     I had to give oxygen
      to three of them.     They were all breathing, but the three
      on stretchers were unconscious.


18.   We arrived at the hospital and the patients were taken off
      into casualty.      We were helped by porters.   As soon as
      the patients had been handed over to the hospital staff, we
      were "green" and tried to contact control.


19.   The radio was very busy and we could not get through so we
      used our own judgment and went back to the ground, this time
      to the Penistone Road entrance.


20.   We again entered the ground on the perimeter and saw a
      patient lying on the floor, who was conscious.   We put him
      in the ambulance and then I went on foot to the gymnasium
      with a stretcher and another ambulance man.      The driver
      stayed with the ambulance and the patient.
21. We put a patient with a fractured thigh bone,          onto the
      stretcher and carried him out and back to my ambulance.
      Both patients were taken to the Northern General.           We
      travelled without difficulty with a police escort.     We went
      via Herries Road North on both trips.


22. I tended to the two patients, but the first went unconscious
      again.    He was on oxygen and still breathing.


23. At the hospital they were taken in by the porters.            A
      doctor attended the man with the fracture.


24. We still could not contact control so went back to the
      ground, where it seemed all the patients had been moved
      because we were told to wait on the road by an ambulance
      officer, and soon after we were directed to       Herries Road
      bus depot on standby.


25.   We did not carry any more patients.     We did not experience
      any difficulty from any quarter.


Dated the      ~7   ^     day of   ^                      1989
