              born on 21st November,     1959 am 29 years old.

I am a Control Assistant with SYMAS stationed at Rotherham.

I live at                                           .   I live

with my wife and son aged 3 years.


I have been employed with SYMAS on shifts for about two

years; prior to that I served 10 years in the H.M.Navy.



On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was at my home; it was my day
off, I think it would be about 1520 and 1525, when I look a

telephone call from Rotherham Control.     I was told there had

been a major incident and was requested to go in to work.


I went at once arriving at about 1550.        I took a taxi to

get there.   Upon arrival I noticed that there were a lot of

off duty personnel present.      I also noted that it was

obvious that a serious incident      had    happened,   by the
expression on some faces.    Everything was busy and seemed

to be running efficiently.


I took telephone extension 205 and began to take calls.     To

begin with it was mainly press, and I redirected as many as

I could to extension 236 which was the Public Relations

Officer's extension.


I can recall soon after I took the telephone that I had a

call from Nottingham Ambulance Service, offering transport
      if required, either from the scene to hospital or if

      required later, from the hospitals to home addresses.        I

      relayed this message to Mr.Albert Smith.         The call was

      acknowledged.



7.    I was told to put Barnsley and District casualty on notice

      that they might have 40 casualties or perhaps 50 plus.       I

      was told to do this by                   I got the impression

      that they were expecting this and were in fact ready.


8.    About an hour later, on               instruction, I contacted

      Rotherham District Casualty to tell them that no further

      patients would be sent to them.      It was a fact that none
      were sent to Rotherham at all.


9.    I think it would be between 1800 and 1830 that things began

      to ease off and we began to wind down.     I finally left the

      unit at about 9.10pm.


10.   All the important calls were recorded on a log, but the

      number of less important calls, which made the bulk of those

      I took, were not.



11.   I thought the way in which the incident was handled in

      control was excellent.    I was most impressed by the way

everyone got involved and did the job.
Dated the      day of   N^l / v V rv   1989


IVAN COLLINS




                        f07
