                states:-



1.   I am employed as an unqualified ambulance man for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is



3.   I joined SYMAS in 1985 as a cadet and became an ambulance
     man in 1987.       On Saturday 15th April I was on duty from 0900

     to 1630     I had been on duty from 0800 to 1630 for each of

     the previous two days.


4.   I am based at Hoyland Ambulance Station and on 15th April I

     was   on   duty    with                               with   a    front   line
     ambulance whose call sign was B1210.



5.   Some time around 1510 we received a call from control to

     stand by at Herries Road in Sheffield.                At the time we were
     returning to Hoyland from Doncaster, having taken a patient

     to Doncaster General.           We were       in the Wombwell        area    of

     Barnsley    when    we    received      the   call.                         was
     driving.



6.   Before we got to Herries Road we were instructed to go to

     the   Leppings     Lane   end   of     Hillsborough.         We   arrived    at

     Penistone Road from Herries Road South,                turning left onto

     Penistone Road then doing a u-turn at the traffic lights,
     going past the ground and up to the roundabout from where we


                                          \0 %
turned onto Leppings Lane.         When we drove past the ground

there were no ambulances outside It.


When we got to the Leppings Lane entrance there was nothing

there.      I do not recall seeing any public or police.          We
went down Leppings Lane to Middlewood Road and then back up
Penistone Road where we saw Station Officer Eason who was

outside the ground.       He told us to reverse into the yard

where there were already two ambulances.


Mr Hopkins was in the yard and he told us to go to the back
of the north stand with a stretcher and a medical bag which

we did.      There were about 50 casualties in this area.          I
went towards the casualties but as I did so I was approached
by a St. John's Ambulance girl of about 14 who asked __

            and I to help her.      There was a police bus parked

outside the gym and she took us to a lad of about 14 years

who was obviously dead.        The girl then disappeared.



We went over to the casualties and quickly assessed them.

We picked out the one who seemed to be the worst.           He was a
19   year    old   who   had    crush   injuries   and   breathing

difficulties.      He was conscious.     We put him on a stretcher

and took him to the ambulance.          An ambulance officer asked

us to take some walking wounded as well and we probably took

4 walking wounded with us and another two members of the
public who were attending those wounded.        I travelled in the
      back of the ambulance with all the casualties, giving oxygen

      to the man on the stretcher.


10.   We went to Northern General Hospital.       We did not contact

      Control because as we left, Mr Hopkins told us to unload our

      casualties and then come straight back to the ground.



11.   I believe that we had a motorbike escort to Northern General

      where we went to the casualty department.      We unloaded the
      stretcher case onto a waiting trolley and I told the nurse
      what the injuries seemed to be.       The walking wounded were

      accompanied into the hospital by hospital staff.      We loaded

      our trolley back up and went straight back to the ground,

      where we arrived at the Penistone Road end.     When we arrived
      at the ground there was a queue of ambulances in Penistone.

      There were probably about 4 or 5 ahead of us.     We were told,
      by another ambulance man that there had been instructions

      for us to stay with our vehicles and so we did so.        Whilst
      we waited,                from our Station came along and took

      our body bag away.      We waited 6 or 7 minutes until it was

      our turn to pull into the yard.     We reversed in.   By now the

      patients under the north stand had been taken away.         Some

      fans brought a patient over on an advertising board.     He was
      a man of     about   19 with breathing difficulties   and crush

      injuries.    We put him into the back of the ambulance.       He

      was moving in and out of consciousness.      I was not able to

      intubate him because he was struggling too much but I tried


                                     ho
      to give him oxygen.



12 . We went to the Northern General.      I accompanied the patient

      in the back trying     to give him oxygen.    As we   arrived his

      breathing seemed to    stop and we rushed him straight into the

      hospital foyer where a doctor told us to take         him to the
      resuscitation room.    We took him in there on our    trolley and

      the hospital staff tried to resuscitate him.       He started to

      broaoh- and we took him out and placed him on a hospital

      trolley, under the instruction of one of the hospital staff,

      then loaded up the ambulance and went straight back to the

      ground.


13.   We arrived back at the Penistone Road end of the ground at,
      I think,      about 1630.   Allthe casualties had gone   by now.

      We were      told to go round to the back of the gym by an

      officer.     There were about 8 ambulances there and we were

      told to wait.     After a while a leading ambulance man came

      and asked how much petrol      we had.   We were very     low on

      petrol.      When Mr Jones hadgot all the crews around he told

      us what had happened at the ground.          He sent all of the
      people who were supposed to be on duty back to cover their

      own areas.                  and I were asked if we would mind

      working over and we said we would be happy to do so.



14.   We went up to Longley Ambulance Station for petrol and then
      reported back to the area behind the gym.       At about 1830 we
      were told to go to Northern General to collect some bodies

      and bring them back to the gym.       We arrived back at the

      ground with the three bodies at about 1930.



15.   At about 2200 we started ferrying bodies to the Medico Legal

      Centre in batches of three.    I think that we made about 7

      trips in all.


16.   At about 0220 on Sunday 16th April we were told to go back

      to our station by Roger Morley.    We went back to Hoyland and

      signed off at 0300 after cleaning the vehicle and putting

      some more petrol in it.


Dated this     ^      day of     1989.
