                             states:-


          1.   I am employed as an unqualified ambulance man for SYMAS.



          2.   My date of birth is 25th July 1962.


          3.   I joined SYMAS on 13th November 1986 and had previously been

               a driver in the RAF for six years.



          4.   I was on duty on Saturday 15th April         from 0900 to 1600

               hours.      I had been on duty from 0800 to 1600 hours on
               Thursday and Friday.        On 15th April I was on duty with

               ambulance man            in vehicle Delta 906.     We are based at
               Bentley Ambulance Station.



          5.   We dropped a patient at Weston Park a little after 1500 and

               called green at Weston Park.       We had already heard control
               sending     vehicles to Hillsborough and at about 1510 we

               received a call telling us to go to the Northern General

               Hospital.     I was driving at the time.         A minute later we
               were called again and told to go to Hillsborough Football

               Ground gym entrance.       We said that we were an unqualified

               crew and we were told to keep going.



          6.   We approached the ground from Herries Road at about 1528.

               The police signalled us to cross the central reservation.
               There was an ambulance officer outside the ground who told




                                            76
•S v~*?
us to reverse into the yard.       We reversed in alongside
another ambulance which had just reversed in and

opened the doors.    Some lads came over with a casualty on

an advertising board     and we put him    in.   He was not

breathing and there was no pulse.      We started to give him

CPR having pulled the ambulance back out onto Penistone Road
because our ambulance was in the way of others wanting to
come in.    Before leaving the ground we tried to radio

control but the radio was very poor.    Channel 4 was alright
but we were not able to get through on channel 2 or ERC.   We

gave him CPR for a few minutes and then went to Northern

General.   I drove whilst            stayed in the back.   We

drove up Penistone Road to a roundabout from where we had a
police escort to Northern General Hospital.       The police
escort took us straight to the resuscitation room where we

arrived at about 1548.    A doctor came out and examined the
patient.



A doctor took over the CPR from ambulance man         while I
carried on with a bag and mask.     We worked on the patient

for a while and the resuscitation staff came out after only
a minute or so and the patient was put onto their stretcher

and wheeled into the resuscitation room.     We went back to

the ambulance.   We tried to radio control but I do not think
that we could get an answer.



We went straight back to Hillsborough and pulled up on the
     road outside where other ambulances were also parked.       We

     waited a short time and then reversed into the yard and
     loaded up with two more casualties.   The first was a man of

     about 20 with a suspected fractured pelvis and collarbone.

     The second patient was about the same age and seemed to be
     in shock.   We went back to Northern General, again having

     attempted to radio unsuccessfully.    We took the same route

     as previously with police escort and went in through the

     Barnsley Road entrance to Northern General.         Staff were

     ready to take the patients away from us when we arrived.


9.   When we got back to the ground again we parked up outside

     the Penistone Road entrance in a queue of ambulances.      We

     were told to take our blankets to the gym and              did

     that whilst I stayed with the ambulance.     He came back and

     then Mr Higgins boarded our vehicle and directed us round
     through the streets to Leppings Lane.    We pulled into the
     service road at Leppings Lane.   We did not drive in very far

     to a position where there were about        15 or   20 bodies

     together covered with blankets and with temporary fencing

     round.   The police gave us access to the bodies and we

     loaded up three then drove straight through the service road

     to Penistone Road to the gymnasium.   We drove in through an

     entrance between some terraced houses in Penistone Road and

     reversed up to the gym doors.    We took the three bodies in
     and laid them down with their belongings.    There were a lot
     of bodies in the gym.




                              72
10.   We were      Instructed by Mr Jones to park up behind the
      gymnasium and we stayed there for an hour or so.        We were

      given some tea and were told to standby our vehicles and
      keep warm.    It was probably about 1730 by then.



11.   One of the ambulance officers de-brlefed us asking where we

      were from and who was on duty and what shifts we were on;

      this was Mr Jones.    He wanted to know who would volunteer to
      stay on to help.     We all volunteered.    My colleague and I
      then went to Longley Station to refuel and drove back to the

      area of the ground behind the gymnasium from where we were

      told to go to the Northern General to bring back bodies for

      identification.    My colleague drove on the trip to Longley
      and I drove on the trip to Northern General.           We were

      delayed at Northern General.      We had loaded up with three
      bodies but were kept there because there was a man who was

      looking for his son's body.     The staff would not let him see

      the bodies because of the state that they were in but he

      gave a description of his son's clothing and we checked the

      bodies which we had and the other bodies were checked and it

      was established that none of those bodies were that of his

      son.   We were probably delayed about an hour whilst this

      took place.    We then went back to the ground to the gym.   We

      again reversed in between the terraced houses and took the

      three bodies into the gymnasium and laid them down.     It was

      getting dark by now and it was probably about 2000.




                                 7^
12.   We were told to go to the car park at the rear of the gym by

      an ambulance officer and we did this and parked up for a
      while.    We were given another drink of tea.



13.   A little before 2100 we were all told to get into one

      vehicle (a Maltby vehicle) by an ambulance officer             who said

      that     he    wanted   three   crews      to stay behind.      We all
      volunteered but                  and I were told that we were not
      needed and we were instructed to return to Bentley.             We left
      Hillsborough just after 2100 and got to Bentley at 2200.              We

      were     still    having    some problems      with our      radio and,

      therefore, asked Mr Eason to let control know that we were
      returning to base. When we got back to Bentley

      called control on the land line.              We then had some tea,

      cleaned up the vehicle and went off duty.


14.   We did not have any difficulties using channel 4 on the

      radio but I knew that this frequency would not go straight

      in to    the     incident   room     and   it was   better    that   our

      instructions came from the person at control who was in

      charge in the incident room.

Dated this               day of   v-Af>y 1989.




                                      SO
