                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                    REPORT


NAME:       Extended Trained Ambulanceman -

VEHICLE:    S401

SHIFT:

DATE AND TIME OF INTERVIEW:      Written Statement - 19/04/89



On Saturday 15th April 1989 along with my colleague Qualified Ambulanceman
           , I transported a maternity case to the Northern General, Labour
and Delivery Suite.       After handing the patient over to the relevant staff
we returned to our vehicle code sign Sierra 401.


The radio was busy and we noticed that call sign Alpha 4 was passing
messages.    From the conversations that could be heard we understood that an
incident had occurred at Hillsborough Football Ground and we heard mention
of a barrier or barriers collapsing and the fact that a Police task force
had been sent to the scene.       Armed with this information and the fact that
we still could not get air space to transmit, we decided to go across to
the Accident and Emergency Department and inform them of our understanding
of the situation.


This was done and I left the vehicle, leaving Qualified Ambulanceman
on radio watch.      I met Mr Batty, the Charge Nurse on duty and informed him
of what information I could, he replied that he had just been informed by
the Police that an incident had occurred at Hillsborough and in view of
both sets of information, he was going to implement the Major Disaster
Plan.




                                                                     /continued
2


19 April 1989


Extended Trained Ambulanceman -




I returned to my vehicle and heard Control ask for all Sierra vehicles to
come green as soon as possible.        At this stage I was able to transmit my
message that I was      ’Green’ at Northern General Casualty and in view of
radio messages     I had heard, I had informed Casualty that there was an
incident at Hillsborough and that they were standing by for casualties.
Control replied "Roger, stand-by".


I was then despatched to Burncross Road for an urgent leg injury not seen
by a doctor.    This patient was treated and transported back to the Northern
General Hospital and I called green as soon as possible.


I was then told by Control to "Stand-by", this I did and after a period of
approximately ten minutes, I called Control to remind them of my position
and state, and I was then told to return to base.


My   information   to   the Accident   and   Emergency Department   regarding the
incident was given about 1510 - 1515 hours.
