                        states:-


1    I was born on 26th March 1942.



2.   I joined the Sheffield Ambulance Service at Corporation

     Street Sheffield in 1972.      I completed basic training and

     obtained   the Miller certificate whilst at Corporation

     Street.


3.   I moved to Parkway Ambulance Station in 1975 and upon

     promotion to Leading Ambulance man moved to Rotherham
     Ambulance Station in 1982 and upon promotion to Control

     Officer I moved to the control room at Rotherham.



4.   I am a Control     Officer     and   I am responsible for co­

     ordinating the movement of vehicles and monitoring emergency
     cover.



5.   Saturday 15th April was my day off.       I was decorating in a

     neighbour's     house   and   listening   to   the    radio.    At

     approximately 1515 or 1520 I heard on the radio a report of

     a spillage onto the pitch at Hillsborough.           I listened to
     the radio coverage and had rather an uneasy feeling about

     the incident.   I heard the telephone ringing in my bungalow

     and on the second occasion the telephone rang I answered it.
     Control were requesting my attendance at the control unit as

     a major incident had developed.
I persuaded a neighbour to drive me to the headquarters and
I arrived at approximately 1545 or 1530.



I reported to Mr Smith the Chief Control Officer and asked

for his instructions.   He ordered me to man extension number

206 in the control room.      I manned extension 206 and the

vast majority of calls were from the press.        These calls

were    taking a considerable amount of time.       The press
officer was extremely busy trying to get through all the

calls.       I also dealt with passing     domestic messages
regarding urgent admissions to hospital and transfers.



I did this for approximately 30 minutes when Superintendent

Clarke asked me to move to the major incident room.         The
press were taking up so much time I assisted
Control Officer Sharman was taking the controls on ERC.

         and I manned the telephone lines.   These lines were

mainly occupied by press reporters.   The control room needed

those lines and many others to run the incident.



The press men were persistent in their request for details

of the deaths, the number of children who had died, how many

had died, the casualties and these details were given to the

press as information came in about the rising death toll.    I

spent    all my time on   Saturday dealing with telephone
enquiries.
10.   I had no contact at all with the vehicles Involved In the
      Incident.


11 . Control Officer                    was running the incident on the
      ERC frequency.


12. Control Officer                       was running the domestic and
      emergency channel.


13.   Sid Bidmead was running control of the day vehicles.


14.   I spent the day answering calls from the press who wanted
      constant up dates on the information they had been given.

      The information was updated on a white board in the office

      and the press would be given details as they were available.


15.   I am   not   aware   of   any particular         incident   plan   for

      Hillsborough.    I am aware of the major incident plan which

      is always    being updated        and   I have    been involved on

      exercises for a major incident.


16.   I had no problems with my journey to the control rooms.


Dated this     W 7**   day of   V\{\H          /TSrt
