 I                 will say:
I was born on 6.11.65.



I am an extended trained ambulance man.         I joined SYMAS in

1982 and did two years cadette training.        In 1985 I became a

quali f i e d    ambulance man.    In   1987   I did my extended
training.       I was taught methods of intubation, cannulation,

which is the fitting of drips and needles and defibulation,

which is cardiac monitoring.      I have been based at Rotherham

for two years and prior to that I was at Parkway for two and
a half years.       For the week leading up to the Hillsborough

incident        I was on a floater which basically involved

covering shifts for people on leave, training or sickness.

I knew what shifts I was going to be doing for the whole
week.    On Thursday and Friday and I worked 1800 hours to
0200 hours and both shifts ran smoothly.



On Saturday I should have been on nights which is 2200

hours   to 0600 hours but I swapped shifts on the Friday with

                  so that I was working evenings which is 1800
to 0200 hours.



I was   at home and washing the car at about 1445     hours.   The

radio   was on.      A football report came on at about 1505
hours and the commentator said that there was crowd trouble;

there was no mention of injuries.        My girlfriend works at

the Northern General Hospital and I was going to collect her
     that evening so I decided to set off earlier to try and

     avoid any fans who would be leaving the ground if the game

     was abandoned.     The radio commentator actually said that the

     game had been stopped and that it looked like it was going
     to be abandoned.     I set off to the Northern General Hospital

     at around 1510 hours and got there at about 1530 hours.       I
     was not listening to the radio on the way.


5.   My girlfriend,                      came out to meet me.    She
     said that there had been trouble at Hillsborough and that

     patients at the hospital had been watching it on television.
     We got into the car to set off back home.      As we were going

     up Herries Road, near the Devonshire Public House I saw two

     South Yorkshire Ambulances both on emergency mode.      One was

     going    towards   the Northern General     and the other was

     travelling in the opposite        direction.      I also saw a

     N ottinghamshire vehicle going towards the ground.            I
     realised that this was more than crowd trouble as you do not

     expect to see a Nottingham vehicle in our area unless there

     is a major incident.    I decided to go to the nearest station

     which is Longley about half a mile away.     I arrived at about

     1545.    I got out and my girlfriend took my car home.        I

     contacted control centre on the external emergency telephone
     which is outside the station.      A woman Control Assistant

     answered.    I asked whether they needed any help and she said

     yes.    I told her that I was extended trained.   It was not my

     station and so I did not have a key to get in.     An ambulance
woman arrived while I was on the telephone and let me in.

She was called_____________,      I went to contact control by
going on to a vehicle and using a radio set.           We were on

channel three but the controller told us to switch to ERC.

             arrived as soon as I got into the station.         We
teamed up and got on to an out patient ambulance.         This is

not a front line vehicle.      They do not have any equipment
except for blankets and vomit boxes.     I would say that about

10 front line vehicles had left the station before us and
that there were no front line vehicles left at the station.




We were told by control         to go   to the    Penistone Road
entrance.    By now it was about 1555.           was driving.    We

went down Herries Road and crossed Penistone Road.              The
police had blocked off the road and were only allowing

emergency vehicles through.     We went into the ground through

the second gym entrance.      We met Station Officer Eason and

he told us that we could only be of use to the walking

wounded because our vehicle was not equipped for any more

than that.      Eason knew that I was specially trained but

without my equipment I could not do anything more than an

ordinary ambulance man.     We started to collect the walking

wounded which only took a couple of minutes.             We were

collecting them from the side of the gym.        We took about 10

injured people.    Superintendent Dale was directing things in

the gym yard.     He told us only to take the injured and not
any relatives or escorts.     When the ambulance was full we
set off by the same route that we had come in on.        There

were fans everywhere in the yard.       I did not see any dead

bodies at this time but the view was limited by all the

fans.   We got a police escort onto the road and left going

north bound on Penistone Road and onto Leppings Lane.        We
were heading for the Royal Hallamshire hospital.      A police

motor bike escorted us for the whole journey.          We were
passed by a front line ambulance on the way.        It took us
about 15 minutes to get to the hospital.



At the hospital I knew from the major accident plan that

fractures are regarded as minor injuries but I did not want

to let all the patients out of the ambulance before I had
spoken to a sister in charge of casualty.      I went to speak

to a sister and she told me to take them through to the far

end of casualty to be seated.    I went back to the ambulance
and we escorted the patients through.



We were then clear and so we rang through to control.       We

were instructed to go to Netherthorpe roundabout and stand
by on the dual carriageway.      Control knew that we were a

second line vehicle by our call of Sierra 4^2.       it took us
                                            4-52 fw .
about five minutes to get to the roundabout.



As we arrived another message came through telling all

vehicles there to go to Herries Road bus depot.     There were
already about 6 or 7 vehicles at Netherthorpe roundabout
which all looked to be front line vehicles.



We tried to get to the bus depot by going along Penistone

Road and turning up Herries Road south.    We were hindered by

Forest fans who were on the road at least two miles away
from the ground.    They were walking about 20 abreast right

up the middle of the road.     The police were also trying to

get to the ground and were equally being hindered.    We were
doing about five miles per hour as we went through the
crowd.



It took us about 20 to 25 minutes to get to the bus depot.

Unfortunately we do not have an emergency mode on this type

of ambulance.    There were messages coming over the radio but
none for us.



At the depot we were met by Station Officer Eason and he

organised where we were parked.   I had completely lost track

of time by this stage.    There were five rows of front line

vehicles three deep and we were put to one side.     The front
liners were going in and out while we were there.



I was then told by Leading Ambulance Man                to go

to the ground by Penistone Road and liaise with Assistant

Chief Hopkins.   I was to tell him that control had spoken to

Eason and control said they were not receiving any radio
                                                                       f




      communication from the ground.      I was approached by David

      Jones Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer when I
      arrived at the ground.     He asked me where I had come from.

      I passed the message to him and he said that they had now
      sorted that problem out.    I think that this was around 1700.

      I was then put with              who was on his own and had a
      front line vehicle.



14.   Mr.David Jones then called all ambulance personnel together
      and categorised us according to shifts and who was on duty

      and who was not.      Although I officially had not started my
      shift I was due to start at 1800 hours.          He therefore

      decided to return all the afternoon crews to normal duties.

      We were instructed to return to base and got back at about
      1840 hours.



15.   I then completed my shift of 1800 hours to 0200 hours.      At

      about 0100 hours Control Superintendent                 asked

      for those who wanted to help with the transportation of

      bodies from the temporary mortuary at the gym to the Medico

      Legal Centre on Watery Street Sheffield.      We went down to

      the Penistone Road entrance and were escorted by the police

      to the gym.   We met Station Officer Eason who asked us to
      turn our vehicle round so that it was pointing towards

      Penistone Road.    We then removed our cots and loaded three

      bodies.   We made four or five trips.    We tried to identify

      the bodies as we went along by photographs and numbers.     We
      finished at about 0600 on 16th April.



16.   I am aware of the major incident plan which is at the

      station for all to read.    I was not aware of any specific
      Hillsborough plan.     I was not aware that the gym was the

      casualty clearing centre before I actually got there.


Dated the     ^     day of                         1989
