                  aged 26 will say:-

1.   I was born on 13th April 1963.


2.   I am a qualified Ambulance man. I obtained the Miller
Certificate following attendance at the compulsory residential
course, completed the probationary year and I was made up as
qualified in October 1987


3.   I had no previous medical experience prior to joining the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

4.   I joined the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
in February 1985.   I         at Maltby and Wath Station on days
until October 198#, wnen i moved to Rotherham where I have worked
since providing emergency Ambulance cover.


5. On Friday 14th and Saturday 15th April 1989 I was working the
evening shift from 1800 hours to 0200 hours the following
morning.


6. The first knowledge I had of the Hillsborough incident was a
telephone call at approximately 1545.     My sister-in-law had
telephoned and whilst she was speaking to me there was a report
about the Hillsborough incident on her television. She told me
that there had been a report of many injuries and some deaths at
the football ground.   I immediately rang the control room at
Rotherham and although I cannot remember who I spoke to I was
told assistance was needed. I was instructed to report to my own
station as soon as possible.   Rotherham station is just a short
distance away from the control room on Moorgate Road.  I believe
this conversation took place at about 1600 and I quickly tidied
away the tools I had been using, washed, made arrangements for
care of my young son and drove to the station.      I arrived at
approximately 1640 and reported to control by telephone.   I was
told by control to wait at my station.
7.   At 1700           arrived at the station.  He reported his
arrival to control and we provided cover for the Rotherham area
until 1800 when Bill left and               1joined me as my crew
member.   My shift began at 1800 and was uneventful. I watched
television and I saw on the screen the reported events of the
tragedy at Hillsborough football ground.


8.   At 0200 on Sunday the 16th my shift ended and   ^ and I were
asked if we would be prepared to report to Hillsborough football
ground and help move the bodies.  I cannot recall who at control
made this request.


9.   At 2.20 a.m. we drove our vehicle to Hillsborough.
drove and we approached the ground from Herries Road turning
right at Penistone Road and left into Hillsborough gaining access
through an entrance between terraced houses. We pulled up behind
the North Stand in the area of the Gym and were met by Station
Officer Paul Eason. I asked Paul Eason what he wanted      and I
to d o . He told both of us that we should remove our cots and
place them at the door to the Gym.    This was the door furthest
away from the North Stand and was used as the exit door from the
temporary mortuary.   We removed the cots from the vehicle and
took them to the Gym door. Station Officer Paul Eason told us to
stand by as required.


10.   There were other crews in the ground and they were there to
do the same job as       and I.   I noticed that the Police were
controlling the access and exit from the ground. We returned to
our vehicle and Station Officer Eason walked up to the vehicle
and told both of us to report to the Gym.     The system was that
two bodies were loaded into cots, the third body was loaded onto
the vehicle, in between the two cots on the floor of the vehicle.
Each body was accompanied by a Police Officer.
11.   Station Officer Eason and Station Officer

                                     & 1+
were organising and coordinating the evacuation of bodies from
the temporary mortuary. The Police responsible for thf* hndlp.s^
                                                             f
transported them from the makeshift mortuary I n t o t h e cots and
loaded them onto the vehicle.     The Police, as far as I were
aware, were responsible for coordinating the evacuation of the
bodies with Station Officer Paul Eason who checked each body into
the Ambulance and recorded the Police Constables number before
the vehicle left the ground for the Medico Legal Centre.   The
bodies were driven to the Medico Legal Centre and we made five
trips carrying 15 bodies in approximately three and a half hours.



12.   We were stood down at 0610 on 16th April.      The order to
stand down came from control, using channel 2.     Our Ambulance
             ►s o rr/c r® I __
call sign was Roger 503 and the Ambulance number 442. We used
channel 2 throughout the night to communicate with control and we
experienced no problems.


Dated this             day of April 1989.

Signed.........................   P.




                                            38?
