         - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION

Date:   19.4.89

Time:   1355-1435

Duty:   0600-1400

Call Sign:   S105 (Out-Patient Ambulance)


I left Middlewood Station at 1415 to go shopping at Presto on Infirmary
Road. I noticed several ambulances with blue lights on proceeding in the
direction of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

I said to my wife "there in trouble", the car radio had a news report on
about the incident. It was approximately 1600. I then made my way over to
Middlewood Station, the traffic was very heavy. It took me approximately
15 minutes.

I was met at Middlewood by         |., another paramedic, she had made ready
a vehicle, so we told Control and took S105 out.                 and
     were also on Station. Control told           and [IZID to stand by, we
were then given a 999 call which was a Liverpool supporter epileptic
patient to a house on Shenstone Road which is opposite to the entrance on
Leppings Lane.

We tried to go down Leppings Lane but were unable to due to the volume of
people and cars. Penistone Road was tried, but the same, total congestion.
Finally we tried the other route into Leppings Lane with some success.

On arrival the patient was not fitting and walked into the ambulance. He
was taken to the Northern General Hospital. The parking was organised,
porters met us and assisted with the transfer of patients.

The next case was a supporter on a coach (Halifax Road), he was taken to
the Northern General Hospital. This patient had been in the crush and had
made his way over to his coach.

We were then given a transfer of an old lady from the Northern General
Hospital to a nursing home in Chapeltown.

We were using Channel 4 throughout the incident, we didn't experience any
radio interference.

In between cases Superintendent             made contact to update us on the
situation.

The next case was an emergency transfer fron the Northern General Hospital
to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital transit. This case kept us tied up for
some time due to the nature of his injuries.

We were stood down and finished at 2015.
