         - AMBULANCEMAN - HOYLAND AMBULANCE STATION

At approximately 1505 hours we were returning to Hoyland Station in Bravo
1210 through Wombwell. At approximately 1510 hours Control told
ambulanceman          and I to proceed and stand by at five arches on
Herries Road, Sheffield. At approximately 1512 Control told us to proceed
red to the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Football ground and then
whilst we were proceeding to that area told us to make our way to the gym
entrance.

At approximately 1517 hours we arrived at the gym entrance to the football
ground where Ambulance Officer Eason was directing the ambulance from the
road. He told us to reverse the ambulance down towards the stand, we had
no idea at this time of the actual events taking place, although it was
clear to us that there were many casualties. As we reversed into the
ground Assistant Chief Hopkins told us to make our way to the back of the
stand where there were many casualties.

On surveying the scene we proceeded to those who were in our eyes most in
need of attendion and took a casualty to the ambulance at the same time
approximately five walking injured people boarded the ambulance and we were
told to proceed with them to the Northern General Hospital, which we duly
did. After having done this we returned immediately to site of the
disaster.

On arrival there was a queue of ambulance waiting to get into the ground.
We eventually got into the ground where there was a clear movement of
casualties. This time we transported one casualty with severe difficulty
in breathing and fitting. We took him to the Northern General Hospital and
returned immediately to Hillsborough. At this point, all the casualties
had been cleared and about one hour has elapsed since we had been first
called to the emergency. Here we waited for further instructions.

We were soon told to park the ambulances at the back of the gym and soon
after Assistant Chief Jones called us together to tell us exactly what had
taken place inside the ground. He then asked those men on Day shift if
they wanted to contine their duties.

At about 1830 hours four vehicles (including ours) were called upon to
proceed to the Northern General Hospital to transport twelve bodies back
down to the football ground gym for formal identification. After having
done this we returned to the rear of the gym where we were waiting for the
relatives to arrive and formally identify the bodies of the victims and so
that we could take refreshment.

The Officer in charge asked for three volunteer crews to remain and convey
identified bodies to the medico legal center. This transportation of
bodies started at approximately 2200 hours and at about 0200 hours we were
relieved by other ambulance crews after having made about seven journeys
between the ground and the medico legal centre.

These are the facts to the best of my remembrance, where I am unclear about
times I have left them out.
