RHfi                     TEL No.0742 306956               05,05,89    13:02     P.02




  "THE INDEPENDENT" - 12 APRIL .133S


  SCALE OF CASUALTIES SHOWS NEED FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND PLANNING


  THE disaster throws into sharp relief the appalling consequences of an absence
  of "first line" medical equipment, of a stand-by medical team and irrmediate
  disaster strategy for any event bringing together thousands of people, Celia
  Hall writes.

  Doctors at the match who specialise in emergency medicine were shocked by the
  absence of even basic resuscitation equipment.

  Crisis procedures based on combat experience group casualties into the dead
  (those for whom no intervention will help), the critically ill (those most in
  need of first aid), and the less seriously injured.

  John Ashton, senior lecturer in cofrmunity medicine at Liverpool University,
  who was at the match, said "There was nobody in charg«; no plan, no
  organisation at all. I had to assume control of the casualty situation
  myself. I had to make sure the people who were still alive and most seriously
  injured were got off to hospital first. People were being put in ambulances
  in any order when I got there".

   "The whole thing from beginning to end had incompetence running right through
   the organisational arrangements," Dr Ashton added.

   "I think it is time we started to ask questions about the accountability of
   some of the senior officers in the FA and the minister himself".

   “They treat our people here like animals and it results in their deaths.     I am
   outraged."

   Police were doing what they could, he said, but "there was a total lack of
   leadership and a total lack of any overall plan at the Leppings Lane end."

   Glynn Phillips, a GP and a Liverpool supporter, from East Kilbride,
   Strathclyde, who described the scene as 'sheer mayhem", was one of the first
   to identify the lack of life saving equipment.

   He said he was appalled to discover there were no defibrillators at the
   ground. Defibrillators are machines used to pass 200 volts of electricity per
   second across the chest wall, to chock a heart which has gone out of rhythm
   and is "wobbling" back to normal.

   He spent 10 minutes resuscitating one man. "We were just about to give up
   when we got his heart beating, but I don’t know what the state of his cerebral
   function is going to be like".

   "We asked for a defibrillator and I was informed that there was not a
   defibrillator irf the whole ground,, which is appalling for a major event like
   this."

   He added: "We were given an oxygen tank to help with our resuscitation and it
   was empty.

   "I think that is an absolute disgrace."
                              TEL No.0742 306956               Ob,05,89    15=05    K.uo
RENT RHfl




       Mr John Thurston, secretary of the Casualty
       best first aid for many would have oeen the kiss of life alternating w.u.
       heart massage".
       "Anyone can learn t o d o this and we believe that every child in school should
       be taught. It should be in the core curriculum .

       "It is inconceivable that at events of this size
       With nuSrs like this you can expect someone to have a heart attack,
       least."
            l.                   aid action, in the hands of trained personnel, is to
       T
       pu?         i n S ?hl windpipe through the necR through which oxygen can be
        passed directly into the lungs.


                             e rssussas srssrasa-
        he said.
        Mr ^ r s t o n said his association believed that any major event shoul'd^e
        required to have a medical officer and an operational P'»n u> ~ p e w.th -h-
        immediate aftermath of a disaster.




 #
KHH                            TEL No . 0 7 4 2 3 0 6 9 b 6             05,05,89   13:04     P .04




                           YORKSHIRE POST               ]? APRIL 1983

      Doctor attacks 'lack of a plan'
      The Football Association reacted sharply yesterday to scathing claims by a
      senior doctor at the ground of "organisational Incompetence".
      Dr. John   Ashton, Professor of Medicine at Liverpool University,_said
      ordinary   policemen on the scene did what they could when the disaster
      happened   but added “There was a total lac1' ^ — — ill plan at the
      Lappings   Lane end".
      iiv Ashton, who was a spectator at the match, said "The whole thing from
      beginning to end had incompetence running right through the organisational
      arrangements.
       ■f-t-bink it ' is' time we started to                                 countability of
                            i.r officers in the' FA and the Spofts Min'     -y? Mfltsilf, They
                            M r e Tike animals and it results in the         eaths. I am

      A GP who was at the match, Dr. Glyn Phillips, who practises in East Kilbride,
      Strathclyde, said he was appalled to find there were no defibrillators -
      machines used to give electric shucks to victims to restart the heart - and
      t h a t h e wes yivsn an sxygen tank to holp ruEUEcitati victims hut it was
      empty,
      But an FA spokesman, Mr, Glen Kitson, said last night: "We can't speculate on
      who is to blame. That is the job of the inquiries and it is far too soon to
      speculate, it would be wrong to do so".
      He added: "Sheffield Wednesday operates under the Safety at Sports Grounds
      Act. If the inquiries find it to be a club organised in accordance^with the
      requirements of that legislation, the question of blame would not* I hope,
      ari se,
      We are distressed as anyone and desperately sorry for all the families
      concerned, and we will learn whstsver oisy need to be 1earned as a result of
      the inquiries' findings".
      The Chief Ambulance ■Officer in charge of operations at the.ground denied that
      having defibriTatars there would have helped*
       i!The chaos in the evacuation process just would not have al 1 owed anyone to
       use equipment had it been there", he said,
       "You are just not expecting the sort of situation that we faced- yesterday.
       I don't think a football club like that would expect to purchase such equipment
       "Defibrilators -certainly couldn't have been used yesterday. They can kill .if'
       you come in contact with them, because of the surge of electrical power through
       them.
       "They can kill if misused, and with the thousands of people around in that kind
       of situation, there would have been more fatalities.
       "'A doctor is used to working in a surgery - not in a mass evacuation situation"
             0742   306956
RENT RHA                     TEL No.0742 306956              05,05,89   13:04   P.05




           The Times - 17 April   1989

           DocttDrs whn wore? spectators <a1- Hillsborough yesterday condemned
           the? "totally inadequate" emergency -facilities at the ground and
           said there was no organised response to thes disaster.

           Dr John Ashton, senior lecturer in public health at Liverpool
           University who volunteered to help with the casualties, said
           there was a total lack of leadership and no overall plan at the
           Leppings Lane end.    "Everything conspired to create a
           catastrophy" he said*

           Dr Ashton went to the injured behind the stand about 20 m i n u t e s
           after the tragedy when an appeal for medicai help was made.         "At
           3.30 pro there were no medical personnel apart from one or two St
           John Ambulance men.    There was no equipment and there was only
           one ambulance"/ he said.

           "There were people lying dead and dying and seriously injured all
           down the back of the terrace steps and inside the turnstile area*
           There was no body in charge.   It was Just total chaos.

           "I had to assume control of the casualty situation myself and
           basically divide the people into three groups, depending on
           whether they were dead or not or whether they should have
           priority to go to hospital when the ambulances arrived."

           Dr Ashton said that a full casualty team with resuscitation
           equipment did not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm.
           Although many nurses and doctors attending the match cams to
           help, there was no equipment.

           "There was no oxygen, airway tubes or drips.   More lives could
           have been saved if staff and equipment had arrived earlier", he
           sai d .

           Even when ambulances did arrive, they could not get t h r o u g h
           because the police did not clear a path for them,Dr Ashton said.
           "The whole thing from beginning to end had incompetence running
           right through the organisational artangements."

           Dr Glyn Phillipo, a Liverpool iBnppnrt p r , who practises *t East
           Kilbride, St r a t h c l y d e , said the aftermath wae “Sheer mayhem".

           He said he was appalled to find there were no defibrillators used
           to give electric shocks to victims to restart the heartbeat.

           Dr Phillips said he was given an oxygen tank to help to
           resuscitate victims but it was empty.

           "There's no doubt that this crowd was too big for this ground.
           Liverpool just filled the end they were given.

           "The police allowed the fans to fill the middle terracing section
to the point that they wer.
H o » e v ^ S i M*                         divi s i o n a l superviaer for th. St John
However, nr r                           branch, disputed the need for wore
£5?££."                    "Tllll it'oltk have              be.n impossible to ,.t it to
those who were crushed.
u                      that there were five ambulances on                site, two from the           St
John Ambulance and three from South          / “ rising!
fully staffed to cope with any normal problems arising.

„or. staff and -                                                                       -uld°not



-We lust could not get to them, however many staff or h o w ®v*^
m uch   equipment we had. People were Just pressing down      each
other and suffocating but there was no way we could get
4.U £2 A *
 W   i} «   fc w   •



 Mr W e i i s , who was manning one of the ambulances on .ite before
 the match began, said that he took an oxygen tank
 barrier to try to help the fans who were being crushed f
 behind.
    "The had t h a l r h a n d s tie d to th.it                aides.      T hey war.

    ?"eaCt h “ a l r w a y f u ^ h       o u f h a ° S s and            the ® O K y 9 .n» ha    .aid.

    -It was a t a r r i b l . e x p e r i e n c e which I hope I -ill n . v «                  ever   ...
    again.   They were completely helpless.

    St John Ambulance carry oxyy-n tan^ St^ ! n"dt toB ustb itl.l a t "We
        <««««+ herauES the staff are not trained to use it..
    ” o i ? 2 r h » s i c first aid and if it is s.rious .. taka th. ,.r.<m
     straight to hospital."
                         ,, I - a » m « i+ ifla Mprg not given m o u t h “to**mouth
     Answering criticism that                       crowd and left on the
     resuscitation but were taken out of the crowd ana ler
     field to die, Mr Wells said "They were dead already.              The
     doctors told us there was nothing more we could do.
                                                                                  A
     Mr Wells denied that any of the o»ygen tanks had been
     Mr Wei               , th Yorkshire Ambulance Service said that
                                                                                 He
     r ‘T / t nn o r a n % T t s ambulances carri.d defibrillators
     enmhasllsed that not all of the an.bul.nce staff « t . ^r.ln.d
     aaranedics who knaw how to us. the equipment.                  Ha did not know
                       had gone to the H i l l s b o r o u g h , round.

     T he s p o k . s m a n     said the m a c h i n e s ware
     heart conditions where the heart                              to detect those conditions,

     he said,
     staff
      UO* * ♦
            * K

     \\<^ sc^c)            4'                     cv                       *Aco/rec_Vl^
       A/                ciio        Wuaa    ©^c)      cooV.c)             Q*SoS
w:n i P,nri                        ItL   NO. oca' Z o u 6 9 b 6            05,05,89     13:06      P .0?




              The Sheffield Star - 1? April 1989

              Doctor Attacks "Chaos"

              * Doctor      fought for hours to



              Br John Ashton, lecturer in community medicine at L i v e r p o o l University
                                           n could
              cfii®g<i-"At-lefts-t aO. people  m„,,-1j ctixl Up
                                                              m paai4rve poaay XT’
                                                                     yg today         licidi
                             WSpows«''aHi3 --basic' medical facilities ,

              And he has bitterly criticised the police, iMioal equipment and ground
              fiflllties as "woefully inadequate in the face of trage y

              Dr Ashton, who was at the match with his two young sons, was one nf the
              first on the scene when an appeal went out for volunteers to treat the
              injured.
                                                                         •I found abscO.nte
              He rushed to the emergency station in the gyro.
               Qhnv*-




                                                                                          behind

                                                              ___ __ _ no order and no one
              vsenior"police officer'tack charge.
                             _ -
               teoe-w what to" do.
               >•1 had to assume control and separated people into three categories -
               Survivors, injured and dead.

               "The police weren’t dispatching in order of severity and that is
               not the right thing to do.
               He gave first aid to the dying and injured men, women and childreri who
               lav sprawled s.cfoss i^lis pix-ch.®

                •The whole thing was a nightmare I
TRENT RHfl                       TEL   N o .0742 306956                 03,05,89          12 =21   P.01




             APPEARED IN THE B R IT IS H MEDICAL JOURNAL -   29 A P R IL 1989 ED ITIO N



             Wanted:    medical accounts of the Hillsborough disaster


             Dr John Ashton, a community physician who was present at the disaster

             in Sheffield when almost a hundred football supporters were killed, would

             like to receive first hand accounts from other health workers who were

             present.    These will be collated and presented to the inquiry into the

             disaster. Dr Ashton can be contacted at the Department of Community

             Health, Liverpool University Medical School, Ashton Street, Liverpool L69 3BX.
 GC/JAM

                                                    3 May 1989



Mr R. M. Whalley/Mr
The Home Office
Room 662
F6 Division
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT
URGENT

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Inquiry
Our Clients : Trent Regional Health Authority
Further to the leave given by Lord Justice Taylor last Friday
27th April 1989 at the Preliminary hearing of the above
Inquiry, we are making written submissions on Leading
Counsel's advice to be allowed representation.        ^
We act for Trent Regional Health Authority (TRHA) the
Authority responsible for the management of South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service ("SYMAS").   In making these
submissions, we would not wish to detract from Lord Justice
Taylor's approbatory remarks as to the part played by SYMAS
on 15th April 1989. '                    ,
In summary we respectfully submit that TRHA should be allowed
representation for the following reasons:-

1.        we believe that SYMAS has significant evidence to
          produce to the Inquiry which is relevant to both
          aspects of- its terms of reference. ,• X-,V.'

2.        so far we have taken statements from 98 officers and
          staff, all of whom are ready and willing to give
                                                                          -r
         (evidence, but each of whom is anxious to be legally ■rip
          represented when so doing. West Midlands Police have   '    ‘        ,

          requested copies of all the statements, our clients*
          Control Action Plan injthe event of amajorincident




                                                                     **/*>•* I
3 May 1989

                  at Sheffield Wednesday F ^ t b a l l ^ u b . Jill.borough.
                  their Major Incident            q{ radio and telephone
                  documents, the origl      Control and transcripts of
                  messages to and from ^     ^ » JLld“ Ce is clearly
                  those messages.          j -.ij .- to be relevant and
                  considered by West                             Plan, -Major
                  the original J?P®s/± ® of an staff involved have
                  incident Plan and a I-*®* ° t Midiands Police Officers
                  already been           v and inspector Burrows) who



 3.
                      immediate8                                    .'SSSS* o T ^ f e q u l p m ^
                                                       «        e     ZZxioJs that its members


                      these issues.
                                           4 .4 -
                                                A that  the Panel. of
   4.                 while we appreciate          that tne         . Inquiry  has
                                                                       f critiCism
                      indicated that anyone who is the s i ±               of this
                      will be given ^ a n c e notice^                    concerned
                      type of inquiry n4 V m c S ? tT p S iS T su ch criticism
                      that i t is o f t e n difficult to            nature of this
                      in advance and to v ± « of              ^ baiance adverse
                      inquiry, it *s "f* J~JJ!a y Moreover, Counsel of our
                      opinions after the event.             briefed and who has
                      choice who has already been briefed *mm&diately
                          available S              ^ f ^ o l i e ^          interests,

      5.                  at least two of our
                          the Hillsborough ground ^ f o r e t)he            matters with ''.V-"
                          observed
                          ooserveu the vne events    lead g
                                            o»o..v-----          - P                          V=A-
                          which the Inquiry is concerned.
                                                  > v--.^       '
                                                                ■        "■  -   _ ,a U J I 4
                                                                               given power : -     '
                                              i        J  «v4 aiaffl
                          S Y M A S has strongly held                                               c■
                                                                                                    ..
                          of the Ambulance Services nationaily being
                          to insist on,being consulted by S p o r t s ^ ^ s are
                          licensing authorities in 0®                 At present. Local
                                                                     to Sports JStadia
                          “        ut «nsul Jtion with « -                 Services
                                        ....   -

■ - v,          -..        ■




.......    •-   •;;=•••

t y .*.           ™A            _____              w       ..              X,
                      May 1989

                           believe that this matter is very germane to the second
                           part of the Inquiry's task, and we stress that there
                           is a history of correspondence between SYMAS and
                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club which is relevant.
                           We believe that events prior to 15th April 1989
                           involving contingency planning for such a disaster as
                           this involved the ambulance service as well as three
                           other parties all of whom have been granted leave to
                           be represented. The way those plans were carried into
                           effect influenced the way the ambulance service was
                           able to respond on the day. To ensure the facts are
                           fully ascertained, and in all fairness, the Authority
                           should be represented.
                We are prepared to deal with each of the above in more detail
                if required.    We are instructed to emphasise that our
                clients' earnest desire is to assist in every way they can,
                but we cannot urge too strongly their real wish to have the
                benefit of representation of their choice on such an
                important matter as this Inquiry.
                Our clients have instructed us that they wish leading
                Counsel, Mr Michel K a l l i p e t i s QC to make p e r s o n a l
                representations to Lord Justice Taylor in relation to the
                above.   In view of the fact that the Inquiry is due to
                commence on 15th May we should be grateful if you would
                confirm when and where those representations can be made, as
                a matter of urgency.
                Yours faithfully,
                                                                   ■            \   .




                                                                                                                  ■


                                   ;.    :                         . . . ....   ■       ■ .             .     ,       -...   ... .... ; ■




                                        * •*'   .                  7
                                                                  •'                                  -
                                                                                                      ■■ '
                                                                                                         ■■                                 "...

               ■^..
                                   1"■ ;.                                                                         ■
                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                  ■.'-'‘Ty
:     yy'^yy
           yy:yy:>:-
                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                   -       ..



y i ' - S . '<:y'.-yy;"y   ■’vyy
                                                    ,- « w . ft     «*’•   *    --i*          i   .
f




    IN THE MATTER OF A PUBLIC INQUIRY
    INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

    LEADING COUNSEL'S SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF AN APPLICATION BY
    TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY FOR REPRESENTATION


    A.   I am instructed on behalf of Trent Regional Health 'Authority
         (TRHA) which is responsible for the management of South
         Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service {<£39fAS) in
         connection with their involvement in the Hillsborough
         Disaster.      I have advised that TRHA should seek formal
         rights of representation at the Inquiry which is due to
         commence on 15th May 1989.


    B.   I am instructed that Lord Justice Taylor has xequested
         written arguments in support of this application.     For ease
         of reference I propose to deal in turn with each of the
         points in my Instructing Solicitors' letter of 3rd May 1989.
         In so doing I shall adopt the numbering of the letter:


    1. SYMAS EVIDENCE
    The evidence which SYMAS is able to produce to the Inquiry
    includes:
         (a)    The observations of officers who were present in the
                ground prior to 3.00 p.m.


         (b)    The evidence of an ambulanceman who was off duty at the

                                            1
      time but who was admitted to the ground through C gate
      together with many others.     The gate was then shut and
      opened again later with the consequences which have
      resulted in this Inquiry.


(c)   Evidence of Senior Officers who attended the ground as
      the incident developed.       This will include evidence
      relating to the crush and rescue, and the difficulties
      which were encountered in gaining access to "the ground
      and in manoeuvering vehicles within the ground and onto
      the pitch.


(d)   The evidence of the Chief Ambulance Officer, of another
      Senior Orticer (now with another service), and of two
      other officers, relating to SYMAS' desire to have its
      officers (and in appropriate cases an ambulance)
      present at the ground.      The Chief Ambulance Officer's
      evidence will be critical of Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club.   I shall refer further to this below in
      more detail.


(e)   Evidence relating to SYMAS own Control Action Plan in
      the event of a major incident at Sheffield Wednesday
      and the implementation of a Major Incident Plan.


(f) The original tapes of radio and telephone messages to

                                2
            and from SYMAS Control and transcripts of those
            messages.   These are relevant to the timing of events
            as they unfolded and to the manner in which the police
            and others in authority reacted.    A number    THessages
            from the police are recorded.




     (g)    Evidence    of   difficulties    encountered lay SYMAS
            ambulances on approaching the ground - in -particular
            the fact that some vehicles, including the S?nAS Major
            Incident Vehicle, were directed in error by police to
            the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The Control Action
            Plan and instructions given to the drivers         those
            vehicles    required that they should repox± to the
            entrance next to     the gymnasium on Penistone Road
            North.


2. FORWARD PLANNING


The statements,      documents   and tapes     together reveal   the
considerable extent of SYMAS' involvement in the planning for and
reaction to the disaster at Hillsborough.      I understand that West
Midlands Police have been asked to investigate the role played by
the emergency services.          That in itself in my respectful
submission makes it desirable that SYMAS its officers and staff
should be     represented, not least because in view of the high
degree of public criticism of the police to date it is essemtial
that     the evidence   of   the   ambulance   service   should   be
independently presented to the Inquiry.


3.     CRITICISM OF SYMAS


Criticism of SYMAS by a Community Physician and a G.J». who were
present at the disaster were widely reported in the stress in the
days immediately after the disaster.    In particular the Community
Physician    is reported to have said there was a lack of control
incompetence and lack of overall plan and the G.P. is reported to
have said that there was a lack of life saving equipment and in
particular defibrillators.         Similar complaints continue to
receive mention in the press.


SYMAS wish to be legally represented throughout the Inquiry in
order to be in a position to assist in responding to the issues
raised and,    further be able to refute any such allegations
against SYMAS.    I understand that the Community Physician has
published in the British Medical Journal of 29th April 1989 a
request for "medical accounts of the Hillsborough disaster"
which he says will be "collated and presented to the Inquiry into
the disaster". Given the criticisms which he has already made, it
is highly probable that evidence if presented will be critical of
SYMAS.    The Ambulance Service should have legal representation to
enable it to refute any such criticism,           and give it the
opportunity to establish the accurate position through all
relevant witnesses.


4. ADVANCE WARNING


     (a)   It is difficult to anticipate precisely when adverse
           comments or criticism will be made during tha -course of
           such an Inquiry, and thus adequate advance jtaOce may
           not always be possible.    However it is often "the case
           that such criticism can be anticipated by Counsel from
           the cross examination of the other witnesses by other
           Counsel and it is very often the case that the nature
           of such criticism is    such that Counsel caa .establish
           facts refuting that criticism from other witnesses
           before the critical witnesses themselves are called.


     (b)   West Midlands Police have requested statements from
           SYMAS some of which especially that of the Chief
           Ambulance Officer and other officers are     critical of
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's management.
           Pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's direction and the
           usual practice, advance notice of those criticisms will
           be given to the people concerned.   Inevitably they will
           give evidence anticipating such criticism and will seek
           to answer deflect or refute this and may well in so
           doing   attack the author of these criticisms.   It would
            be invidious if the Chief Ambulance Officer and other
            officers or staff were not able to put these criticisms
            to those   witnesses through their own Counsel who can
            test the replies by cross examination.       Further,
            unfairness may result to the SYMAS officers if they
            give evidence and are themselves cross exam±ned by the
            representatives of those witnesses without having the
            benefit of being represented themselves.


5. STATION OFFICERS' PRESENCE


Two Station Officers were present with an ambulance and crew, in
the ground before the match started.       As stated above their
evidence is relevant to what happened as the incident developed.
It is also highly relevant to the dealings between SYMAS and the
Club relating to involvement of the ambulance service at matches.
They will for example give evidence that because the season
tickets provided to them by the Club did not cover the F A Cup
semi-final a request was made for tickets to be provided for
their normal     seats,   but this request was declined and in
consequence they had to make arrangements through the police to
view the match from pitch level - a much less advantageous view
point than their normal seats in the stand ( from the point of
view of monitoring events and effective communication with
Control).    Furthermore the Club had in the 1986/1987 season
provided them with free passes giving access to any part of the
ground.      In 1987/1988 and onwards those free passes were
withdrawn.


6. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS


This paragraph may be more relevant to the second "part of the
Inquiry but SYMAS will be in a position to make more cogent
representations if it has had the opportunity to participate     in
the Inquiry by full legal representation. Moreover, fcy taking a
full part in the Inquiry,       SYMAS is inevitably in a tetter
position to put forward tactical submissions on the second part
of the Inquiry.    Involvement throughout    the Inquiry will save
duplication.   Furthermore   the questions which SYMAS will wish to
put, so as to establish its recommendations as to wha* should
happen in the future, will not greatly lengthen the proceedings,
but will if put in the first part of the Inquiry, make it
unnecessary for such witnesses to return.     There will therefore
be a saving of expense, but, in more human terms, witnesses will
be spared the ordeal of reliving the event twice over.


7. SYMAS CONTROL ACTION PLAN


I have referred to the SYMAS Control Action Plan and Major
Incident Plan above.   I have also referred to the difficulties
created by the police in their direction of SYMAS vehicles away
from their intended destinations.

                                    7
I am instructed on behalf of those persons from whom statements
have   been taken.   They all wish to have legal representation if
required   to give evidence.     That representation wUJL be    more
meaningful if I am able to represent SYMAS' officers 'and staff
throughout the Inquiry and in my respectful submission the SYMAS
evidence could not and should not be in isolation from all the
evidence given at the Inquiry.


D. FAIRNESS


Each of the SYMAS officers      and staff involved in the disaster
have been asked to supply a statement to the Inquiry.          Those
statements have been prepared by my instructing Solicitors, but
the    officers and staff wish to be legally represented if they
are to be called.      Each of them is an important witness as to
fact as regards either one or more of the following:-


           (a)   the events leading up to the incident


           (b)   the way the incident was dealt with by         the
                 ambulance service


           (c)   the broader issues of crowd safety at sports
                 stadia.
As a matter of fairness where criticisms have already been made
the ambulance service ought to be legally represented.    In any
event I respectfully submit that it has an equal if Ttat greater
contribution to make than the Fire Service who have been granted
representation. I understand from my instructing Solicitors that
the Fire Service argued that they should have representation
since they must be consulted before the Local Authority grants a
licence to the sports stadium.      The ambulance sezrice has
significant points to make in relation to why it too should be
consulted and furthermore it has considerably greater evidence to
give in relation to the many points set out in this submission
and in my instructing Solicitors' letter of the 3rd May 1989.


1 respectfully submit that for the above reasons SYMAS ought to
have full representation before the Inquiry.


Michel Kallipetis QC
2 Crown Office Row
Temple
EC4
8 May 1989
                            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
                     Outline Submissions on behalf of
              South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Services


Pursuant to the leave granted on 28th April we apply on behalf of
SYMAS        to be allowed representation at this Inquiry.   There are
three        areas of the Inquiry's investigations to which SYMAS can
give considerable assistance to the Tribunal:-


A.      PRE-MATCH ARRANGEMENTS
        1.     Although there is no statutory obligation to consult
               the ambulance services as there is as regards the fire
               brigade under Section 3 of the Safety of Sports Grounds
               Act 1935, in fact, there were consultations with SYMAS
                following the publication of the Popplewell Report, as
                a result of which some safety arrangements were made at
               the request of SYMAS.


        2.     The co-operation of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
               was limited to providing two season tickets in the
               South Stand from where ambulance officers could see the
               whole ground, and from which position their portable
               radios had good contact with emergency Control.     This
               concession was not made available for the F.A. Cup
               Semi-Finals, as a consequence of which two officers
               made private     arrangements with police     and were
               positioned on the touch line between the North Stand
               and Spion Kop.    From this position their overall view
     of the ground was limited.


BUILD UP TO THE DISASTER
1.   SYMAS officers were present from 2.15 p.m. onwards and
     observed the build up of crowds in the West Stand.


2.   They were first alerted to a problem just after kick
     off and two officers went to investigate.             They
     realised that there was an emergency and alerted
     Control and, as a result of their action,     the SYMAS
     Major Accident Plan was instituted.


3.   When the ambulance crews arrived pursuant to the
     initiation of the SYMAS Major Accident Plan, their
     operations were directed by those officers.


FUTURE PLANNING
1.   SYMAS has substantial        submissions concerning    the
     inclusion of the ambulance services as one of the
     bodies who should be consulted under Section 3 of the
     1975 Act.


2.   These submissions would more cogent and pertinent if
     they are in a position to have taken a full part in the
     first part of the Inquiry.
REASONS FOR REPRESENTATION
1.   SYMAS hd as much, if not more, involvement with safety
     measures generally at the Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club Hillsborough Ground than the fire services who
     have already been granted representation.


2.   SYMAS has been the subject      indirectly of severe
     criticism of two doctors which was reported widely in
     the press.   The allegations were that there was no
     control, chaos, lack of plan, lack of equipment and
     incompetence generally.    If any of those allegations
     are to be repeated, we submit that it is only right
     that SYMAS should be in a position to challenge those
     allegations in cross-examination, establish the factual
     position through examination of other witnesses, and be
     in a position to call evidence of its own to deal with
     those allegations.


3.   SYMAS has criticisms of its own of Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Club as regards its refusal        to pay for
     adequate ambulance presence, and for constructing an
     additional gangway which hindered access to the pitch
     by ambulances. SYMAS also has severe criticism of some
     portions of the media, whose persistent telephone calls
     to Control blocked lines which were urgently required
     by nurses, doctors and ambulance men off duty who were
     calling in to see if their help was required and asking
         for directions as to where they should go.


    4.   At the request of the Treasury Solicitor the police
         have taken details of the Control Action Plan, the
         Major Incident Plan,    and transcripts of the tapes
         recording all messages through to Control.      It is, in
         our submission, only right that if that Plan is to be
         the subject of investigation by this         Inquiry the
         authors of that plan as well as those who implemented
          it on 15th April should have representation.




                                             MICHEL KALLIPETIS QC


Dated 15th May 1989
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PROCEDURES

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER


Introduction
1.   HC(77)1: Advises Health Authorities on health service arrangements for
     dealing with Major Accidents, it identifies the role of the Regional
     Health Authority (RHA) which is to:-

     1.1       Ensure that plans are prepared by the District Health
                Authorities and Ambulance Services throughout the Region to
                deal with 'Major Accidents'.

     1.2       Co-ordinate and advise on such plans and generally monitor
                standards of service.

     1.3       Consult with appropriate bodies to prepare and keep up to date
                a list of hospitals with 24 hour Accident and Emergency
                departments.

TRHA Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures


2.   In April 1986 the Trent Regional Health Authority (TRHA) gave its
     approval to the issue of Regional Guidelines on Major Accident
     Procedures, the contents of which had been prepared by the Regional
     Emergency Planning Officer and agreed in consultation with the Regional
     Medical Canmittee - Sub Carimittee in Accident and Emergency Medicine,
     Chief Ambulance Officers, Chief Constables, Chief Fire Officers and
     others in the Region. The main aims of this document are to:

     2.1       Ensure that the role of the NHS (and others) is clearly
               understood and that canmon (agreed) terminology is adopted to
               prevent confusion and misunderstanding between the Emergency
                Services, Ambulance Service, Hospitals and others who may
               become involved.

     2.2       Provide a firm basis for co-operation and liaison between the
               NHS, Emergency Services and others.

     2.3       Assist plan writers by providing a canmon TRHA information
               manual.
3.   Subsequently Hospital and Ambulance plans were produced with regard to
     these objectives.

PRINCIPLES

4.   A Major Accident is a complex problem and planning requires:

     4.1       A simple approach (not a solution).

     4.2       Ongoing reviews, particularly after an incident to assess the
                lessons learnt.
      4.3    Co-operation between the emergency services (Police, Fire and
             Ambulance) and hospitals.

Monitoring and Review
5.    In August 1988 the Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer initiated
      a 'monitoring and review' exercise of all Major Incident and response
      procedures designed to ensure that hospital and ambulance plans were
      monitored, practiced and updated regularly and this was largely
      completed by December 1988. It is intended that 'monitoring and
      review' should be an annual event.

DESIGNATED HOSPITALS

6.    The Regional Health Authority is responsible for preparing a list of
      hospitals with accident and emergency departments which are suitable
      for designation to receive casualties on a 24 hour basis and their
      capacity to deal with casualties in relation to the nature of their
      predominant injury. Copies of this list (Annex 'A' of Regional
      Guidelines) are made available to Ambulance Controls, Hospitals and
      Police and Fire Services in the Region. This includes the availability
      of a hospital based Flying Squad.

MAJOR ACCIDENT SITE PROCEDURES

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/FLYING SQUAD   (Ref:   TRHA Guidelines - see also
Appendix 'C' of HC(77)1 attached.

7.    Provision. If requested by the Ambulance Service a Hospital Flying
      Squad would be dispatched to the scene. The senior person on the
      medical team will evaluate the situation and this will include a
      request for a Site Medical Officer if required, otherwise the Senior
      Medical member of the Flying Squad should act as the Site Medical
      Officer.

8.    Site Contacts and Location. On arrival at the site the Site Medical
      Officer must contact the Ambulance Liaison Officer and will normally
      locate himself at the Ambulance Medical Ccrariunications Point.

9.    Responsibilities. The Site Medeical Officer is responsible for:

      9.1     Formulating a casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with
              the Ambulance Incident Officer.

      9.2     Arranging for the attendance of further medical and nursing
              teams if required eg to deal with trapped casualties.

10.   In practice there is much debate about the use and role of a Site
      Medical Officer. Many Accident and Emergency Departments prefer the
      policy of "Scoop and Run" in order to bring the casualty to the
      hospital with the minimim of delay in order to take advantage of the
      concentrated skill and high technology available. Professor Angus
      Wallace of University Hospital, QPC is on record as saying that, in his
      opinion, this procedure of 'scoop and run" adopted during the initial
      stages of the Ml Kegworth air crash saved lives.

11.   Many consultants disagree with the principle of a Site Medical Officer
      on the basis that it depletes the hospital staff at a time of crisis,
      therefore the considerations are proximity of the incident to the
♦


          receiving hospitals, and the overriding need for medical assistance at
          the site (eg trapped casualties).

    12.   The procedure to activate the Flying Squad/Site Medical Officer is as
          follows:

          12.1   Request from Ambulance personnel on site (via Ambulance
                 Control)

          12.1    Control requests appropriate hospital for "Team" to be got
                  ready

          12.3   Ambulance Service provides transport

    13.   The nationally agreed policy of "extended trained" ambulance personnel
          currently being introduced (up to 6 months training required) will mean
          that in the medium term the need to call out a hospital based Flying
          Squad may reduce since the aim is to reach a position where there is at
          least one of these individuals on each front line A & E Ambulance
          vehicle who have two person crews. Their training encompasses:

          13.1   Infusion (setting up of drips)

          13.2   Intubation (introduction of special airway and use of oxygen)

          13.3   Defibrillation (use of electrical apparatus to correct heart
                 rhythm)

    14.   However, in general, the use of a Site Medical Officer, who can be a
          senior doctor of any specialty, is recanmended in order to:

          14.1   Formulate the casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with
                  the Ambulance Incident Officer;

          14.2    Arrange for the attendance of further medical and nursing teams
                  if required eg to deal with trapped casualties, amputations
                  etc;

          14.3   Provide medical advice to the Police and Fire Services;

          14.4   Establish and maintain direct contact between the site of the
                 incident and the hospital Accident and Emergency department in
                 order to:

                  14.4.1 Regularly update the hospital on numbers and types of
                         casualties they can expect.

                  14.4.2 Request further staff support and equipment to the
                         scene.

                  14.4.3 Monitor the status of the hospital to continue to
                         receive casualties.

    15.   The Royal Hallamshire Hospital Major Disaster Plan states:

          SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAM

          A medical and nursing team or Site Medical Officer will not be
          automatically dispatched to the site of a major accident. However,
          should medical and nursing assistance be required by the Ambulance


                                       3
      Service in the light of the particular circumstances the Medical
      Controllers at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General
      Hospital will make appropriate arrangements in the light of the
      particular needs and staffing resources. The mobile team will normally
      be sent from the hospital not accepting the initial casualties and any
      further teams required will be sent on a rotational basis. The
      Ambulance Service provides a vehicle with certain basic supplies for
      transporting a medical and nursing team and further specialised
      equipment, supplies and protective clothing are held in readiness at
      both hospitals. On arrival at the site the senior person on the
      medical team will evaluate the situation and act as Site Medical
      Officer. He must contact the Ambulance Incident Officer and will
      normally locate himself at the Ambulance Service Ccsnmunications Point.

16.   On balance we would recommend, except in the most exceptional
      circumstances, the setting up of a triage point and Casualty Clearing
      Station under the control of a Site Medical Officer.




                                    4
                                                                                                             APPENDIX C



                                     HOSPITAL OPERATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS


IN F O R M A T IO N A B O U T T H E M A JO R A C C ID E N T P LA N

1.     A hospital w ill function well in a major emergency only if responsibilitiesaie
everybody has a thorough understanding o f their own individual duties an    ow in ge            ■ w ith act j 0 n
                                                                                                                         ^
is intended to w ork. T o help achieve this consideration should be given to 'ssu.ng key personne| w ith action
cards detailing their role and conducting exercises at intervals (see paragrap            o

A L E R T IN G P R O C E D U R E S

2.       The ambulance service is responsible fo r alerting       the designated and supporting hospital^and advising
whether or not a m obile medical and nursing team should be despatc          im m        .            although in
major accident procedure should be initiated on reliable info rm ation                                           the
these circumstances it is advisable not to despatch the m obile team un i c               . . f w j|| norm ally be
ambulance service or Site Medical O fficer that it is required. As notice o f a ^ l ^ c c dent w ill n o r m a lly t *
received by telephone a t the main hospital switchboard hospital
activating the hospital plan by alerting key personnel and departm ents. St®n^                                 ^    e num bers,
should therefore contain the telephone numbers o f hospital staff involved inc: u g                                   should be
in order o f p rio rity , and details o f how to contact staff ^ . ^ ' ^ h ' e bV t e 'e p h o n . ^ b f X ? t o keep outgoing
made to make additional and relief telephone operators available, and r a r e s h ^ l d t e taken to K e e p ^ tg o ^
calls to the m in im um . F ull use should be made o f any direct lines i?ndppu^ C^
bypass the hospital switchboard and any prior plans agreed w ith the Pos 0                          rp<nr<nsibilities inthe
telephones should be im plem ented. A ll operators should be briefed f r e q u e n t l y o n their responsibilities
event o f an emergency and should check the agreed 'call o u t procedures a t regular intervals.

 T H E S IT E M E D IC A L O F F IC E R

 3      As part o f the hospital m ajor accident procedure the Site Medical O fficer w ill i™ n « lia te ly
 the scene, where he w ill have overall responsibility fo r all medical activity                               Qf the
 and other emergency services. Designation o f the Site Medical O ff ce                     should be supplied by a
 likelihood th at he w ill have a clinical role in the initial stages. By prior a^    ean^  s^ ° UJ fd a^ S   medical
 listed hospital or the health au th o rity . The Site Medical O fficer should not be a m ember o f a m obile meaica
 and nursing team.

 4.        I t is essential fo r the Site Medical O fficer to be readily identifiable as soon as he arrives^U-he scene o f
 the accident and as he may be called o u t fro m his hom e it may ^ n e c e s s a r y b e g i v ^ o                          the
 identificatio n and protective clothing w ith him a t o ff-o u ty times. Consid
 possible need to provide transport fo r him to the site.

  5.    His first d u ty on arrival w ill be to establish the current situation                                          ConSSl
  Incident O fficers o f the emergency services and set up his headquarters a t the A m                summoned already, he
  Point I f he considers th at a medical and nursing team is retried and one has                        a r tivitv is prolonged




     via the am bulance radio link.




                                                               is tS
                                                                   he°SU,te Medical 0^ « r ^     o     give ^ s t a r ^ d o w n u ,


     the                                                                      •'£                                        ^ ^
     done and is fu lly aware o f the state o f affairs at the site.




                                                                (i)
CH I EF SI TE NU RSE

7.    Where tw o or more mobile medical and nursing teams are required at the site of a major accident, or
where circumstances create a need fo r her presence, a previously nominated senior nurse who is fam iliar w ith
the major accident plan, should be supplied by a listed hospital to act as Chief Site Nurse. She should have
protective clothing (including headwear) which w ill ensure th at she can be easily recognised. On arrival at the
site she should

       i.          liaise w ith the Site Medical O fficer and assume overall nursing responsibility

       ii.         assess the situation from the nursing stand point

       iii.        control the activities, replacement and reinforcem ent of nurses working on site

       iv.         assist the Site Medical O fficer in his duties as necessary.

M O B IL E M E D IC A L A N D N U R S IN G T E A M S

S U M M O N IN G

8.    The first m obile medical and nursing team w ill usually have been summoned by the ambulance service in
accordance w ith the locally agreed plan. N o additional team should be despatched unless requested by the Site
Medical O fficer. Where additional teams are so summoned the Chief Site Nurse should go to the site.

9.    Each listed hospital should arrange fo r a mobile medical and nursing team to be despatched on request,
and have readily available fo r their use w arm w aterproof protective clothing (including suitable headwear) in
w hich they w ill be easily recognisable and medical supplies packed in light, strong and reasonably siz
carrying boxes or holdalls. A ccount should be taken o f w hat is carried by ambulances to avoid duplication or
items and wherever possible equipm ent should be com patible eg adaptors and connectors should mat
Arrangements should be made fo r periodic checking o f equipm ent and the replacement o f perishable supplies.

TRANSPORT

10.     Prior arrangements should exist fo r the transport o f m obile medical and nursing teams. This task may be
allocated to the am bulance service.

T H E D U T IE S O F T H E C O N S U L T A N T IN C H A R G E O F M A JO R A C C ID E N T P R O C E D U R E

11.   T he Consultant in charge o f M ajor A ccident Procedure (usually the Consultant in charge o f the A & E
D epartm ent) w ill, w ith appropriate colleagues be concerned in the fo rm u lation and updating o f the hospital
plan. If the hospital becomes a designated or supporting hospital, he w ill be responsible fo r im plem enting tne
medical arrangements. He should despatch a m obile medical and nursing team (either fro m his o w n or another
hospital) if asked to do so by the Am bulance Service, Site Medical O fficer or other authorised body. H e should
m aintain close contact a t all times w ith the Casualty Assessment O fficer and in consultation w ith the bite
Medical O fficer should decide a t w hat stage supporting hospitals should be nom inated to receive casualties.

C A S U A L T Y A S S E S S M E N T O F F IC E R (O R T R IA G E O F F IC E R )

12.    A senior m em ber o f the medical staff o f a designated hospital w ith considerable experience o f accident
and emergency w ork should be appointed to be responsible w ith a senior nurse fo r assessing all casualties on
arrival a t the hospital and fo r deciding th eir p rio rity o f treatm ent and appropriate transfer.

T H E D IV IS IO N A L N U R S IN G O F F IC E R (N U R S IN G S E R V IC E S G E N E R A L )

 13.    The Divisional Nursing O ffic er (Nursing Services General) is responsible to the District Nursing O fficer
fo r ensuring

        i.          th a t nursing staff understand the m ajor accident plan and the detailed arrangements fo r their part
        w ith in the w hole team

        ii.   th at appropriately trained and experienced nursing staff are available to act as members o f a
        m obile medical and nursing team and are fu lly conversant w ith resuscitation techniques

            iii.     th e nom in atio n o f C hief Site Nurses

            iv.      th a t a list o f nurses (w ith telephone numbers) liable to be called to the hospital in the event o f a
        m ajor accident is m aintained and regularly up-cated
       V      th a t nursing staff participate in tra in in g programmes and exercises

       vi.     th a t a p p ro pria te relief arrangements are made fo r nursing staff selected to deal w ith emergencies
       b o th at the designated hospital and at the site.

SEC TO R A D M IN IS T R A T O R

 14.    The Sector Adm inistrator is responsible for ensuring that the resources of the hospital are fu lly
mobilized; th at a hospital inform ation centre is set up (para 18) and that essential inform ation about casualties
in the hospital, including condition, is collated and passed to the hospital inform ation centre and to the central
casualty bureau (para 17). He is also responsible fo r seeing that there are sufficient clerks (sometimes members
of the voluntary services may have to be used) to record details of condition of casualties, bed state and
theatre availability and th at porters or volunteers are available to help unload and re-equip ambulances to
facilitate a quick turn round. He is responsible fo r alerting the hospital chaplains and the linked social serviws
departm ent as appropriate (see para 12 of the circular). He should review all aspects of the hospital plan
regularly in conjunction w ith the Consultant in charge of M ajor Accident Procedure, the Divisional Nursing
O fficer (Nursing Services G eneral), the Medical Records O fficer and other heads of departments.

15.    In the event of a major accident involving an international airliner the possibility of enquiries from
relatives and legal representatives o f casualties whose knowledge of English may well be im perfect, as we as
fro m consular and diplom atic representatives, should not be overlooked. In these circumstances
com m unication w ith casualties may also prove more than usually d iffic u lt and the sector adm inistrator may
therefore wish to m aintain a list o f staff w ith a knowledge of one or more foreign languages.

P U B L IC R E L A T IO N S

16.    The police appoint a Press Liaison O fficer to handle press and television enquiries in the immediate
afterm ath of a major accident. Nevertheless the clamour fo r inform ation fro m relatives, press, television and
radio may be the biggest single adm inistrative problem of a major accident for a hospital. Arrangements or
coping w ith the demand must be carefully planned to ensure th at inform ation is given as effectively as possi e
w hile avoiding serious interference w ith the hospital's prim ary task o f caring fo r casualties. T he pressure o
enquiries is likely to be particularly heavy in the first 2 4 to 4 8 hours so it is suggested th at full use shou
made o f the Regional Public Relations O fficer and his staff to help in handling news media                      Press
releases etc. T V interviews on the general medical condition of patients are norm ally best assigned o a
consultant.

C EN TR AL C A SUALTY BUREAU

17.    A central casualty bureau w ill norm ally be set up and manned by the police away fro m the hospital to
handle all general enquiries about casualties, including those dealt w ith at the site w ith o u t referral to hospital,
fro m the press or public. T he telephone number(s) of the bureau, which w ill have been agreed in advance w ith
the Post O ffice, w ill be made known im m ediately to the public via local and national television and radio. T ne
hospital sw itchboard should transfer all initial enquiries about casualties to the bureau. The use of the central
casualty bureau w ill be particularly helpful when casualties are sent to more than one hospital and/or nave
been transferred fro m the designated hospital. Close liaison between the bureau and the hospitals mvo ved is
vital to ensure th at a simple up-to-date list o f casualties is m aintained. Arrangements fo r this service should be
agreed w ith th e police at the planning stage.

H O S P IT A L IN F O R M A T IO N C E N T R E

18     In ad d itio n to the central casualty bureau manned by the police it w ill be necessary to Pr° vicJ« an
info rm ation centre at th e hospital receiving casualties fro m a major accident where 1[>eoplcs can come to    a
enquiries about the co n dition o f patients. It is essential to set aside a d e a rly signed area where datives and
friends can congregate and where catering facilities are available, away fro m the reception a i a r ® a .
Representatives o f th e news media are likely to attend the hospital and separate provision w ill need to be made
fo r them .
