                        states:-


1.   I am employed as a qualified ambulance man for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is 12th September 1961.



3.   I have   been with SYMAS since 1983, the last five years of

     which I have been a qualified ambulance man.      Prior    to my

     working with SYMAS I had been in catering management.


4.   I was off duty on Saturday 15th April and was at home.      The
     television was on and I saw pictures being transmitted from

     Hillsborough showing people being pulled onto the upper

     terrace of the west stand.      The time was about 1505.   I had
     the feeling that something was wrong.


5.   I telephoned control a couple of minutes later to see if
     they were aware that things were getting out of control at
     Hillsborough.    I initially spoke to a control assistant and

     then was put onto Superintendent Clark.       I asked if they

     were coping.    He told me that if I went to the scene he was

     sure that I would be needed.      I put my uniform on and drove

     straight to the ground.       This would have taken about seven
     minutes.



6.   I arrived at the ground at about 1530.        Attached to this
     statement is a plan of the Hillsborough ground.     I parked my
car in the position marked X on that plan.     There were two

fire engines in the positions marked Y on the plan.        The

police let me in through the outer gates.     I could not see

any ambulances although I did see a line of about ten bodies

by a wall to my right.    They are marked on the plan as ZZZ.

Those bodies had obviously been deliberately placed there.

I then saw an ambulance at P.     There were a large number of
people milling around in the area.



After I had passed the bodies a policeman approached me with
a youth aged about 14.     He was being carried on a board by

some people and was not breathing.       I attempted mouth to

mouth resucitation.    This was roughly in the position marked

Q.    I had my bag with me.     This would normally be kept at

Parkway Ambulance Station where I am based but I had been
floated to a different station the week before and so I had

kept my bag with me.     The bag contains equipment such as

tubes,   dressings and collars.      I inserted an airway and

attempted CPR (Cardio Pulmonary Resucitation).      I did not

get anywhere after several minutes and someone who had come

up to me whom I believed to be a doctor said the patient had
been gone too long.     I left this lad with a policeman and

policewoman.



I asked the ambulance crew in the area where the control

point was.     They said they did not know and they left with
casualties.      I do not know who that crew was.      I then
     attended to another young man had been brought out on a

     board.   He was having difficulty breathing and was under the

     age of 10       years. I made a quick    examination of him and sat

     him up to       assist his breathing.I then left him with the

     police constable.


9.   I was told by a member of the public that there were a lot

     of people injured on the pitch.         I went through E gate, down

     some steps, and climbed over a three foot concrete wall onto
     the south stand onto the pitch.          That appeared to be the

     route by which injured had been carried out on boards to the

     area where I had tended them.


10. I went onto the pitch.            Many people were attempting

     resucitation but I did not notice any ambulance men on the

     pitch.      I   asked a policeman if     he knew where the control

     point was       and he said that people were being taken towards

     the gymnasium.      Members of the public started asking me to

     help them but all of the people immediately around me who

     needed help were being attended to.         I used the five or six

     airways which I had with me, by inserting them, and told the

     people attending those injured to carry on.          I made my way

     across the pitch towards the gym.            There was a line of

     policemen across the pitch, only one deep, about two thirds

     of the way along the pitch along the cop end.               I went

     through the police line to the area outside the gym.         There
     was an ambulance parked under the north stand outside the
      entrance to the gym.


11.   I saw the police feeding unit in the position marked

      on the plan.   There was a group of policemen outside the
      gymnasium door and a police sergeant in the driving seat of

      the ambulance that was parked near to the gym.     I contacted

      control over the ambulance radio and told them that the
      policeman was going to drive the ambulance to hospital.

      There was an ambulance man in the rear of the gym with two

      casualties.


12.   Another policeman approached me and asked me whether I

      wanted him to take the walking wounded to hospital.     I told

      him that if they were reasonably comfortable he could take
      them in the police transit van to hospital.   The transit van
      was parked in the position marked S on the plan.


13.   A young man was brought to me with abdominal injuries.        He

      was on a board carried by fans.    As this stage I did not

      know that there were people in the gym and this casualty was

      placed on the ground near to the transit van.     He had marks

      across his pelvis and his abdomen was swelling.    He did not

      seem to be in severe pain but his abdomen was tender.      One

      of the spectators approached me and said he was a doctor and

      asked me if the casualty was alright.         I said   that   I
      suspected that he had internal injuries.   The doctor stayed

      with this young man and I asked a policeman to try to get



                              50
      him into an ambulance.


14.   I then looked around for something else to do and went into

      the gym.     Bodies were laid down the right hand side of the
      gym as I went in (down the east wall) and I was shocked by

      the number which were there.



15.   At this stage I had not yet met an ambulance officer, or

      been designated a duty and had no ambulance.


16.   The casualties      were     being treated by doctors,      all in
      civilian clothes and ambulance men.           I saw

      who is a Leading Ambulance man at Middlewood Ambulance

      Station.     He was dealing with a patient in the middle of the
      gym with     a doctor.       There did not seem to be anyone

      organising stretchers into the gym to get patients away when
      they were ready.     I went round the gym quickly assessing how

      many of the casualties were ready for removal and went

      outside where I s a w ______________ |, who is a station officer

      based at Maltby.     I told him that we needed four stretchers
      in the gym.     I then went back into the gymnasium and saw a

      group of fireman attempting to          lift    a patient   onto a

      stretcher.     I organised this.   By this time some stretchers
      were coming in and I went out to ask for more.           I assisted

                     (who is a qualified ambulance man) with one of

      his   stretchers.      We    splinted   the    leg of one   of   the
      casualties and lifted him onto a stretcher.           I recall this



                                  SI
      man was very distressed because he could not find his son.
              and I loaded him into an ambulance.



19.   I then helped to load a patient onto a Rotherham ambulance
      with leading ambulance man           I then saw Mr Hopkins in

      the middle     of the courtyard.      He told me to move an

      ambulance which was in the plan.     I told him there were no
      keys in it and I then saw Superintendent Dale who went to

      find the crew of that ambulance.


20.   Ambulance man             was in an ambulance which had just

      reversed in.    He had two patients on board but he had lost

      his partner.    He asked if I would travel in the back with

      the casualties which I did.    One had abdominal injuries and
      the other rib injuries.    Neither seemed to be too serious.

      The ambulance which          was driving was Sierra 203 which

      is based at Parkway.      We radioed control that we were
      leaving and went to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.       We

      drove over the central reservation of Penistone Road and

      were given an escort by a police motorcyclist to the Royal

      Hallamshire.    The traffic was very heavy in Penistone Road

      and progress was slow.       I would think that we left the
      ground at some time between 1615 and 1630.



21.   We arrived at the Royal Hallamshire and unloaded the two
      patients into the major incident entrance which is the

      fracture entrance not the casualty entrance.       Access is
      better at the fracture entrance.


22.   We radioed green at Hallamshire and were told to standby at

      Netherthorpe Road.      When we arrived at Netherthorpe Road

      there were about three ambulances there in front of us.


23.   After    about   ten minutes    I radioed control      asking for
      permission to go to Leppings Lane because my car was still

      there and might have been causing an obstruction.       They said

      we could do so.       We proceeded to Leppings Lane.     The fire
      engines had gone and police were stopping traffic going into

      Leppings Lane.       We saw a fireman and gave him some fire
      service resucitation equipment which had been on board the

      ambulance from a previous journey.     Control then radioed us

      to return to Hallamshire B road to transfer patients to the

      King Edwards Hospital.         I asked if I could follow the

      ambulance in my car and was given permission to do so.         We
      went to the Royal Hallamshire where        I left my car and

      rejoined the ambulance.        We went to B road where we met

      Standards & Efficiency Officer                           who was

      organising the loading of patients being transferred from

      the Royal Hallamshire to King Edwards.     She asked if we had

      any    stretchers.     We had two.    She arranged for us to

      transfer two stretcher cases from Ward FI.      We waited in B
      road    for about 30 minutes before leaving with our two

      patients and went       to King Edwards   Hospital      where we
      delivered the patients.


                               53
24.   At about 18.15 we radioed green at King Edwards and were
      told to return to base and contact control by land line from

      Parkway Station.     We went via the Royal Hallamshire where I
      collected my car and went to Parkway Station.    We arrived at

      Parkway Station at about 1835.       We cleaned the ambulance

      and equipment and I telephoned control at 1900 and signed
      off



Dated this               day of            1989
                                                                                                          Main Police Access


 Sheffield Wednesday F.                               C.                                         Police
                                                                                                 Room
      Hillsborough Ground                                                           Aid Room



                                                                              Gymnasium

                                                                                                                               7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                                  73-76
                                                                                                                                    s- 7 2
                                                                         NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                                             I   c. ,'

                                         ^   ^




                                    §
                            ...     2.           41

                                - R ....... H
                                  f°
                                    g            31


                                                 21
                                                                         Player's
                            \                                            Tunnel
Away Fans Entrance              V


                                                 r
  and Enclosures


        Police Control
                                                           w   bi   in
                                                                                               2 9 -3 2 3 3 -3 6    Pari,
      KEY

      TURNSTILES   177771                                  Directort Entrance
