                                  states :

      1.   I was born on 6th July, 1934.
      2.   I am a Station Officer at Maltby Station, Maltby.        I have

           been employed by SYMAS or Its predecessors since 1963.          I

           have held the position of Station Officer for the last 8
           years.

      3.   My call sign is Alpha 7.

      4.   My shift on Saturday 15th April,       1989 was 1530 to mid­

           night.     I set off from home at about 1500 to travel to
           work.      I was travelling along Sheffield Parkway listening

           to local radio.      At about 1506 Radio Sheffield put out a
           n ew s   bulletin   saying   there   had   been   a stoppage   at
           Hillsborough but they did not know the reason.        I switched

           over to Radio Hallam.        The commentator there explained
           there had been a stoppage, that police and others were on

           the pitch and there appeared to have been an incident which

           was developing.      I proceeded then at speed to Rotherham

           Ambulance Station where I was due to pick up my vehicle.

           As I travelled along Moorgate Road, Rotherham, and was just
           turning into the hospital within which Rotherham Ambulance

           Station is sited a service Range Rover came towards me

           travelling at speed.    Its occupants I now know to have been

           Deputy Chief Hopkins and Assistant Chief Officer Roger

           Morley.

      5.   I went into the Station and tried to contact Control by
           telephone but was unable to get through because the line was

           engaged.    I collected my vehicle for the day (service Range


                                   2*



Sio
Rover).    Ambulance              was in the Station.     I told

him there was an incident developing and he should come with

me.    We then proceeded together to Control at SYMAS H.Q.,

in Moorgate Road and reported to Superintendent Ray Clarke.

 He said a Major Incident was developing.         He gave me a

list and asked me to call out the staff on the list.
Before I could start this he instructed me to take the Major

Incident Tender Vehicle to Hillsborough gymnasium.

I drove back up to Rotherham Station with                    and

obtained the Major Incident Tender Vehicle.       It was ready
and waiting.     I then realised I did not have the UHF radio
sets which are required for use in connection with that

vehicle.    The UHF radios allow individuals to communicate
direct with each other without going through control and are

for use on a Major Incident.          I returned to Control to
collect the UHF sets and informed Mr Clarke when I got there

that I had come for them.       There were however none in the

Charging Rack.         I then checked the radio case in the

Superintendent's Office.      It contained two sets, one being

a VHF pocketphone and one a UHF but without battery.           I
took both these,      told Mr Clarke there were no others and

that I was now going to Hillsborough.

I left H.Q.,   monitoring channel 2 on the Major Incident

Vehicle.    It was transmitting all the way.            I had Mr
           with me.      I know that channel 2 was transmitting

since I could hear it and I turned it up as we travelled

along Sheffield Parkway.      We took the most direct route.
A police motor cycle was directing traffic at the junction

of Penistone Road, Rutland Road.
As we passed Hillsborough Park, about 400 yards from the

ground there were crowds of spectators walking towards the
city.     We had to slow down as they were spilling on to the

road.
As we arrived at the ground (at about 1540/1545) traffic was

being directed up Herries Road and there was a line of

police across the road.       I told the police officer doing
traffic duty that I wished to get through to the entrance

nearest    the gymnasium.      He said    I could not and he
directed me left into the first gateway (marked with an      X

on the plan attached).       I proceeded in and alongside the

south stand as far as the gate marked with a Y on the plan

attached where police and others were blocking my way.
Someone then said I must get myself back to the gymnasium.
I returned by the same route and spoke to a police officer
at point X and an officer made the other officers break rank

for me to get through.        I got as far as the gate marked

with a red 0 and parked up in the position indicated by a

red rectangle.        Between Parkside Road and getting to my

parked position radio communication on the Major Incident
Tender Vehicle had stopped.         The radio was working but

nothing was being transmitted.     My pocketphone was however

still transmitting.      At this point ("0") I was met by S.O.

Higgins and Mr Hopkins and was instructed to unload all the
body bags, stretcher canvasses and poles which were in the
      vehicle.      Everything on the inventory was unloaded.   I was

      told to stay with the vehicle.       At no time did I go into
      the gymnasium to treat anyone and no time did I go into the
      stadium.

10.   I tried to get the radio to work but it would not.           My
      handset was still functioning on channel 2.       There was no

      need for me to contact Control.

11.   Ambulances were being loaded at gate 0 immediately behind

      me.    I went up to the police room under the north stand.

      It was full of uniformed police officers.       I tried to get
      hold of a telephone to ring Control          (with a view to

      establishing a link).       Someone said all the lines in that

      room were for a direct link to Force Control.         The room
      next door was First Aid Room in which there were three St

      John's cadets who were young teenagers possibly 12 years

      old.    There were huddled together crying.      I returned to
      my vehicle.

12. I assisted in loading up seriously injured patients.         The

      area adjacent to the gymnasium was cluttered with a police

      feed vehicle and two skips and various cars and vans.      This

      caused difficulties.       We could not get vehicles turned
      round in the area and we had to use Penistone Road for that

      purpose.      There were also a large number of distraught fans

      around seeking friends and relatives.

13.   I then issued bundles of brown and grey blankets to SYMAS

      staff from the vehicle.     I returned to the Tender again and
      tried the radio again but still there was no response.      My


                                 z\
      pocketphone was still working.

14.   A West Yorkshire Emergency Tender Vehicle then arrived and I

      suggested that the driver park it on the central reservation

      of Penistone Road.       Ten body bags were obtained from that
      vehicle.

15.   I assisted with the marshalling and loading of vehicles.

      In this period a non-SYMAS vehicle broke down.

16.   I became aware then that Mr Jones was present.        I used my

      pocketphone, contacted Control and asked for the mechanic.

      Then the vehicle started.        I cancelled the mechanic.    I
      reported this to Mr Jones and the mechanic was instructed to
      go   to   the Herries    Road Bus Depot     in case of   future
      breakdowns.

17. By now the number of casualties had started to ease off and

      the vehicles were on stand by at Herries Road Bus Depot.

      British Telecom engineers then arrived to instal telephone
      links for the police.

18. I think it was at about 1730 when Mr Jones told me to go to

      the Bus Depot and to stand down all the non-SYMAS vehicles.

       We had by now finished transporting live casualties.         I

      was also instructed to tell all non-SYMAS vehicles to return

      to their Authority.       The SYMAS vehicles were to return to

      gate 0.       By now the car park around the gymnasium had

      emptied itself and we put vehicles in there.
19.   After     a   briefing   I liaised   with   police   regarding

      identification and eventual removal of bodies to the Medico
      Legal Centre after positive identification.


                                 32.
20.   By   0500    only   unid ent if ie d   bodies   were   left   at   the
      gymnasium.     These were documented and transferred to the

      Medico Legal Centre by 0530.



Dated this    ‘O'v* day of             1989.




                                33
                                                                                               Main Police Access

  Sheffield Wednesday f, c.
                                                                                       Police
                                                                                       Room\\'
      WlsbgroughGround                                                       Room



                                                                 Gymnasium




                                                             NORTH STAND




                                                            Player's
*way Fans Entrance                                          Tunnel

  and Enclosures'


        Police Control       19-22                        so uth sta n d
                                                                                                              z
                                     c ru - " m "i
                                     Official
                                                                                    2 9 -3 2 3 3 -3 6
      KCK

      TURNSTILES    877771
                                                Director* Entrance
