             states:-


1.   My date of birth is 11th November 1942


2.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman stationed at Batemoor.     I have
     21 years service with Sheffield Corporation/SYMAS.        I hold
     the Miller Certificate and I am an extended trained
     assistant, which is an intermediary qualification between an
     ordinary ambulance attendant and a paramedic.        I completed
     this training in March 1989.


3.   I work on an emergency crew and on Saturday 15th April 1989
     I had been on the 0600 to 1400 morning shift.        However, we
     returned late from a call and logged out at Batemoor at
     1455.


4.   I then went home and took the dog for a walk.        When I got
     back at about 1550 my wife said she had heard on the radio
     that there was a problem at Hillsborough and there had been
     a request for ambulancemen to report in.        I think she was
     listening to Radio Sheffield.          I immediately telephoned
     central control and they told me to report to station.        No
     further information was given.        I was still in uniform and
     drove back to Batemoor where I met                 who had come
     in having seen the incident on TV.         We were the only two
     people there.




                                    ZL^o
We took an emergency vehicle, which was the same one I had
re-equipped after the morning shift, and radioed in green to
Control at about 1610.     We used the ordinary frequency and
were told to proceed to Hillsborough and to switch to ERC
channel.    No instruction was given as to which part of the
ground we should report to.


We made the journey very rapidly with flashing lights and
siren and since the police had, by this time, blocked off
all major junctions we had no traffic problems whatsoever.
We arrived in only about 8 minutes, the journey would
normally take 20/30 minutes.


We had no further radio contact on the way.     We arrived at
the Leppings Lane end because this was the direction from
which we had approached.    By this time everyone was leaving
the ground and Leppings Lane was a solid mass of people.
Fortunately we arrived from the Middlewood Road end and the
crowd was moving away in the other direction along Leppings
Lane.   We, therefore, managed to get within sight of the
gate without trouble.    It was about 1620 or 1625.


There were police officers outside the gate and I asked them
where the ambulance control point was.     They did not know,
so         called Control on ERC to find out.    We could not
get through, partly because the line was busy, and also
because of interference.       After about 5 minutes we heard
control giving a general instruction on ERC for all vehicles
to report to Herries Road Bus Station.         We, therefore,
followed the crowd at a snails pace down Leppings Lane
towards the bus station.


All I saw at    Leppings Lane endwas the crowd spilling out of
the ground.     No casualties or bodies were apparent and no
more ambulances were going in.      There were a lot of police
and two fire    tenders but I didnot see any police horses.


On arriving at Herries Road Bus Station we were still unable
to confirm our position to control, but Mr Eason was there,
co-ordinating operations and we reported to him.     There were
already about ten ambulances waiting and we parked with them
and stood by.   We waited for about an hour, after which EZ
________ arrived from the football ground and instructed
three vehicles, including mine, to go to the gym yard.        We
did so immediately.    It would be about 1730 or 1745.


On arrival in the yard behind the gym we parked alongside
other ambulances, about 8 or 9 in total.       Mr Hopkins came
and asked me to go round all the vehicles and collect      body
bags.   I did so with the help of another lad from Rotherham
whose name I do not know.    We took the bags to the gymnasium
and passed them inside.     There were many police dealing with
the bodies at this stage.       After this we returned to our
vehicles and waited.
12.   There was a long wait before It was decided how the bodies
      should be dealt with, during which time, we were able to
      stand by at one end of the gym which had been converted to a
      makeshift canteen.


13.   Eventually       and I were stood down without having been
      involved in the transfer of bodies.   On leaving Hillsborough
      we notified control on the domestic channel that we were
      returning to station and later confirmed our arrival in
      accordance with standard procedure.    We left the ambulance
      at Batemoor and logged out at about 2020.




Dated this         day of           1989.
