                        states:-

 1.   My date of birth is the 25th March 1962.

 2.    I am an Ambulanceman, although I do not hold formal
 qualifications and I have not yet attended the compulsory course
 leading to the Miller Certificate qualification.

 3. I joined the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
 in 1986 and spent 11 or 12 months as a part time dedicated day
 transport Ambulanceman at the Bentley Ambulance station.    In
^^Jtober 1987 I became a full time Ambulance man and I have
^remained at Bentley Ambulance Station.

 4. I have attended a compulsory two week training course and I
 am gaining experience doing the job.      I have previously been
 involved with transporting the physically handicapped and was
 employed on a community programme agency scheme transporting
 people, particularly the physically handicapped and members of
 PHAB prior to joining the Ambulance Service.

5. On Saturday the 15th April 1989 I was working a 0900 to 1630
day shift with my crew member and colleague

    The first I head of an incident at the Hillsborough football
ground was at approximately 1510 when control asked our position.
I reported that we were green at Sheffield Park Lane.     Control
ordered us to attend the Sheffield Northern General Hospital. I
had earlier heard control direct two Ambulances to Hillsborough
football ground, although I was not aware of the situation.     I
was aware that there was an incident at Hillsborough and I told
control that        and I were not a qualified crew. This is the
standard procedure and enables control to use qualified crews
wherever available before calling upon unqualified crews to
attend an incident. I remember that we were using channel 4 on
Saturday the 15th. Channel 4 is the usual channel for day crews.



                                   321
 7•                    was driving and we began to make our way to
 the Sheffield Northern General Hospital.      During the journey
 control contacted me and directed our vehicle to the Hillsborough
 football ground, where control said there were crush injuries. I
 was told that the vehicle should make its way to the Gymnasium
 entrance to the Hillsborough football ground.     I did not know
 where the Gymnasium entrance to the Hillsborough football ground
 was.    I ought to say we are a Doncaster crew and our call sign
 was D906.

      We approached the Hillsborough football ground from Herries
^oad and passed two Ambulances who were going in the opposite
  direction with their blue flashing lights and two tone horns on.
  At the junction of Herries Road and Penistone Road a traffic
  warden was unable to tell us where the entrance to the Gymnasium
 was and sent us south down Penistone Road, where a Police Officer
  re-directed us to the entrance. We drove north up Penistone Road
  and into the first entrance we saw. There an Ambulance officer
 directed us into the ground.     We were told to reverse in.   As
 soon as we had reversed into the ground the back doors were
 opened and four supporters ran to the doors with a casualty on an
 advertising hoarding board.    The board was placed on the steps
 and the casualty was lifted onto a cot.      The casualty was not
^reathing he had no pulse and was pale, although he still had
 some colour.    I was the attendant and I carried out this check.
 I cleared his mouth and inserted an airway into his mouth and I
 then used the bag and mask to put some air into his lungs.      I
 checked his pulse again. There was no pulse and I began cardiac
 massage. At that time we were instructed to move the Ambulance
 by a Senior Ambulance Officer to allow an Ambulance to exit the
 ground.   This was happening whilst I was still working on the
 casualty.                    closed the vehicles doors and exited
 the ground.    The vehicle was then parked a short way from the
 exit and ________________ came into the back of the vehicle to
                               3 22
 assist me with cardiac pulmonary resuscitation. The vehicle was
 parked in front of a row of terraced houses. Cardiac pulmonary
 resuscitation is more effective with two people and despite our
 efforts there was no apparent improvement in the patients
 condition. The colour had not improved, the pupils were dilated
 and on my instructions      1returned to the drivers seat and we
 made our way to the Northern General Hospital.     The radio was
 still tuned into channel 4 and the airways were very busy. We
 had not been instructed to change from channel 4 to channel 2 or
 to ERC.     I was still working on the patient who was not
 responding.    A Police motor cyclist outrider assisted the
 Ambulance's passage through traffic on its way to the hospital
 Rid I continued to work on the patient.     The patient smelt of
 alcohol.

 9. The journey from the ground to the Hospital probably took 10
 minutes and on arrival at the Northern General Hospital,         1
 used the Herries Road entrance and as soon as the vehicle came to
 a halt         assisted me in the rear in putting on the minute
 man equipment.   I had not done this earlier because it is not
 advisable to try to affix the minute man equipment when there is
 only one person in the rear of the Ambulance.     When putting on
 the minute man equipment I used suction to clear the patients
 airway.   The suction cleared traces of vomit away from the
^pirway.

 10.   I presumed casualty had been informed that we had arrived
 because a doctor arrived and jumped onto the Ambulance. He was a
 young man and he asked questions about the patient.     I believe
 this particular patient was one of the first casualties to be
 taken to the Northern General Hospital.      I recall the doctor
 asked about the state of the patients airway, the effect of
 attempted resuscitation and whether his pupils were dilated. The
 doctor asked the Police Constable if the crash team had been
 advised at the Northern General Hospital. I do not know what the
                                32 %
Police Constables response was but he had been very helpful and
he assisted with the movement of the patient, together with 3 or
4 porters, whilst the doctor,                 |and I continued to
resuscitate the patient all the time he was being moved.      The
patient was transported to casualty on the trolley and handed
over to the casualty staff. The doctor and another person took
charge of the patient when we reached casualty, which was very
busy because people were beginning to rush about as more
casualties arrived.   A doctor took over the cardiac pulmonary
resuscitation of the casualty who was still not responding.

 1. The Northern General Hospital kept our bag and mask because
  1 of their bag and masks were in use. I left casualty and met
a control Officer outside the department and I informed him of
the situation, namely that we were now minus a bag and mask, but
still had our minute man equipment and our Brook Airway.

12.    I returned with          to the vehicle where I radioed
control to confirm that I was clear at the Northern General
Hospital.   I had trouble communicating with control and I could
not receive their messages. I therefore informed control we were
returning to Hillsborough. On the second trip to Hillsborough I
drove and in Herries Road South I passed many Ambulances and
Police cars travelling in the opposite direction.     The traffic
    very busy and the Police were keeping the traffic to one side
allowing the Ambulances clear passage.

13.   We returned to the junction of Herries Road and Penistone
Road expecting to be directed to the same entrance we had used
before.   This time a Police Constable was directing traffic at
the junction of Herries Road South and Penistone Road.        He
directed us towards the South end of the ground. We drove down
Penistone Road and across the central reservation to gain access
to the rear of the South stand.     When we arrived there were
several Ambulances congregated in this area and a Fire tender
                             32.4
 too. I turned the Ambulance around and reversed it as instructed
 by a leading Ambulance man or Senior Officer. There were also a
 lot of Police in the area and the other Ambulance crews were busy
 getting their cots out of the vehicles and I saw several bodies
 lying in the car park.    I asked a Police Officer, who was near
 by, what the situation was.      The Police Officer told me to
 collect priority casualties and to leave the ground.

  14.    There were a lot of shocked people in the area and I loaded
  one cot with a conscious casualty and put that cot onto the
  Ambulance.   The casualty was suffering from suspected fractures
^ n d was complaining of chest pains. This patient was loaded very
"ently using a blanket.      I took the casualty's name and logged
  it. A young man in shock was also loaded into the Ambulance. He
 was in his early 20's and his name was taken and recorded in the
  l°g*           and I looked for other casualties because we had
  space on the Ambulance. _______________ was the attendant. We
 began to drive outof the South stand area and whilst doing so
 decided to pick up any walking wounded. We left the ground and
 turned into Penistone Road, travelled north and whilst doing so I
 noticed other Ambulances were arriving in Penistone Road.        I
 drove to the Gymnasium entrance off Penistone Road and saw
 Station Officer Eason.     I told him we had spare room on the
 vehicle but that we had a priority casualty.      Station Officer
^p^son told me to take the casualty direct to Hospital.         The
 traffic was very heavy and was lined up in Penistone Road. I
 travelled with lights and horns on up Penistone Road around the
 roundabout, I passed the bus depot and returned to the Herries
 Road route to Northern General Hospital. I made good progress
 and whilst driving I tried to make contact with control using
 channels 2 and 4 on the radio. I was unable to make contact with
 control.     I approached Northern General Hospital using the
 Barnsley Road entrance.    I was aware that the casualty who was
 suffering from crush injuries was lapsing into unconsciousness at
 times and I drove straight to the casualty department. Casualty
                              3£5
 helped me with the patient and the shocked patient was also
 unloaded.    Both were taken into casualty and the young lady
 doctor was briefed quickly by         |. I recall that the camera
 and T.V. men were making a nuisance of themselves outside the
 casualty department at the time. I found the control Officer who
 I had spoken to before and told him that I was popping back into
 casualty to recover our bag and mask. I could not find our bag
 and mask but obtained a hospital bag and mask. I reported this
 to the control Officer, put the bag and mask on the vehicle and
 the control Officer said I was clear to take the bag and mask
 with me.    I switched to the attendant on the return journey to
  illsborough and                   drove. I tried the radio in an
W t tempt to make contact with control. The radio was useless, all
 the channels were blocked and on channel 1 all I could receive
 was interference.

 15. We returned to the Hillsborough football ground via Herries
 Road South and at the junction of Herries Road and Penistone Road
 the Police Officer in control directed us to the Gymnasium
 entrance.   There was a queue of Ambulances waiting to enter the
ground and we joined the queue. We waited for a few minutes and
 I recall that there was a West Yorkshire Ambulance in front of us
and Derbyshire Ambulance behind us.        The queue moved quite
quickly and whilst we were in the queue I saw Ambulance Officer
#  ivid Jones and Station Officer           who instructed
and I to take our blankets out of the vehicle and take them to
the Gymnasium. I did this and returned to the Ambulance. Senior
Officer Jones told _____ and I to take our vehicle and Station
Officer Higgins to the rear of the ground.        Station Officer
Higgins climbed into the vehicle and told us that there were a
lot of casualties and dead people at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground. Station Officer Higgins directed us to Leppings Lane and
we drove into the ground from the Leppings Lane end. On arrival
at Leppings Lane end we passed the Fire Services Major Incident
vehicle and drove down the access road to the rear of the South
                              3£6
 stand.   There were bodies in the car park and each body was
 accompanied by a Police Constable.      The area we entered was
 controlled by the Police and when we arrived we were told by
 Station Officer Higgins to load three bodies onto the vehicle.
 Station Officer Higgins was coordinating the operations with the
 Police. One body was loaded into each cot and one body onto the
 floor of the vehicle in between the cots.          Each body was
 accompanied by a Police Constable. When the vehicle was loaded
 we returned to the Gymnasium entrance and reversed in to the
 ground and unloaded the bodies in the secured area to the rear of
 the Gymnasium.   The bodies were moved from the vehicle into the
     where there were a lot of bodies lined up on the floor in the
^Rsmporary mortuary.

 16.   Whilst in this area I recall catching sight of Senior
 Officer's Allan Hopkins and David Jones. The Police unloaded the
 bodies onto the floor and stayed with them.     David Jones told
        and I to go into the car park at the rear of the Gymnasium
 and wait there after we had obtained some refreshment from the
 mobile canteen under the North Stand.

 17.   We returned to our vehicle and I again tried to use the
 radio and make contact with control. Control was not receiving
 our messages.    We therefore reported to the Senior Officers on
^pie ground where we were and that we were clear.

18. I cannot remember the time but after waiting in our vehicle
for a short time David Jones took details from all the crews
whose vehicles were parked at the rear of the Gymnasium and he
then cleared some crews and told them to return to base and other
Ambulance men who had not been on duty but were at the match were
sent away to report for duty or sent home.

19. David Jones then asked for volunteers to remove bodies from
the temporary mortuary.        and I volunteered. We waited in
                              3£7
 our vehicle for a short while and then reported to Leading
 Ambulanceman              that our vehicle was low on fuel.     I
 think we were told to go to Longley Ambulance station and fill up
 with fuel. As we were leaving the Hillsborough ground I think
 the major accident vehicle returned to the car park at the rear
 of the Gymnasium.   We attended Longley filled up with fuel and
 returned to Hillsborough.   On our return we were instructed to
 make our way to the Northern General Hospital and transport
 bodies from there to the temporary mortuary in the Gymnasium for
 purposes of identification.    When we arrived at the Northern
 General Hospital there was confusion. The staff there were not
^ r e whether the bodies were to be returned to the Hillsborough
^rootball ground and there was a delay of probably an hour whilst
 this problem was sorted out.    About an hour after our arrival
 three bodies were loaded onto the vehicle, together with three
 Policemen and we returned to Hillsborough football ground.
 Relatives of the dead were arriving at the temporary mortuary.

 20. I radioed control to advise them of our position and I was
 still unable to make contact with them. Channel 1 and channel 2
 were not working on our radio set.

 21. On our return to the Hillsborough football ground I reported
 to an Officer who I had spoken to earlier in the day. We were
^^pld to reverse the vehicle towards the Gymnasium unload the
 bodies using sheets and poles and to place them in the Gymnasium.
  This was done and we returned with our vehicle to the car park
 at the rear of the Gymnasium and waited in our vehicle. We stood
 by for a short while and at 2100. David Jones asked for three
 crews to remain on duty to transport bodies to the Medico Legal
 Centre in Sheffield.          and I volunteered as a crew. All
 the other crews volunteered and David Jones stood us down. We
 returned to our station, deep cleaned the vehicle and booked off
 at approximately 2230.


                              32 8
        Dated this   3 7day of   fflfiY     1989.

        Signed.                  .........




r
i


    ♦




                                          32.9
