                      states:
1.   I was born on the 17th September 1965.
2.   I am an unqualified ambulance man.   I have not attended the
     residential course leading to the Miller Certificate
     gualifaction.
3.   I joined the ambulance service in February 1986, at
     Rotherham Ambulance Station and until August 1988, I was a
     dedicated day transport ambulance man.       I moved to Maltby
     Ambulance Station in August 1988, where I am now based as a
     full-time ambulance man.
4.   My previous experience includes two years experience as a
     Trainee Technical Pathology Technician at Sheffield's
     Childrens Hospital.
5.   I was not on duty on Saturday 15th April.
6.   I was travelling from Sheffield towards Wickersly when I saw
     police cars speeding along the road in the opposite
     direction.      I was driving along the Parkway when I saw a
     Maltby police car followed by an ambulance Range Rover and I
     recognised the driver as Alan Hopkins.      The Range Rover was
     travelling at high speed and I also heard on the radio that
     there was crowd trouble at the Hillsborough Football Ground.
     The radio report cited advertising hoardings being used as
     stretchers to transfer casualties off the pitch.       I saw a
     Maltby day crew travelling in the opposite direction on red.
     I decided that the incident at Hillsborough Football Ground
     must be something serious.     I drove home and telephoned
     Control.   Control told me to report to Maltby Station.   When
I arrived at the Station it was deserted.        I telephoned
Control from the Station and Control instructed me to take a
vehicle to the Hillsborough Football Ground as soon as
possible.     I took an Emergency vehicle and drove to the
Penistone Road entrance to the Hillsborough Football Ground.
I met an ambulance liaison officer there.   I was using radio
channel 3 and the call sign of the ambulance was Romeo 607.
On arrival I joined a queue of ambulances waiting to gain
access to the ground.        I enlisted the assistance of a
traffic warden and requested him to sit in the vehicle for
safekeeping whilst I entered the ground and spoke to Station
Officer Paul Eason who told me to wait until I was called
into the ground.   I recall seeing David Jones in the area at
that time.     I returned to my vehicle relieved the traffic
warden and shortly after that an ambulance man asked me for
the vehicle's body bags and blankets. He took the blankets
and body bags out of the vehicle.   I waited in the queue for
approximately ten minutes.    David Jones waved me out of the
line.   I drove to where David Jones was standing and he told
me that he had a doctor, nurses and a matron who had to be
transported to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.                I
contacted Control and informed them I was driving to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital.       Control instructed me to
contact the liaison officer                   when I arrived.
I arrived at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, the doctor,
nurses and matron left the vehicle, entered the Hospital, I
reported to                     that I was a single handed
     crew.      She gave me instructions to tranfer two stretcher
     cases from Ward F at the Royal Hallamshire to Ward D at the
     King Edwards Hospital.    I carried out the transfer, returned
     to the Royal Hallamshire,     where                    told me
     there were no more cases to transfer.           I reported to
     Control.     I was stood down at 1800.   I returned to base and
     arrived at 1830.       I informed Control that I was clear at
     base.   Control thanked me for my assistance.       I returned
     home.


Dated this   rj    day of                     1989
