    *
K

        Station Officer Higgins.




        1505 hours - A crowd disturbance was noticed at Leppings Lane, I asked
        Station Officer Eason and Ambulanceman                to have a look.     I then
        notified control of a crowd problem at Hillsborough but there did not
        appear to be many casualties at this time.


        Station Officer Eason returned and informed me that many people were
        injured.     I informed control of this and then proceeded to the Leppings
        Lane end to try to establish the number of people injured.     I was still not
        aware at this time of the severity of the situation as many of the injured,
        and all of the bodies were on the floor behind the Leppings Lane wall.


        I had extreme problems with radio equipment at this time, transmitting was
        impossible from the location of the incident.     The crowd were lashing out
        at everyone in uniform, including ambulance staff.


        I returned to the vehicle to transmit to control and was told by a Police
        Inspector that there were approximately 30 bodies at Leppings Lane end
        (they had seen these on video).     I passed this information to control.     I
        used the parked ambulance at Penistone Road by the gymnasium as a base and
        asked the Police to make sure that the gymnasium was available as per the
        major incident plan.


        Shortly afterwards two ambulances arrived.     I directed them onto the pitch
        and told them to find Station Officer Eason who was at the far end of the
        pitch.     At this time Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Morley and Mr. Dale arrived at
        approximately 1520 hours.


        I was directing Police and fans to the gymnasium area with casualties and
        bodies, but the medical resources available at this time were very limited.
        Mr. Hopkins asked for the major incident vehicle, which arrived shortly
        afterwards with Station Officer            Iat approximately 1545 hours.
Station Officer Higgins.


We unloaded body bags, canvasses and poles and took them to the gymnasium
area.   As more vehicles and staff arrived, I tried to establish the more
serious injuries, make cots available and transport to hospital.   Walking
wounded were also put into vehicles were a seat was available.


From the start of the incident, I had tried to make a route available
through the gymnasium area using both entrances, one in - one out, but this
was impossible until later as Police vehicles were parked at the junction
of the gymnasium area.


By this time, Mr. Hopkins had taken control of the incident and I was left
estimating condition and priority of patients, and directing ambulance
staff as they loaded patients.


Mr. Jones had by this time arrived and was dealing with availability of
staff and vehicles.


By approximately 1650 hours, the gymnasium area was clear of casualties and
I was told by Mr. Hopkins to take two vehicles to the entrance area at
Leppings Lane to collect eleven bodies which were at this location and
return them to the temporary mortuary.   This I did.   I was not aware of
this incident.   Upon my return I was told by Mr. Hopkins to go to Medico
Legal and await vehicles arriving, ensure as efficient turn round as
possible of vehicles and return the vehicle complete with body bags to the
temporary mortuary at Hillsborough.


Superintendent Dale took me to the Medico Legal centre at 1800 hours and I
remained there until 2000 hours.


No bodies were received at the Medico Legal during this time as an amended
plan was agreed at the ground during this period.


At 2100 hours I returned to the ground with Superintendent Dale and helped
with the loading of bodies for transport to Medico Legal.
Station Officer Higgins.




I left the ground at 2330 hours to go home.


Conclusions


From the start of the incident we were in the wrong place - at ground
level.


If we had been in our usual place high in the ground we would have been
aware of the incident more quickly and Police Officers would have been more
readily available.


Mr. Eason, myself and static crews could not contact each other by radio,
we could only contact control with extreme difficulty.    The equipment was
inadequate.


The Police Officers both men and sergeants seemed unaware of the incident
plan for the ground.    They wanted to put casualties and bodies into the
nearest ambulance.


I found in the initial stages of the incident that it was difficult to make
fans and police accept that the bodies they were bringing out to me were
dead.    I feel that a team and doctors at the onset of the incident at my
post (casualty and mortuary) in the gymnasium would have helped greatly.


The senior St. Johns staff helped readily but the junior staff who were
children could not cope and should not have been put into this position.


As the incident progressed, St John senior staff were left dealing with
their own cadets and were not available to help with medical teams.


The numbers of off duty SYMAS road staff that attended the ground were
invaluable.   They were a major factor in ensuring the incident was dealt
with as quickly as it was.
Station Officer Higgins.


To document events as they happen as per major incident plan is impossible,
unless you have sufficient officers at locations.      I found myself directing
the incident and still treating many patients as medical staff in the
required numbers could not have been available.


The response time to the ground by SYMAS officers, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Jones,
__________ , Superintendent Dale and Station Officer            was greatly
appreciated by Station Officer Eason and myself.    The number of officers to
control an incident is as important as the numbers of crews.      The jobs that
need to be done in a situation of this level need officers capable of
following instructions from the senior officer.


The parking of vehicles outside the ground should not be allowed, it
greatly hindered the ambulances trying to attend the incident.
