__________       states:

1.    I was    born on 19th October,     1966.       I am a Qualified

     Ambu1ancewoman with SYMAS.       I joined SYMAS in October, 1983

     as a cadet, and remained a cadet for two years.         After the

     two year period I was seconded to Hoyland             Station     in

     Barnsley where I remained for approximately 18 months.            At

     this point in time I was still unqualified and my main tasks

     involved moving geriatric patients and ordinary out­

     patients.     Thereafter I moved to Middlewood Station in

     Sheffield and proceeded to become a Qualified Ambulancewoman
     in or about September,   1987.       At the beginning of this

     year,    I was transferred to Longley Station where I have
     remained.

2.   Whilst a cadet, I did a lot of in depth theory in anatomy, I

     was taught basic ambulance aid and resuscitation.          I took

     an ambulance driving course and obtained the Gold Award in
     the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme.          After ceasing as a

     cadet, in order to gain experience I travelled at all times

     with a Qualified Ambulance person.          During this period,   I

     became involved in accident and emergency treatment, but at

     all times with the assistance of a Qualified Ambulance
     person.

3.   I was on duty on Saturday 15th April, 1989, and my hours
                  ISOOfa 0200Q H .
     were to be -Q &QQ %e-1409. I worked the same shift on Friday

     14th April, 1989.     I was at home on the afternoon of the

     incident,   and first became aware      of    the   situation at
     approximately 1645 when I turned on the local radio to find
out the football score.     As I became aware of the incident,
I immediately put my uniform together and travelled down to

Longley as quickly as possible in my own car, a distance of

approximately 5 miles.      I arrived at Longley station at
approximately 1715.

One of my colleagues,                    , who had also heard

about the incident, arrived some five minutes after myself.
Upon arrival,     I informed Control that the 1800 shift was

available to go out on the road.     I was informed by Control

that we were not required down at Hillsborough, although a
few minutes later at approximately 1745, I received a call

from Control informing us to go down to Northern General

Hospital, intensive care unit, which was approximately one
mile away.   I drove the ambulance directly to the hospital,

and when we arrived at the hospital we had to pass by the

Accident and Emergency Department,     at which point we were
asked whether we had arrived to transfer a patient to the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital for a scan.     We replied yes, and

were then informed that we were to take a patient from the

resuscitation room.      We proceeded to this room and loaded

the casualty on to a cot, and put the patient into the back

of the ambulance with a team of two doctors and a nurse.
We drove on emergency to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, a

distance of approximately 4/5 miles. I drove to the Scan

Department, and                  and I unloaded the patient,
with the medical team behind.      The casualty was on a heart

monitor and was receiving oxygen therapy.     The patient was
taken straight in to the Scan Department, where we handed

the patient over together with whatever notes we had in our

possession.              and I then went back to the ambulance,

radioed Control and were requested to go back directly to

Northern General Hospital, again to the Intensive Care Unit

in order to transfer another patient to the Scan Department

at Royal Hallamshire Hospital.       We proceeded straight back
to Northern General       Hospital   to pick    up   this    second

casualty, again with a medical team in attendance.             This

patient was also on a heart monitor and was receiving oxygen
therapy.      I drove immediately back to the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Scan Department,      unloaded the patient from the
ambulance with the help of                        and handed the

patient over to the medical team in the hospital.            On our
return to our ambulance vehicle we again radioed Control who

again requested us to go back to Northern General Hospital,

Intensive Car Unit, in order to take a third patient to the
Scan Department at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.               We

carried out exactly the same process as before.

After   transferring      the   third   patient   to   the   Royal

Hallamshire Hospital, on return to our ambulance, we radioed
Control and were requested to return to Longley Station,

which we duly did.      On our return we cleaned some of the

ambulance vehicles and re-fuelled some vehicles.

During the course of the night,         we received a call from
Control requesting us to help with the removal of bodies
from the gymnasium at Hillsborough.            We agreed to work
     overtime at the end of our shift.

7.   At approximately 0145 we received another call from Control

     basically to confirm that we were ready to go down to

     Hillsborough.       We left Longley at this time and drove

     straight to Hillsborough,    approaching down Herries Road

     South and on to Penistone Road.      We liaised with one of our

     ambulance officers at the gates, marked A on the attached
     plan.   The officer we met was Paul Eason, who is my Station

     Officer.     Mr Eason asked               and   I to turn the

     ambulance around and open up the rear doors in front of the

     exit to the gymnasium, in order to allow bodies to be loaded

     onto the vehicle.       Paul Eason explained the system of
     identification of the bodies, and once identified the bodies

     we taken in threes into the ambulances - two bodies were
     laid on the cots and the third body was laid on the floor in

     between the cots.      All bodies were inside body bags.     I

     assisted with the loading of some of the bodies.     each body
     was accompanied by an individual policeman, which meant that

     there were three policeman in the back of the ambulance with
     the fatalities.

8.   We drove straight to the Medico Legal Centre,        where we

     waited outside until the ambulance in front of us had off

     loaded their bodies into the Centre.       I then reversed the
     ambulance into the Centre.        I helped off load the bodies
     onto waiting      trolleys whereupon the individual police

     officers took over for the purposes of undressing bodies
     etc.

                                38<\
9.             and I then got back into our ambulance and as we
     knew approximately how many bodies required removal from the

     gymnasium,   we drove straight back to Hillsborough without

     contacting Control,      and upon our return we carried out

     exactly the same process as before.       I am not sure whether

     we carried nine or twelve bodies down to the Medico Legal
     Centre from the gymnasium,        but I do recall that the last

     three bodies we removed were unidentified at that point in

     time.     After off loading the last three bodies at the

     Medico Legal Centre, I drove back to Hillsborough, and when

     we arrived we were informed by a police officer that no more

     bodies required transportation down to the Medico Legal
     Centre.               and I then drove back to Longley Station

     refuelled the vehicle and washed the same,       took off both

     cots in order for them to be cleaned and then signed off at
     approximately 0630.


Dated this 5 ^ day of Mcvcf      1989.




                                 V\0
