                 states
1.   I live at                                   Sheffield.
     I was born on the 25th December, 1946.
2.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman and have been with SYMAS for
     nine and a half years.     I have been based at Parkway for
     the last two and a half years.
3.   I worked 0800 to 1630 on Thursday and 0800 hours to 1530 on
     Friday.
4.   It was my day of on Saturday.     I was at home in the garden
     when my wife came out at about 1530 to say that there had
     been a tragedy at Hillsborough.    Apparently her sister had
     rung her to see if I was at the match.     I rang Control and
     asked if they wanted any assistance.     I was asked to go to
     Parkway.
5.   I arrived at Parkway at about 1550.      The place was locked
     and so I decided to go down to Hillsborough in my own car.
     I went down to the Penistone Road entrance.        I was not
     aware that this was a meeting point or that the gymnasium
     was the casualty clearing point or mortuary.      This simply
     seemed to be the best route into the ground.     I arrived at
     about 1610 to 1615.    Penistone Road was full of supporters
     leaving the ground.   I did not have any radio with me to
     contact Control.
6.   I parked the car outside the Penistone Road entrance on the
     road.      I then went towards the gymnasium because that
     seemed to be where most activity was.     I saw an ambulance
     crossing the central reservation to go up Herries Road South
     and he was being helped by the police.
7.   I virtually straight away saw Station Officer
     asked him what I could do and he told me to take charge of
     the Major Disaster Vehicle and make sure that no-one
     unauthorised entered it.      I went to the vehicle but within
     a few seconds            shouted that I should instead crew up
     with               who was on his own and had an ambulance
     parked on the road outside the gates.      I then went to the
     ambulance parked on the road and we were told to standby.
     We did not report in or use our radios,             was in the
     driver's seat.   I do not know what frequency the radio was
     on.
8.   It was now about 1625.     Another ambulance arrived behind us
     so we pulled slightly forward.     A message was passed to us
     verbally from I think Assistant Divisional Officer David
     Jones.     He asked us to go to Leppings Lane to collect
     bodies and bring them back to the gymnasium.      This was the
     first that I realised that the gymnasium was the mortuary.
9.   We set off to Leppings Lane.       We had no problem with the
     journey.    We saw a policeman who directed us to where the
     bodies were, by a fence outside the gates.       We could not
     tell how many bodies there were.        We collected three.
     There was at least one ambulance following behind us and
     maybe another.    We then carried on round the inner road
     going past the executive boxes and back out onto Penistone
     Road and back to the gymnasium entrance.       We reversed the
     ambulance so that the bodies could be unloaded in the


                              26
      gymnasium.      There were already a lot of bodies in the
      gymnasium.
10.   I spoke to I think               or Jones to ask for further
      instructions.      We were told to go to the spare ground
      beside the gymnasium and to standby.         There were already
      about four or five ambulances standing by there.         I still
      had not used my radio by this stage.        I would say that the
      time was about 1730 hours although I do not really know.
11.   More vehicles arrived and then Mr Jones and Mr Hopkins
      called everyone together and split us up in to groups,
      depending on who was on duty and what shift and who was not
      on duty.     He then told my group of about five or six people
      to standby in a vehicle at the ground.       We went back to our
      vehicles.     I was due to fly from East Midlands Airport to
      Majorca at 2400 so I decided to ask Station Officer
      whether I was needed any further.       He said I could go home.
      My car was still parked outside so I went home.        This was
      about 1900 to 1915.
12.   I was aware of the Major Incident plan but was not aware of
      any Hillsborough plan.


Dated this   6^     day of   MY.      1989.




                               11
