                      ^j/v\a<w4ost->fo c J f l o s t x
                                        'Lo^fc^eL^>


ROGER MORLEY    born on 18th April 1947 states:-



1.     I am the Assistant Divisional Officer (Support Services) for
South Yorkshire       Me t r o p o l i t a n   Ambulance   Service,    whose

headquarters are situate at Heather Close of Moorgate Road,
Rotherham.



2.     I joined the West Riding County Ambulance Service at Maltby

on the 14th August 1967 and have completed 21 years service.                I

attended the West Riding Training Course in 1968 and attained the

standard Miller qualification.             Since 1968 I have attended many
supervisory training and Management courses including Block



Authority     First   Line Supervisors            Course which is held at
Markfield in Leicestershire.



3.     I have over 21 years experience of the Ambulance service and

for 8 years I was an Ambulanceman and one year as                     Leading

Ambulanceman at Maltby.            I then became aLiaison Officer and

transfered to Rother’         "rom 1976 to 1977 when I was appointed

Control Officer. In -xvtta, I was appointed Superintendent Officer

responsible for standards and efficiency and on 1st March 1988 I

was appointed Control Room Superintendent. On the 1st January

1989    I was appointed Assistant Divisional               Officer Support
Services.



4.     I was a duty Officer during the weekend 14th to 17th April
1989 and my duty commenced at 1700 on the 14th.      From that time I

was on call should the Ambulance headquarters need to contact a
Senior Officer that weekend.       I was not contacted on Friday

evening or early Saturday morning and I had arranged to attend

the H.Q. on Saturday morning to meet a British Telecommunication
Engineer, who was installing a telephone in my office.          I was

conscious of the Cup Semi-’final and of the problems which the
movement of vehicles in the North Sheffield area might cause for

Ambulances caught up in any congestion as a result of the match

at Hillsborough.     I had been in Headquarters dealt with the

British Telecommunication Engineer and I was leaving the office

at 1130 hours just as Alan Hopkins the Deputy Chief was arriving.

I had earlier arranged to meet Alan at a bridge which overlooked
the Ml motorway for the purpose of evaluating the amount of

traffic and any problems which may be caused by congestion in and

around the area of Hillsborough, and to assess potential problem

areas for the movement of Ambulances in that same area.      I spoke

to Alan Hopkins in the -entranod^to the Ambulance Station- and
arranged to meet him at about 1300.


5.   I returned to the Ambulance           approximately 1320 and
Alan Hopkins was not there.   I went to the control room and asked
                                                        kfKlW
where he was.   I was told Alan had gone out and I         good idaa

where he would be.     I climbed into David Jones', Range Rover,

which I had permission to use on Saturday the 14th April.          I
drove the Range Rover to the Ml and saw that Alan Hopkins was
                             A/UojMjLy




parked in his Escort on the bridge which overlooks the motorway

at the junction of Rotherway and Parkway.     I drove to where Alan

Hopkins was parked and I parked behind him, left the Range Rover

and spoke to him.     The time was now about 1330 or 1345 and he

commented to me that things were very quiet.     We remained on the

bridge over the Ml for a short time I then told Alan Hopkins that
I was going to drive into Sheffield.     He drove away and I drove

onto the Ml, travelled North and left the Motorway at junction 35
following the A269 into Chapletown.      I drove into Sheffield via

High Green and Ecclesfield calling at the Northern General
Hospital to check on the casualty department where I saw one ^>f

our vehicles but otherwise the depai^ment was very quiet. j^JI left

the hospital grounds and drove down Herries Road ■Soutfi^       As I

approached the and "~I saw two Police vehicles        outside   the

Devonshire Arms. Public house.      Fans were being directed down
                  \
Herries Road Soutlv towards the Sheffield Wednesday Hillsborough

ground.   The time was now approximately 1400 or 1415 and I
decided not to drive down Herries Road knowing that I might run

into problems because .of the numbers of people attending the

football match.     I knew there would be two Station Officers,

Eason and Higgins inside the Hillsborough ground and my presence
at the ground was not absolutely necessary as they were capable

of overseeing the Ambulance in attendance.     It was their job as

Liaison Officers to co-ordinate any problems outside the ground
with the Police inside it.   I was responsible as Duty Officer for

the whole County and I had to remain mobile and available to
react to any situation which may arise and require my presence
and I drove into the City centre and noticed that a lot of Police

were on duty.        I then drove down Sheffield Parkway and made my
way home.



     At 1445 or 1450 I told my wife that I would return David's

Range Rover because I believed that at about that time in the
afternoon the vast majority of fans would be in the Hillsborough

ground.      I left home to drive to the station at approximately

1450.      The drive from home to th«              usually takes about 10

minutes.      I was in Moorgate Road/Hthen       Station Officer Baaon -a-

£te«rt±en—GfrSieer Higgins, was radioed by control who were asking

why the Police wanted a fleet of Ambulances at Leppings Lane.                I
could only hear control on the radio in the Range Rover. I could
not hear the reply.         The “time was about 1565— ant]         was only a
few hundred yards away irom m e Amcuiance-etationr            j.   pulled into

the Headquarters drive and was about to alight from the vehicle

when Alan Hopkins raced towards me and indicated he would drive

and I should move into the passenger seat and at the same time
savino to me        "wp'up rrr»+- onmo ‘•‘▼'ouble at Hillsborough,       I'll

                                          what Alan Hopkins said to me
in   the    Range   Rover    whilst   driving    at   speed   towards     the

Hillsborough Football ground,         although I distinctly remember

operating the siren and two tone horn whilst Alan concentrated on

driving at speed via Sheffield Parkway,               the City Centre and

Penistone Road to the football ground.           I operated the radio and


                                           412
                                    M>o/KjLAy




Alan told me to get onto control and tell control to clear all

available vehicles, in case there was a need to call Ambulances
to the scene.         He wanted all available Ambulances to be clear of

any existing commitments and to be ready to respond and those

vehicles were to tell control as soon as they should become
green.      Green is the code used to stand all available Ambulances

ready to respond to a request for assistance.           I heard control
broadcast the ^message to all Symas ambulances         on the emergency
        2L ' '
channel



      All the ambulances are controlled by radio from the ambulance
     i*±©r - andr   the control station^-telephoned the other ambulance

stations to call upon any ambulances parked up but available and
on call although not mobile.



       I was aware that Alan Hopkins had been in the control room
(■
when telephone messages had been received although I cannot

remember him telling me specifically what had been said, he

obviously knew more about the situation we were approaching than

I did and I recall there may have been          mention that there was a
crowd control problem at Hillsborough ground.



J.     During the last few hundred yards of the journey as we

approached the ground at speed Alan Hopkins said to me "Why are

the ambulances going to Leppings Lane, Leppings Lane is not the
collection point.         They should have been going to the First Aid
room at the gymnasium".



ifi.   We arrived at Hillsborough at 1523/^ and followed two fire

service vehicles along Penistone Road, one was the Fire services

incident control vehicle and the other a tender.              I remember
commenting on the fact that the Fire service had their incident

control vehicle on Penistone Road and that it did not turn into

the ground but continued on and passed the entrance to the

Gymnasium presumably to attend the Leppings Lane end.         However we

turned into the ground and concertina gates were opened to allow
us in.            fcfae-^j-etrrftoy tlmo -woo protmbly ao— -Little— as— i&
                                              Cr~    -Wtou.
minutes buL may have- boon— 12—mimitoo anc (3n arrival I noticed a

large number of Police Officers who were waiting in the area to
the west of the north stand and at least six Police Officers were

mounted on horse back waiting very close to the vehicular access

point onto the pitch.         Alan and I alighted from the Range Rover.

Alan left me by the Range Rover and he went to speak to a _____-

Boiixaa^dftficer   and following a short exchange^.with that officer

he ran down the vehicular access slope and onto the pitch.           Alan

had told me to stay with the vehicle and as he               disappeared

onto the pitch, t— radlood contro±— l(J uunfirm we had arrived at. the-

m i l o b orough ground.    ,1 spoke to Duty controller              «and

instructed him to pass on the message rthat I required as many

vehicles as possible to be made available for Hillsborough/^ Alan -
Hbpkrns told me    to   gex as many vehicles lo bhe ground as qulUJcly

n?                  T ■"»|i|i!‘   fciTthqT call t^
                         warf?     P -* r r a ffg n ii    in iiia ^ a t e l v . —


                                   S<j2/v x «-^ O S
 ll.    'I recall that ati ambulance ^was parked in the entrance to the

 ground off          Penistone Road with its rear doorswide open                      with no

 cots and no staff and no one in attendance >fos seve-Lal mimitees-r
 The whole area of the entrance off Penistone Road was bedlam at
 the time, and-thaT-p            ar>                         «m...»hfl-Janja P^rr^o rni^n-

 th-sut— the— Hillshnrnngh— incident— was— a majog— 1-no id ant— and_all
 Whicles-woro to ohangn t~n nhannal- 1.                     As the-message wac drawing

 'fee— a close Alan Hopkins returned and A^oid me to **— get— that feher;
   0^<K       Stp r i- ft—         ^XSL .
 Ma^ax venicie             — and-1 immediately relayed that message by

 radio ^ o                       the Duty Control Officer at the Ambulance
 -stationrT I -anknnm]edgftd— thn mrsaage— from— control—                           — a major

 icmidmiL and ifejquesLBd LHe Majax vuhlulw.                           I was told that the

 Majax vehicle was already on its way„ fco— the— inaidant— as ■ a

 previous— request— had— been roopondod to.                           I ‘retail— that— I— was—

 r-pTT-ririnrj tn q-ha-M ryfl Q-F^ifccgr^                ^»t that time .>^ |             j
                                                                                         -JWtfli

/^€he~ du^^ officer for the                                       Ti^O to 2400.       T aaf»4rr

 rggues'ted^gs man-^—vchicloa— aa aould—'possibly ~B&—raillod— upon— to—
 a^s.ist— atLJii-lAgSorou^^ tQ-^e~~crjrgoctod to-the. ground immgrH.atoly -
 I^WUL- jCQQtrol jthere were-mahy'B«gii»H"««r.r^ many fatalities ,— I_

 coUld^s^e>^the-cg s u a ltires “Biainq b iouuht p a st mo and In —fr o n t o t me""

 nn>-4wft« H n g s          -t-h-t q -Mmn T r.rao             ng +-<-> asnflr t a in hptj many

 vehicles might bo needed -to oopo with tho number of casualties at

 the ground.         I saw one of our vehicles coming off the pitch

 having great difficulty getting a clear exit through the narrow


                                                   41 t>
                               A A /o r4ji>Y




vehicular access way and the Ambulance managed with difficulty to
clear the obstacles and leave the ground.


            Our V-tkACAa^>/ I
    2.I- wao consciouS^^f— Ctre— fact— thorte— one ambutanee had had
                                        fj«wv»wuw ^vt-o  ,zAjL->
difficulties leaving the grminri^vfn fhn FaniVftnnn ffnnri— onj-ra^ra

<anad I considered this could become aAproblem.     The area was in
total chaos,    people were running off the pitch looking into

ambulances which were arriving, filling them up with casualties,

some of whom were seriously injured and needed to be cleared from

the ground immediately and some who were not so seriously injured
who could probably be dealt with at the ground or wait to be

cleared. Priority was given to the more seriously and critically

injured.     There were a lot of police in the area but no one

appeared to be in controlj         coordinating the efforts of the
police force, the fire service or the ambulance service and I

decided I would organise my own priorities for clearing the

seriously and critically injured. I also attempted to introduce a
system for incoming and outgoing ambulances which would allow

them to clear the area quickly without congesting the access/exit
off and onto Penistone Road.              ^                 t/v      .




r




         The spectators,   some of whom were    distraught        were
physically manhandling me and around me there was fighting
between the supporters whilst vehicles were moving in and out of

the ground.      I could see a lot of people moving to the north

stand carrying injured and dead people.




1     I was still trying to establish a casualty holding point in

the north stand/Penistone area.       I was particularly concerned

about the vehicles arriving and leaving from the Penistone Road

access/exit.     I was also concerned about the distribution of

equipment and my job was made extremely difficult because I was

inundated with requests to help people,     give advice,    hand out
equipment, direct able qualified volunteers to those areas where

assistance was needed most, whilst trying to keep the ambulance

flow as even and unhindered as possible.



Ip.   Although    I cannot   recall   the time    I remember   being

approached by two men who told me that they were qualified
doctors and volunteered their assistance.        I sent them to the

north stand gymnasium where I knew they could help casualties or

certify   the    dead.   I was    also   approached    by   several

Nottinghamshire Ambulance service men who asked if they could
offer assistance and I sent those people to the North Stand
sports hall too.     My priority with the volunteers was to direct

them to give assistance to the living casualties and whilst I was

doing this I was constantly pulled, jostled and man-handled by
distraught people.



        I tried to establish a routine and assess the severity of
tne injured in order so that when an ambulance arrived I could

give priority to loading the more serious injuries and evacuating

them first.    I recall a St. John's Ambulance lady Superintendent

asked me to get an Ambulance immediately for a man who she said
was dying.    I recall I was able to load that particular casualty

onto an ambulance and evacuate him quickly.



ip.   I was constantly aware that I needed to establish my own

priorities    for dealing with the overwhelming requests      for

assistance whilst marshalling the evacuation of casualties and
the movements of the Ambulances in a very confined area populated

by the police, fire service, the injured the grief stricken and

unsympathetic opposing fans.    The police were working extremely

hard and if I had a problem a policeman in the area intervened

and allowed me to get on with the job in hand and the police

comforted and dealt sympathetically with the many distressed
people in my immediate area.



fo.   I was always conscious that ambulances were being stripped
       of their equipment as soon as the crews had left to attend to the
       inj ured.



       121.   The ambulances which I assisted in loading often left the

       Penistone Road area carrying as many as seven casualties at a
       time and this was done to evacuate as many casualties as possible

       in the shortest available time to get them to the hospital which

       could provide the treatment needed without delay and in the
       circumstances I had no option, I needed to get the many injured

       specialist treatment and the only way to clear the large number
       of casualties was to utilise every available square foot of
       ambulance space.




   t    2.    I    remember being asked by distraught          fans to get an

       ambulance onto the pitch because two doctors were resuscitating a

       casualty.      Tfee— access —frrf~~the ambulances onto~~llie piLc.li fSas
       pi-^lful^y^ipadequate— 3Jhe access was^HSr^ow and the ^ n g l e of

                                                                        'which,

        bmpounded/fiy the numbei'^fef^fans in^-fche area, roaffik acces^/to the
       pi^ch/^xtyemely clirficyrlt and/Kaza^aous.^/The .embuianc^s n&e£ted

                                               orris simplv/to getHrrom/^Che

                                               ~was liul d salu ajLBd lor fans

                               At this time I was also liaising with the

       police and fire services men who were on the scene^L         Although I

       had little contact with the St. John's Ambulance Brigade, I gave
       what advice I could in the circumstances to the police and fire


                                                11


olcL                                           ~~     4 1 1)
services and I did not,       apart from contact with the one St.
John's Ambulance Officer, speak to members of their brigade;-
they were themselves very busy.



^   .   I was probably engaged in marshalling the casualties and
Ambulances and organising the distribution of equipment and

evacuation of injured whilst liaising with all services and

giving advice as required for possibly one and a half hours.



2/4.    I went to find Alan Hopkins because although I cannot recall
who, someone had given me a message to go and assist him.          I
recall at this time I was unable to contact control on channel 1

and I remember that I made a comment to radio control shortly

after I had received the order to transfer to channel 1 that I
could not get that channel.     The only noise I could hear on the

channel     was   a faint crackling and the disjointed voice of

Superintendent Clarke whose voice is quite distinctive because he
is a "cockney".      I recall other Officers were making calls from

the Range Rover which was used as a mobile communication centre

to maintain radio contact with control and use was also made of

its mobile phone to make telephone contact.



7^.     I met Alan Hopkins together we proceeded into the gymnasium,

which was being used as a temporary mortuary.          There was   a
shortage of body bags.
ft •   I was sent by Alan Hopkins to make a physical count of the
bodies which had been received by the Northern General Hospital
and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.



2/.    I drove in an Escort motor car to the Norther General

Hospital and I remember arriving there at about 1700         because

there had been accident involving a Police motorcyle outside the
Hospital.   I met a Police woman inside the Hospital and was told

there had been 118 casualties,   11 of which were fatalities.      I
left the Northern General and drove to the Royal Hallamshire.      I

was told by staff that there had been 80 casualties and it was

thought there was one fatality although there was some confusion

and they told me there may in fact be two fatalities.        When I

arrived at the Royal Hallamshire I remember there were a lot of
people waiting    at the Hospital     to accept   casualties    and

fatalities.    This is the procedure as laid down in the major

incident plan and there was obviously confusion about the bodies
from the Hillsborough Football ground.



^8.    Whilst in the Hospital    I met a Police Inspector      from

Sheffield and the General Manager of the Hospital David Baldwin

who told me how many casualties the Hospital had and said that
the Hospital was geared up and ready to accept the bodies.    David

Baldwin's assistant, who was also present, told him that all the

bodies were going to the Medico Legal Centre.     This confused me

because my understanding is that the Medico Legal Centre can only
                          l'4/O




take 45 bodies and I left the hospital, returned to the car and

attempted to speak -to radio control using channel 2.   I could not

speak to them, there was,, a problem with the radio and although
they could speak ~fcO" me I could not speak to them.



29.    I used the Vodaphone and spoke to Superintendent- Smith.      I

informed him that I had made       the physical    body check     and
requested him to relay the information to Alan Hopkins.         I also

requested confirmation of the bodies which were going to the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital.       I reported the problem with the
radio to him and I made my return journey to Hillsborough.



3jb.   At 18^00 I used the radio again in the Escort motor car and

made contact with control without difficulty.      I spoke to

          and reported that I had had difficulties with the radio,
which appeared to have abated.



3p..   I arrived at Hillsborough and I was informed by David Jones

that Alan Hopkins did not want to move the Range Rover as it was

still being used as a communication centre as it had been during
the afternoon.




f2.    The operations from the Range Rover had been moved to the

rear of the gymnasium behind the North Stand, y The Range Rover
                                                                         x



was being used to pass many messages and particularly for people

wanting to let their families know they would not be returning


                                      14

                                       f   Ft
home and they would be working or that they had been delayed due
to the incident at Hillsborough.



      David Jones then called a meeting of the staff and I recall

that all live casualties had been cleared from the ground before

17^00.    Most of them had gone when I left the ground to carry
out the physical body count at the Hospitals.


                                                                   \
r .\Z    think I arrived back at Hillsborough at about 18yf00~-ea=-„
1Q ^30~*an
18      a fl on my ..arrival most of the equipment--of the -Ambulance ■■

-service had been exhausted^^^



3^.   On my return    I went to the North Stand gymnasium and Alan

Hopkins briefed me about      the   situation   and   procedure   for
transferring bodies to the Medico Legal Centre.



^6.   Ambulances were to be sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

to collect the bodies which had been delivered there and they
were to be returned to the gymnasium for identification purposes.

The bodies which had been sent to the Northern General were also

to be collected and returned to the gymnasium.        The bodies were

to be cleaned up, laid out, photographed and each body was to be

accompanied by a Police Officer.    The bodies were laid out on one
side of the gymnasium and the photographs were to be erected on

the opposite side.    The relatives of the deceased were to be
shown the photographs and if they recognised the photograph they
 were    to   be   shown   the body   for the purposes      of   formally

 identifying the deceased.       For the purpose of bringing the bodies

 out from behind the screened off part of the gymnasium,              the

 ambulance service provided cots.




 t7.    All the ambulance vehicles were called into Penistone Road

 gymnasium area and David Jones briefed the ambulance crews on the

 procedure for the removal of the bodies following positive

 identification and those crews which he selected for the duty
 remained on stand by.



 jfa.   I accompanied Alan Hopkins following the briefing of the

 ambulance crews and we went back to the temporary mortuary and I

 was appalled to see photographers in the gardens of the terraced
 houses fronting Penistone Road and backing on to the gymnasium

 trying to take photographs of the bodies being moved into the

 temporary     mortuary.       Police   intervened    and    moved   the
 photographers on.     The photographers were causing distress to all
 present.



 2j9.   I recall that it was probably around 2000 and the light was

 beginning to fade.        The police had not yet rigged up temporary

 lighting for the area to the east of the North Stand and I
■&&1 nn..IIe>pkins^was asked to move the Range Rover into a position to
 provide temporary lighting.          The Range Rover was moved and

 illuminated the area to the rear of the gym as requested by the


                                          16


                                           425
Police.     This was to assist and help the relatives who had to
enter the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium for the purpose of

identifying the dead.          The Range Rover stayed in that position

for probably three quarters of an hour before the Police arrived
with their temporary lighting system.



flo.   At about 2045     Alan Hopkins briefed me with the Coroner and
I was instructed to stay and oversee the proceedings following

identification of the deceased.         I stayed there with two crews

whose names I cannot recall and one relief crew plus two Station
Officers.



yl.     The procedure         for moving the bodies was:            following

identification, the body would be moved in a body bag to the back
door of the gymnasium, loaded into an ambulance and when there

were three bodies in the ambulance that ambulance vrould leave to
deposit     the   dead   at    the Medico    Legal   C en t r e /
Hal lamshire or the Northern-Cefteral Hoopital-r-



i1     I instructed               to co-ordinate operations inside the

gymnasium and liaise with me outside the gymnasium                    and to

organise the Police to co-ordinate the movement of the bodies
from the gymnasium to the ambulances.             I gave instructions to

            to contact control centre on the hour and every half
hour to update control on progress.          I put Station Officer Eason

in charge of loading the bodies and each body was recorded on a


                                            17



                                            426
list and a number was attached to     that body by Eason, -f

or o    together with the deceased name and the number of the

Officer who accompanied the body and the number of the vehicle

which moved it.



^3.    Two or three bodies were identified almost immediately
following the establishment of this procedure and the operation

continued throughout the night.    This was a traumatic experience

for the staff and I organised staff welfare as best as I could in

the circumstances.


^4.    All the bodies had been identified and moved from the

gymnasium to the Medico legal centre by approximately 0525       on
16th April.    Following completion of that procedure the equipment

of the Ambulance service which was still present at the scene was

loaded into Ambulances and a radio message was sent to control
confirming the incident closed at 0530.


4y^.   I had worked for some fourteen and one quarter hours on the

major incident. Although I had been on call from 1700 on Friday

the 14th.     I was not called out during Friday night or early

Saturday morning and following the incident on Saturday afternoon

through to Sunday morning I returned home, slept for a short


staff and deal with the press.




                                      18
          IloCrksK. KAjfriLU'o'r
