D JONES - ASSISTANT CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER


I returned home after shopping between 1500/1505 on Saturday 15th April
1989. I had been home approximately 6-7 minutes when I switched on the TV
to see reports of the Liverpool v Notts match. The TV immediately
displayed live coverage from Hillsborough on BBCl where the game had been
stopped after 6 minutes play, the scene changed advising further coverage
would be seen later. At that point I was not concerned with what I had
seen on TV because it merely appeared to be a crowd spill from the terraces
onto the pitch. However in my own mind I felt concerned, TV immedaitely
returned to Hillsborough by this time it was apoproximately 1517, I saw a
massive crowd spillage with bodies laying on the ptich. I did not wait to
watch any more I ran to change into my uniform whilst doing so I asked my
wife to telephone control and tell them i was on my way into Headquarters.
My wife also works for SYMAS as a control assistant and was asked by
Control to report to headquarters with me in order to assist in Control.
We arrived at Control at approximately 1530, I immediately sort out
Superintendent Clarke who was in the incident room, he told me that several
vehicles had been despatched to the ground and that Alpha 3 (Higgins),
Alpha 4 (Eason) Trentamb 2 (DCMAO), Trentamb 6 (ADO Support Services) were
either at the ground or on the way. The M.I. Vehicle was also en route.

I did not wait for any further update and took the keys for a staff car and
left for the scene, this would be at approximately 1540 hours as I pulled
out of Headquarters I met the CMA0 who had been called out and was just
arriving. We briefly exchanged informals and I continued to Hillsborough
arriving at 1550 hours.

On approaching Hillsborough I could not get to the pre-arranged and agreed
casualty clearing area in the gymnasium. This was because the Penistone
Road section from Herries Road towards Halifax Road was completely blocked
by Police vehicles, Police Officers, Football fans and traffic going in the
opposite direction to me. Because of this road blockage I knew I could not
clean a path for my vehicle and therefore decided to gain access by the
entrance which leads to executive suite of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club.

I saw ambulances leaving this area and had to manoeuvre my vehicle past
ambulances, police vehicles and fans. I got to Leppings Lane end and
parked my vehicle by the high wall adjacent to the Police control boc (E
Gate).

I immediately informed Control "on scene" and was not acknowledged. I left
my vehicle, and used my hand portable again I received no acknowledgement.
I commenced walking towards Leppings Lane through masses of fans who
appeared to have no pattern of direction. They were trying to go in every
direction.

The situation was completely chaotic, I contacted two ambulances in a short
walking distance from my own vehicle. I very quickly checked them for crew
and patients, they were both fully loaded with patients, police officers
and helpers, in fact I would say they were overloaded as against normal
situations. I despatched them to a hospital, I cannot remember who the
crew members were. At this point I noticed a number of bodies laying on
the floor against the railings opposite the west stand area of the ground
outside the ground. The exact loaction was between E and C gates. These
bodies were partially covered with plastic bags, blankets and items of
clothing. I cannot say exactly how many there were but I would say
approximately eight. These bodies were in a line parallel to the railings.
I continued toward Leppings Lane entrances and passed at least one fire
tarden on the drive close to the Leppings Lane gates.

All of the Leppings Lane and the adjacent area was heavily congested with
people I could see in the distance on Leppings Lane itself that there were
a number of ambulances in a convoy with crews still in the cabs, I believe
there were five ambulances. I had walked from the area of 'E' gate along
the outside perimeter road to Leppings lane itself. I am convinced that
after dispatching the ambulances from the 'E' gate area and walking to
Leppings Lane that no living casualties were in that area. In fact the
area was densely crowded. Because of those reasons I re-deployed the
convey of ambulances to the Penistone Road Gym entrance which is the agreed
casualty clearing area for the ground. During the inspection walk I met
L/A         who appeared to have been organising the clearance of
casualties from that area.

In Leppings Lane I met a Divisional Fire Officer from South Yorkshire who
was stood adjacent to the mobile fire control unit and two tenders. I did
not stay there but attempted to make my way into the ground to get to the
gym, en route I met Chief Inspector Wareing of South Yorkshire Police and
told him to get me to the gym as fast as he could. As we walked he pointed
out more bodies on the floor, we progressed through the ground under the
North Stand with great difficulty due to the agressive nature of fans
leaving the ground. I was approached by a man who introduced himself as a
doctor and asked if he could be of help. I kept him with me and we
continued to head for the gym. As I approached the gym I saw ambulancemen
and police officers both treating and loading patients into ambulances in
the agreed casualty clearing area.

During the process of walking from the 'C' gate area to the gym, the route
I used did not allow me a view of the pitch area as I walked below building
under cover, I know this was the North Stand.

I sent the doctor into the gym and one of my colleagues, who I can't
remember, informed me of Mr Hopkins' location. I entered the gym and
immediately saw Mr Hopkins, dialogue took place. He asked me to take
charge of the loading and movement of vehicles by the gym.

I despatched vehicles with casualties aboard and then walked onto Penistone
Road North and saw heavy congestion of football fans, police officers,
police transit vans, dog vans and ambulances. I saw a Police Inspector and
informed him that section of road had to be completely clear of vehicles
except ambulances, I think this was approximately 1625 hours. This was
partially achieved as well as clearing the central reservation on Penistone
Road North opposite the gymn entrance 'O' gate in order to allow ambulances
to mount the reservation and turn right. This action allowed free passage
of ambulances to either of the receiving hospitals. I returned to the gym
to update Mr Hopkins and shortly after this it was established that all
live casualties had been cleared from the ground and were in or en route to
hospital. This was approximately 1630 hours.

Mr Hopkisn told me to get as many body bags and blankets as I could from
our vehicles which were lined up in Penistone Road North. I think at that
time I had twelve ambulances in line. I had the blankets and body bags
taken into the gym, whilst this was being done the Barnsley Medical Team
arrived at gate 'O'. The crew who brought them was A / M a n d      A/M
________ and also A / M   \. I sent them into the gym to see Mr Hopkins.
Shortly later they re-appeared back at the gate and I was advised that they
were no longer required. They stayed with me whilst I re-deployed the line
of ambulances to Herries Road Bus Depot. A Nottingham vehicle failed to
start in the line, thje crew eventually started the vehicle, I contacted
Control with a hand portable and requested that the duty fitter be sent to
the Bus Depot to render assistance to the crew. I began to stack vehicles
at Herries Road on standby. I then despatched 3 ambulances along with S/0
Higgins to collect the bodies which ad been left at Leppings Lane and bring
them to the gym. I loaded the Barnsley Medical Team on to a vehicle manned
by S/0 I        and A/M              I told S/0          to return the team
and for him to remain at Barnsley as Liaison Officer. As I continued to
move the ambulance from Penistone Road to Herries Road, a Police Officer
came to me with two teenage boys who were in a distraught and shocked
condition, I placed them onto a West Yorkshire ambulance and told the crew
to take them to Barnsley District General Casualty Department because I was
aware that this hospital were taking minor injuries from the Incident. I
also told the crew that one that had been done he sould report clear to his
own Authority. I then moved approximately 6 ambulances into the gym car
park area by use of gate between the terraced houses on Penistone Road
North.

I contined to send other vehicles to Herries Road Bus Deport during this
time it was pointed out to me that the Barnsley Medical Team had left their
equipment, this was loaded onto an ambulance and sent back to the hospital.

The bodies from Leppings Lane were brought to ghe gym I then closed the
gates to '0' entrance and advised Mr Hopkins that he had 10 ambulances in
the gym car park and 24 ambulances at Herries Road Bus Depot.

I stood down all outside authority vehicles at that stafe. As far as I was
concerned the immediate incident had been cleared. In conjunction with Mr
Hopkins I stood down all SYMAS vehicles with the exception of 7 which were
returned for the transportation of the dead at a later time.

I left the scene to return to Headquarters with Mr Hopkins at approximately
2000 hours.
