DATE OF BIRTH 3.7.1939

CONTROL OFFICER (SYMAS)



1.   I have been with the      ambulance     service   for 25 years

     originally with West Riding County Council and since about
     1974 with Symas based at Hoyland.



2.   On starting with the service I attended the training course
     for ambulance men.



3.   After three years as an ambulance man I attended a refresher

     course at Cleckheaton.     In 1974/1975 I was promoted to

     Leading Ambulance man based at Hoyland station and then

     attended the Leicester training school on a refresher
     course.



4.   About   1976 I was promoted to Control Officer based at

     Corporation Street Station/H.Q at Sheffield.         Almost 18

     months afterwards control became centralised for the whole
     of Symas at Rotherham HQ in Moorgate.



5.   Formally there had been controls at Wath for Rotherham and

     Doncaster, Hoyland for Barnsley, and Corporation Street for
     Sheffield.   Since that time I have been a control officer at
     HQ at Rotherham.
In relation to major incidents there is a manual in control.

The manual has procedures to following in the event of major

incidents.     I work on a three shift system.       There are 12

controllers on a 12 week rota system.          The hours you work

depend on which week you are allocated in the rota and which

control you are working.



Control is divided into three separate units



1.     Emergency control - South   Yorkshire


2.     Domestic and outpatient - Doncaster, Sheffield



3.     Domestic and outpatient - Rotherham and Barnsley


In addition to this there is also a major incident room

specifically reserved for events of the Hillsborough type.
On Saturday I had been out for the day and returned home at

about 1430 hours.    Around about 1530 hours my wife answered

the phone and it was control asking for me.        I took the call

and it was              |as far as I can recall.    She said "Can

you come into work as we have an incident at Hillsborough

and believed fatalities" I replied "Yes, I'll attend".           I

got changed into uniform and went straight to Symas HQ in my
car.



I would estimate I arrived at Symas HQ at about 15.50 hours
      I reported straight into control room and the first person I

      met was Don Page.     He asked what shift 1 was on and 1 said I
      had been called in.    He asked me to carry on.


10 . 1 started answering telephone calls from outside lines and a
      lot of these were press enquiries.      I toldk them that we
      were dealing with Hillsborough, but no further information
      was available.


11 . I received a call from West Yorkshire ambulance service

      saying   they were sending their Major Incident Vehicle.     I

      took this message into Mr Clarke the superintendent who was
      on emergency control duty.


12 . I was asked by superintendent Clarke to monitor the domestic

      emergency channel because a lot of the vehicles concerned
      with the Hillsborough incident were calling on that channel.

      They were finding it difficult to make contact on the

      Emergency Reserve Channel - channel 1


13.   1 then listened for any messages on the domestic channel on

      the radio in the major incident room.     There were no calls

      relating to the Hillsborough incident that I could pick out.

      There was the usual volume of domestic calls.      1 continued

      to monitor that channel for any Hillsborough calls for about
      10 to 15 minutes.




                                  488
14.   I then asked superintendent Clarke if he wanted me to plug
      into the emergency channel to assist in picking up any

      messages relevant to the major incident.



15.   He asked if I would relieve him from that position.          I did

      so and                was logging all incoming calls on the
      emergency as I dealt with them.      At this time              the

      superintendent was in the other control room co-ordinating
      all the channels.



16.   I received a call from Alpha 4 station officer Eason stating

      he had enough vehicles at Herries         Road   bus   depot   and
      requested the vehicles be held on Netherthorpe.        As vehicles

      called in clear (green) I directed them to Netherthorpe to
      standby.



17.   I then     received calls from West Yorkshire vehicles which

      were at junction 36 of the Ml.      I passed this information on
      to            via the assistants.   He requested that 1 send no
      further vehicles to the incident and I therefore called West

      Yorkshire vehicles to stand them by on a layby on the A61

      just off junction 36 of the Ml.     I then received a call from

      West Yorkshire major incident vehicle at junction 36.            I

           despatched him towards Hillsborough and informed            I

      then contacted Dale to tell him that the Major incident
      vehicle was on route with supply equipment.         I directed the

      West Yorkshire major incident vehicle towards Penistone Road




                                   48
      where he would be met by Dale (Alpha 2).


18.   I continued to monitor the emergency channel and got

               to telephone South Yorkshire Passenger transport to
      try and get a line open to the Herries Road bus depot as we

      were experiencing difficulty in radio contact with the

      vehicles there.    We got a direct line to the bus depot.



19.   I continued monitoring emergency channels, but there were no

      specific messages.    Trevor Dale then called to inform me he
      was taking Station Officer Higgins down to the Medico Legal

      Centre in Sheffield, the public mortuary.



20.   I cannot recall the exact time,       but by then things were
      beginning to quieten down and the next call 1 remember

      taking was to stand the West Yorkshire vehicles down and

      return them to their own authority.      That was about 1800
      hours.



21.   Around 1900 hours the major incident room was closed.       I

      then returned to the control room to assist with telephone

      enquiries.    I continued to cover the phone until about 2300

      hours I was then told by superintendent             the night

      superintendent that 1 should stand down and go home.


22.   The only difficulty in communication was with incident

      officer at the Hillsborough Ground.     The emergency channel
     was very distorted and it was for this reason that telephone

     links were established.


Signed...




Dated this   3 * day of May 1989
