ALBERT EDWARD SMITH


1.   I am Albert Edward Smith and was born on 26.7.47.



2.   I am employed by SYMAS which is a divison of                      the Trent

     Regional Health Authority.           I have been in the           ambulance

     service for most of my life .          I started as an ambulanceman

     at the age of 20 and have sinces worked my way up to my

     present position which is Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer,

     Control and Communications based at Ambulance Control,
     Farfield, Moorgate Road        Rotherham.



3.   I was promoted to my present post in June 1988 and I am

     responsible        for   the planning       and    use    of    ambulances
     throughout    South Yorkshire, both on a routine basis and in
     any emergency.



4.   My duty normally covers Monday to Friday, and on Saturday
                        v-4         AM.
     the 15th April T wnn nn— T-rnvrr I had worked the previous

     five days as usual.



5.   I think it would have been about 1530 hours; I was at home

     and took the telephone call from Control Assistant ____
           £
                  She   told   me   that    there      was    an    incident   at
     Hillsborough Football Ground.


6.   I asked her what kind of incident it was, but she was unable
to tell me, I enquired of her what response we were making;

she did not seem to understand me so I hung up and went at
once to work.



I think it was about 1540 hours when I arrived at work and
went into the main control room intending to see fof myself
what was taking place.



In the control room there were, as far as I can recall four
people, who were under the control of



_____ told me there was an insident involving a large number

of people at Hillsborough Football Ground;    he did not know

exactly what had happened.      He told me that vehicles were
being sent to the ground.     He said all the day vehicles had

been sent from Sheffield and some of the emergency vehicles,

if they were not on route, were being sent         as they became
available.



The Control Room Superintendant was not in the control room

and I realised he would be in the incident room so I went in

the room next door and spoke to Superintendant Raymond
Clarke.



Also in the incident room was                and
the publicrelations officer
                                                                           ^
12. I noticed that an incident log was being kept by

      that is normal proceedure .     I spoke to Mr Clarke , he was

      actually on the radio, and was directing operations from the
      incident room.



13.   Mr Clake had brought into use a special emergency reserve

      channel which is used for unusual or major incidents which

      require special monitoring.



14.   I asked Mr Clarke what the incident was, but he did not know

      for sure.   He did tell me that he had received information

      from the police at Snig Hill Sheffield but he indicated that
      there were many injuries and some fatalities.



15.   I asked waht our response had been and he drew my attention
      to the log they were keeping.   The log indicated that we had

      responded with ten vehicles, each with a crew of two.          They
      had been told to go to hillsborough Football ground where
      there had been an incident.



16.   I knew we had two men at the ground as normal proceedure and

      they would coordinate the crew when they arrived at the
      ground.


17.   I knew               was in control of the control room and
      Ray Clarke of the incident room so I then assumed the role
      of   supervisor   and   link    man   which   is   in   fact    my
          responsibility.



    18.   This was doubly important because we still had the rest of

          South Yorkshire to look after as usual.



    19.   Mr Clarke told me who had been sent to the ground.    He also

          said the Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer Alan Hopkins, was at

          the ground as was Mr David Jones Assistant Chief Ambulance
          Officer.



    20.   I was satisfied at that time having spoken to             and
          Mr Clarke that our response had been quick, efficient and

          was satisfactory.   Indeed as time passed it continued to be
          so.



    21.   I asked if Mr Page the Chief Ambulance Officer had been

          contacted and was told he had and was on his way to control



•
          at Rotherham.



    22.   Other mambers of staff kept arriving at control;     they had

          either been contacted or just come in having heard about the
          incident.   As they arrived they were deployed on various
          duties , mostly answering telephones.


    23.               was on a telephone contacting other memberrs of

          staff, to ask them to report for duty , I ••gn satisfied

          myself that this was being done satisfactorily and told her



                                        t:9 Q
                                        e)hi Li
to continue.



Mr Clarke told me that other ambulance authorities had

contacted us or had been contacted by him and offered

assisstance,   in fact vehicles had been despatched towards

South Yorkshire.   They were West Yorkshire, Derbyshire and
Nottinghamshire.



Mr Page arrived at about 1550 hours and I told him as much
as I knew about the situation and what our response had

been.   He asked if we had set up liaison officers at the
Sheffield Hospitals,     I instructed               to contact

control superintendant                   to inform him to act

as liaison officer at Northern General Hospital and for

               , Standards and Efficiency Officer, to go to

Hallamshire Hospital and perform the same duties.


We also set up liaison staff at Barnsley District General

and Rotherham General Hospitals.    First choice for Barnsley
was            but as he could not be contacted I sent
           Station Officer              was first choice for

Rotherham, but as he could not be contacted
a Standard and Efficiency       Officer was   contacted   and
attended in his place.



Some time after 1600 hours it was obvious that sufficient
staff had attended Control and I told                  not to
        inform further staff to attend, but to stand by at home.

        This is standard proceedure because we have to cater for

        relief if the incident is lengthy.



28. During the first half hour that I spent in control reports

        confirmed large numbers of casualties.       Our enquiries
        revealed that most casualties had been removed from the

        ground around 1630 hours.    I advised that all vehicles who

        reported their availability to standby at Netherthorpe Road.



29.   Around 1645 hours we were able to respond to a request from

        the Royal Hallamshire to transfer patients to create room
        for Hillsbororough casualties.    Vehicles from Netherthorpe

        location were used and we transferred at least       twenty
        patients mainly to King Edwards Hospital.



30.   Around 1755 hours Mr Page declared the first stage of the

        incident as closed and he then went to visit the scene of
        the incident at Sheffield.



31.     I was          essed with the way my staff had responded and

        the^wa         h they efficiently performed their duties.


Signed

         ALBERT EDWARD SMITH


Dated
