                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICI
                                    AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                         FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                            ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                    TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 8 2 88 20



                  O UR REF:
                          F: AH/                                            Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                  YO U R REF:                                                    CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                  AM BULANCE OFFICER
                  Please ask for:




23rd June 1989.


For the immediate attention of Mr. A. Callaghan

From Mr. A. Hopkins - SYMAS




Please find enclosed entire fax received from the Association of Chief
Ambulance Officers as per our recent conversation.




Total number of sheets including front sheet - 8




                                                                                          C P 6 5 /3 2 5 8 6
                                                                                              ;iF;f
¥,mi S u f f o l k H ealth A u t h o r i t y                                                                              Suffolk Ambulance Service
                                                                                                                          Ambulance Service Headquarters
                                                                                                                          l.Hu'kamere,
                                                                                                                          flrarnfflrd,,
                                                                                                                          Ipswitli IPS -|a,?:
                                                                                                                          Telepr>cme:
fa x Cover Sheet                                                                                                          Ipswich (STD 0473) 49333

                                                                                                                          rax:
                                                                                                                          0 4 7 1 2 *' 14 5 8




                                                    *
          ' • •-                              ,s.   ...




                          ■' TATZ,                  "     " “■ *       ^ * * “ - A
                                                                                                  .
                                                                                         W""*"' * r +   «■ - -* ■. * t»          j, * „ „ ? ,Jr .v ,f „ 9. w     # m* * e M,




                                                                                                                                                                   .....


                                        i',                        i:E T7 T:ET,
              . . . . .   ...       .   .




                                                                        ..X T .i




         TV Bfc; COMPLETED BY THE FJIX O f E M TOT? FOR THE SUFFOLK




                                                            - r,;             •• I:
                                                                   T
                                ■                   >                  iv ^          s

                                                                   ■       V \0
                                                                              , . A,.


         " ; 1t s o? jjOCTm>r'v‘R Mitrn,
                                                                                                                                                               : .I U X U
                                                                                                                                 j
       I n q u i r y i n t o t h e XiUl-sV> o ro ug h
                  Stadium D isaste


                       S u b m i s s i o n by
The A s s o c i a ti o n of C h ie f Arxibi,    .'."41 iK. t:? C.
             0473 241458     SUFFOLK AMBULANCE HQ                           068 P02/07 22.06.89 16:04         1




                                                                                                        '
                                             Submission


                1.   The Association of Chief Ambulance Officers {"the Associa­
               tion") wishes to subm it the following views concerning the needs
               of safely at sports events in the light of the i liiisborough Stadium
               disaster.


               2.    The Association was founded in 1949 to, inter alia, prom ote
               an d m aintain efficient and economical am bulance services within
                the N ational Health Service, The sixty or so mem bers ot the
               Association com prise all of theC hief A m bulance Officers in post in
               the United K ingdom, the Republic of Ireland and thy Channel                                   I
               Islands,    The views expressed here are, how ever, directed at
               m a t t e s within the United Kingdom.


               3.    The Association understands that am bulance service resources
               at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989 com prised thirty St. John's
               A m bulance Brigade personnel with two am bulances, and two
               officers from the South Yorkshire M etropolitan Ambulance Serv­
                ice ("SYMAS") w ith a similar n u m b er of am bulances and their
               crews.


               4.    N o direct information is available to the A ssoda lion concern­
               ing contingency planning, first aid and casualty evacuation equip­
               m ent, or life su p p o rt training of stadium staff at Hillsborough.


               5.    In terms of am bulance service resources, if perhaps not other
               m atters of medical provision, those at H illsborough were greater,
               in the Association's experience, than are to be found at m any sports
               events which attract large crowds. W hether they were adequate,
               in deed w hether medical resources as a whole were adequate, are,
               however, different questions.


               6.    That said, the adequacy of medical resources at Hillsborough
               is a question for the Inquiry to consider on the basis of evidence
               from those directly involved.      The points which the Association                                :
               wishes to raise are rather that:


                        (a) if the resources were adequate, then that was essentially
                        (ortintous;




22-06 1989   IS’97   ®                 0473 241458                                             P.02         , A
                                                                                                                  i
              0473 241458     SUFFOLK AMBULANCE HQ                               068 P03/07 22.06.89 16:04




                          (b) if the resources were inadequate, the extent; to which
                          that situation m ight have been prevented w ould also have
                          d ep en d ed largely on chance,


                 7.     The reason w hy the Association takes this view lies in the
                 absence of statutory su pp ort for the provision of medical resources
                 com parable to that available to the police an d fire services.


                 8.    The supp ort referred to is that given by the Safety of Sports
                 G rou nd s Act 1975, as am ended by the Local G overnm ent Act 1985
                 and the hire Safety an d Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, ("the
                 Act").


                 9.    The Inquiry will know that safety certificates issued under
                 section 2 of the Act are required generally to ''contain such terms and
                 conditions as the local authority consider necessary or expedient to secure
                 reasonable safety". The section goes on to specify certain particular
                 requirem ents, including terms and conditions as to "the number ,
                 size and situation of entrances toand exits from the stadium l o r regulated
                 stand] or any part of it (including means of escape in case of fire or other
                 emergency) and the means of access to any such entrances or exits".


                 10.   On the face of it, section 2 of the Act w ould app ear to embrace
                 the possibility of a safety certificate including terms and conditions
                 as to the provision of medical resources. In practice, however, the
                 operation of section 2 is limited by the consultation provisions of
                 section 3, and now sub-section (2A) of section 2. introduced by
                am endm ent. The requirem ent as to consultation extends only to
                 "the chief officer of police and where the local authority is in Greater
                London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
                the building a u t h o r i t y W here a certificate contains a condition as
                to the provision of police services, the sub-section referred to
                reserves theextent of such provision “for thedeterminatum of the chief
                officer of police"


                11.    An incidental effect of these provisions is that they address
                the pocket of a "person concerned with the organisation or management
                of a sports s t a d i u m Such a person can be compelled to lay out
                m on ey on fire precautions and pay for the attendance of police
                officers. M oney is not necessarily the answ er to everything—but




22—06~1989        *
             16; 0s                      0473 241458                                               P. 03
              0473 24145S        SUFFOLK AMBULANCE HQ                            06S P04/07 22.06.89 16:05




                   questions of funding police resources and iire precautions are in
                   this way answ ered to som e degree.


                   12.     The principal effect, however, is that the police and fire
                   services are given substantial "clout" in dealing w ith organisers or
                   m anagers. In terms of advance planning and equipm ent, as well
                   as levels of m anning and organisation on the day, police and fire
                   officers are in positions of authority from w hich to im pose their
                   professional judgm ents in matters of public safely.


                   13.     N otw ith stan din g that public safety is in the Association's
                   experience receiving m ore attention today than ever before, the
                   position is wholly otherwise w ith regard lo am bulance services.
                   The chief am bulance officer has no part in the issue or refusal of a
                   safety certificate. Me has no authority, and no m eans of compelling
                   an organiser or m anager to co-operate in the provision of medical
                   cover, let alone pay for it.


                   14.     This is not to say that the provision of am bulances and crews
                   on the day, or the general advice of am bulance officers, is entirely
                   neglected.


                   15.     The St, John's A m bulance Brigade or the Red Cross are a
                   custom ary and welcome presence at alm ost every sporting and
                   similar event. Likewise, NHS am bulance services will often make
                   voluntary provision at larger events.


                   16.     Again, there is some voluntary co-operation at local level.
                   A m bulance services are able to advise m anagers and organisers in
                   such m atters as first aid equipm ent, basic life su p p o rt training lor
                   staciium staff, and the setting aside of facilities to receive casual­
                   ties—and there are instances of such advice being taken and acted
                   upon.


                   17.     Nevertheless, the operative w ord is "voluntary". Thus the
                   Association u nd erstand s that SYMAS placed officers and a m b u ­
                   lances at H illsborough on its ow n initiative, while the St. John's
                   A m bulance Brigade is of course an entirely voluntary organisa­
                   tion.




^2-06-1989   16;                           0473 241458                                             P. 04
0473 241458   SUFFOLK AMBULANCE HQ                             069 P02/03 22.06.89 16:09




  18.   The fortuitous n atu re of things is in fact well illustrated by
  w hat h ap p en ed at Hillsborough. There are practical limits to the
  n u m b er of am bulances an d crews that can attend throughout an
  event. A major incident will inevitably involve mobilising a d d i­
  tional resources, and doing so quickly. It is the universal experi­
  ence of the Association's m em bers that the first problem faced by
  the am bulance service in a major incident is the com m unication of
  reliable inform ation on which to base its response.


  19.   The Association un d erstan d s that it was the tw o officers from
  SYMAS w ho initiated mobilisation at Hillsborough. It was fortu­
  nate indeed that they were present and in a position to do so. it
  m ight be asked w hether mobilisation w as in any way handicapped
  by the fact that the SYMAS officers w ere present voluntarily and
  thus not at the centre of operations, for exam ple in the police
  com m and post. But be that as it may, the material point is that,
  w hatever role the SYMAS officers w ere able to play, no means
  currently exists of ensuring that professional officers will be in a
  position to act similarity at future sports events.


  20.   As for the funding of am bulance resources, the Association
  u n d erstan d s that SYMAS acted w ithout p aym ent, while the St
  John's A m bulance Brigade w ou ld have received no more than a
  contribution to its expenses at the rate of £5 per 5,000 spectators,
  thus aro u n d £35 in all. That is not a criticism of Sheffield W ednes­
  d ay Football Club— at som e events the brigade receives nothing ai
  all. But it can hardly be described as funding in any real sense.



  21.   H aving regard to the foregoing, the Association respectfully
  invites the Inquiry to find:


         (a) that on-site medical resources, provided o n the basis of
         professional advice and judgem ent, are an essential element
         in meeting the needs of safety at bpotis events; and


         (b) that the provision of such resources can only be secured
         by statutory means.




 &
                                                                                                '1




               22.   The Association futher respectfully invites the Inquiry to
               recom m end am en d m en t of the Act to provide:


                      (a) in section 2 sub-section (2)(c) that a safety certificate
                      shall include terms and conditions as to the provision of first
                      aid facilities and training in use of the same;


                      (b) in section 2 subsection (2A) that no condition of a sa fe ty
                      certificate shall require the provision of the attendance at
                      the g rou nd of any m em bers of an am bulance service unless
                      the extent of the provision of their attendance is reserved for
                      the determ ination o f the chief am bulance officer of the



                      (c) in section 3 subsection (3) that the local authority shall
                     send a copy of an application for a safety certificate to the
                     chief am bulance officer for the area in qu e stion (and that
                      accordingly the d u ty of the local authority to consult shall
                     extend to such officer); and


                     (d) for such further and consequential am endem ents as are
                     appropriate.




                                        V M Joiliffe
                                        National Secretary
                                        Association of Chief A m bulance i cheers
                                        Dorset Am bulance Service H ead qu arters
                                        Ringwood Road
                                        St Leonards
                                        Ringwood,, BH24 2SP


                                        5 th May 1989




22-06-1989   16=10                    0473 241458                                        P.02
     Inquiry into the Hillsborough
           Stadium Disaster

              Subm ission by
The Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
                                    1




                             Subm ission


1.    The Association of Chief Ambulance Officers ("the Associa­
tion") wishes to submit the follow ing view s concerning the needs
of safety at sports events in the light of the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster.


2.    The Association was founded in 1949 to, inter alia, promote
and maintain efficient and economical ambulance services within
the National Health Service. The sixty or so members of the
Association comprise all of the Chief Ambulance Officers in post in
the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland and the Channel
Islands.   The view s expressed here are, however, directed at
matters within the United Kingdom.


3.    The Association understands that ambulance service resources
at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989 comprised thirty St. John's
Ambulance Brigade personnel with tw o ambulances, and tw o
officers from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Serv­
ice ("SYMAS") with a similar number of ambulances and their
crews.


4.    N o direct information is available to the Association concern­
ing contingency planning, first aid and casualty evacuation equip­
ment, or life support training of stadium staff at Hillsborough.


5.    In terms of ambulance service resources, if perhaps not other
matters of medical provision, those at Hillsborough were greater,
in the Association's experience, than are to be found at m any sports
events which attract large crowds. Whether they were adequate,
indeed whether medical resources as a w hole were adequate, are,
however, different questions.


6.   That said, the adequacy of medical resources at Hillsborough
is a question for the Inquiry to consider on the basis of evidence
from those directly involved. The points which the Association
w ishes to raise are rather that:


       (a) if the resources were adequate, then that was essentially
       fortuitous;
                                       2



         (b) if the resources were inadequate, the extent to which
         that situation might have been prevented w ould also have
         depended largely on chance.


 7.    The reason w hy the Association takes this view lies in the
 absence of statutory support for the provision of medical resources
 comparable to that available to the police and fire services.


 8.    The support referred to is that given by the Safety of Sports
 Grounds Act 1975, as amended by the Local Government Act 1985
 and the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, ("the
 Act").


 9.    The Inquiry will know that safety certificates issued under
 section 2 of the Act are required generally to "contain such terms and
 conditions as the local authority consider necessary or expedient to secure
reasonable safety". The section goes on to specify certain particular
requirements, including terms and conditions as to "the number,
size and situation of entrances to and exits from the stadium [or regulated
stand] or any part of it (including means of escape in case of fire or other
emergency) and the means of access to any such entrances or exits".


10.   On the face of it, section 2 of the Act w ould appear to embrace
the possibility of a safety certificate including terms and conditions
as to the provision of medical resources. In practice, however, the
operation of section 2 is limited by the consultation provisions of
section 3, and now sub-section (2A) of section 2 introduced by
amendment. The requirement as to consultation extends only to
"the chief officer of police and where the local authority is in Greater
London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
the building authority". Where a certificate contains a condition as
to the provision of police services, the sub-section referred to
reserves the extent of such provision "for the determination of the chief
officer of police".


11.   An incidental effect of these provisions is that they address
the pocket of a "person concerned with the organisation or management
of a sports stadium". Such a person can be compelled to lay out
m oney on fire precautions and pay for the attendance of police
officers. M oney is not necessarily the answer to everything—but
questions of funding police resources and fire precautions are in
this w ay answered to som e degree.


12.   The principal effect, however, is that the police and fire
services are given substantial "clout" in dealing with organisers or
managers. In terms of advance planning and equipment, as w ell
as levels of m anning and organisation on the day, police and fire
officers are in positions of authority from which to im pose their
professional judgments in matters of public safety.


13.   Notwithstanding that public safety is in the Association's
experience receiving more attention today than ever before, the
position is w holly otherwise with regard to ambulance services.
The chief ambulance officer has no part in the issue or refusal of a
safety certificate. H e has no authority, and no means of compelling
an organiser or manager to co-operate in the provision of medical
cover, let alone pay for it.


14.   This is not to say that the provision of ambulances and crews
on the day, or the general advice of ambulance officers, is entirely
neglected.


15.   The St. John's Ambulance Brigade or the Red Cross are a
customary and welcom e presence at almost every sporting and
similar event. Likewise, NHS ambulance services w ill often make
voluntary provision at larger events.


16.   Again, there is som e voluntary co-operation at local level.
Ambulance services are able to advise managers and organisers in
such matters as first aid equipment, basic life support training for
stadium staff, and the setting aside of facilities to receive casual­
ties— and there are instances of such advice being taken and acted
upon.


17.   Nevertheless, the operative word is "voluntary". Thus the
Association understands that SYMAS placed officers and ambu­
lances at Hillsborough on its ow n initiative, while the St. John's
Ambulance Brigade is of course an entirely voluntary organisa­
tion.
                                  4



18.   The fortuitous nature of things is in fact w ell illustrated by
what happened at Hillsborough. There are practical limits to the
number of ambulances and crews that can attend throughout an
event. A major incident will inevitably involve mobilising addi­
tional resources, and doing so quickly. It is the universal experi­
ence of the Association's members that the first problem faced by
the ambulance service in a major incident is the communication of
reliable information on which to base its response.


19.   The Association understands that it was the two officers from
SYMAS w ho initiated mobilisation at Hillsborough. It was fortu­
nate indeed that they were present and in a position to do so. It
might be asked whether mobilisation was in any way handicapped
by the fact that the SYMAS officers were present voluntarily and
thus not at the centre of operations, for exam ple in the police
command post. But be that as it may, the material point is that,
whatever role the SYMAS officers were able to play, no means
currently exists of ensuring that professional officers will be in a
position to act similarily at future sports events.


20.   As for the funding of ambulance resources, the Association
understands that SYMAS acted w ithout payment, while the St
John's Ambulance Brigade w ould have received no more than a
contribution to its expenses at the rate of £5 per 5,000 spectators,
thus around £35 in all. That is not a criticism of Sheffield W ednes­
day Football Club— at som e events the brigade receives nothing at
all. But it can hardly be described as funding in any real sense.



21.   H aving regard to the foregoing, the Association respectfully
invites the Inquiry to find:


        (a) that on-site medical resources, provided on the basis of
        professional advice and judgement, are an essential elem ent
        in meeting the needs of safety at sports events; and


        (b) that the provision of such resources can only be secured
        by statutory means.
                                  5



22.   The Association futher respectfully invites the Inquiry to
recommend amendment of the Act to provide:


       (a) in section 2 sub-section (2)(c) that a safety certificate
       shall include terms and conditions as to the provision of first
       aid facilities and training in use of the same;


       (b) in section 2 subsection (2A) that no condition of a safety
       certificate shall require the provision of the attendance at
       the ground of any members of an ambulance service unless
       the extent of the provision of their attendance is reserved for
       the determination of the chief ambulance officer of the
       service;


       (c) in section 3 subsection (3) that the local authority shall
       send a copy of an application for a safety certificate to the
       chief ambulance officer for the area in question (and that
       accordingly the duty of the local authority to consult shall
       extend to such officer); and


       (d) for such further and consequential amendements as are
       appropriate.




                          V N Jolliffe
                         National Secretary
                          Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
                          Dorset Ambulance Service Headquarters
                          Ringwood Road
                          St Leonards
                          Ringwood, BH24 2SP


                          5 th May 1989
            South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                        D IV IS IO N A L HEA DQ UAR TERS
                                                                                        HA M M E R TO N ROAD
                                                                                        S H E FF IE L D   S6 2ND
                                                                                        TELEPHONE (0742) 343131



           A L L CORRESPONDENCE TO BE ADDRESSED TO " T H E CHIEF S U P E R IN T E N D E N T "

 r                                                                              “1
                                                                                        YOUR REFERENCE
       Mr A Page
       South Yorkshire Metropolitan                                                     OUR REFERENCE              Fl/DJB/
       Ambulance Service                                                                DATE                       29 March 1988
       Moorgate Road
       Rotherham

                                                                                            RECEIVED BY
                                                                                                   0 5 APR 1988
       Dear Sir
                                                                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE
       F A CUP SEMI FINAL                     SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988                     I AMBULANCE SERVICE
       Please find attached hereto schedules showing the temporary parking
       restrictions which will be in force for the above event, and maps
       showing the routes to be used/parking arrangements.

       In respect of Liverpool supporters, vehicular traffic will, in the main,
       leave the Ml motorway at Tankersley (junction 36) and travel on the
       A61 to Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium. The geographical location
       of Liverpool, coupled with the country wide support enjoyed by the club,
       suggests that traffic may also approach via the A616 (Flouch).

       Coaches will park in Claywheels Lane and Halifax Road.  Transit vans
       and similar vehicles will park in Wardsend Road North and private vehicles
       will be encouraged to park on the Parson Cross and Fox Hill estat.es
       and if necessary, the Wisewood and Marlcliffe estates.

      Vehicular traffic carrying Nottingham Forest supporters will, in the
      main, leave the Ml motorway at Tinsley (junction 34), and travel along
      Sheffield Road, Weedon Street to Brightside Lane.

      At this point coaches and transit vans (or similar) will travel along
      Upwell Street, Owler Lane, Firvale and Herries Road.  Coaches will park
      in the Herries Road Bus Depot, Herries Road South and Herries Road.
      Transit vans will park on the Rawson Springs Industrial Estate.  Private
      vehicles will be directed from Brightside Lane along Sutherland Street,
      Gower Street, Brunswick Road, Nursery Street and will be encouraged
      to park in the Neepsend area.

       I have forwarded an identical letter to the Chief Fire Officer.

      Yours faithfully



      Chief Superinte


A D M /3   THE O FF ICER D E A L IN G W IT H THIS CORRESPONDENCE IS                                                        EXTE NSION
                                                                 APPENDIX   'P'


                                  PARKING R EST RICTIONS

 NO PARKING CONES

 No parking cones will be placed in the following locations prior to 7.00 am on
 Saturday 9 April 1988 by civilian staff under the direction of Police Sergeant
 102 Fidler:

 1.   Halifax Road - out of city lane frcm Parson Cross Road to Cowper Avenue

 2.   Foxhill Road - out of city side from Halifax Road to Parson Cross Road

 3.   Wardsend Road North - both sides

 4.   Penis tone Road - from Claywheels Lane to Railway Bridge - both sides

 5.   Claywheels Lane (including one way system) frcm Penis tone Road to Limestone
      Cottage Lane. (Both sides)

 6.   Niagara Road - both sides

 7.   Leppings Lane - both sides

 8.   Herries Road - from Penis tone Road to Wordsworth Avenue - both sides

 9.   Wardsend Road - both sides

10.   Herries Road South - both sides

11.   Galsworthy Road

12. Rawson Spring Road - both sides

13. Parkside Road - from Penistone Road toCatchbar      Lane -
    one side only - alongside park

14. Catchbar Lane from Parkside Road to Leppings Lane
    One side only - alongside school

15.   Middlewood Road - one side only (alongside park) frcm Parkside Road to
      Hawksley Avenue

16.   Penistone Road - both sides frcm Leppings Lane island to Neepsend Lane

17.   Liversey Street - one side frcm Penistone Road car parkentrance
                                                                        Appendix "Q"


                              ROUTE SIGNING


LIVERPOOL COACH AND CAR ROUTES

1     M1-A61     to    placed in location by Road Traffic

2     A57-A628   Hayfi^lds crossroad-Derbyshir^ to indicate football traffic
                  is to follow. A628 to bp placed out by Road Traffic during
                  night of 8 April 1988.

3     A628/A616 to b^'placed in location by D^epcar Officers.

Additional signing will b^ repeaters at intervals on the route.



NOTTINQiAM FOREST COACH AND CAR ROUTES

All Nottingham Forest vehicles will use a route from the motorway, arriving at
Brightside Lane.        At this point, cars will be directed along Sutherland Street,
Gower Street, Brunswick Road, Nursery Street to Neepsend Lane.

Coaches and Vans will travel via Upwell St., Firvale, and Herries Road to the
Ground.

SIGNING

1     Route split sign                               Owler Lane

2     Coach rout*3 sign                              Herries Road/Barnsley Road

3     Directional sign                               Barnsley Road/Pitsmoor Road

4     Directional sign                               Pitsmoor Road /Rutland Road

5     Directional sign                               Rutland Road/Neepsend Lane

6     Directional sign                               Neepsend Lane/Rutland Road

7     Coach route sign                               Herries Road/Shirecliffe Rd Island

8     Car route sign                                 Herries Road/Shirecliffe Rd Island

Additional signing will be repeaters at intervals.

All signs must be in position by 8.00am.    The signs have movable arrows and when
placed must be facing oncoming traffic with the arrow pointing in the appropriate
direction to follow the routes given above.

Signs will be placed out by   civilian staff responsible for parking cones.
                                                               SEMI FINAL 1988

                                                    LIVERPOOL ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS

                                                                                                    'Z -
VAN/MINI BUS PARKING
WARDSEND ROAD




                                                                       rown Inn" P.H.


                              COACH PARKING   - CLAYWHEELS LANE




                                  CAR PARKING - FQXHILL ESTATE




                                                           COftCH PARKING - HALIFAX ROAD




                       CAR PARKING - PARSON CROSS ESTATE




                                                                                                           APPENDIX
                                                           M l. MOTORWAY JUNCTION 36 - TANKERSLEY




                                                                                                           S(i* V
   SHEFFELD WEDNESDAY

          Football Club
                                                                              SEMI FINAL 1988

                                                             NOTTS FOREST ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS


                                                                                                         NORTH
r
        N I AG A R A                 i                                                                                NSLEY
          Ground
                                                                                                                      ADUCT


                                                                                                                      SOUTH
                                                                                      a
                                             SHFFFieLO WEDNt .DAY       PC



                                                                                          F ir v a l c

                                Coach Parking
                                SYPTE Garage and
                                Herries Road South




                               ' v
                                               r
To M a n c h e s t e r
       A 57                              \V             Car parkijqjP

                                                   o
                                         O         1*
                         Car parking
                         Owlerton

                                                                                                                                  X
                                                                                                                                  C/3
                                                                                                                                  H-
                                                                                                                                  < _
                                                                r° c'f y c ,„ »                            Sout h Yorkshi re P o T i c *
                                                                                                                 P L A N S DEPT.
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                            AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                 FAIRFIELD. MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                    ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                            TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 8 2 8 8 2 0



                  O UR REF:         A P / R M / /145:3                                Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                  YO UR REF:                                                               CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                    ACMAO Morley, ext, 261                                 AM BULANCE OFFICER
                  Please ask for:




22 August 1989


Mr A Paxton
Assistant Director of Planning
Colinade House
Duke Street
DONCASTER


Dear Mr Paxton


As you are aware this Service is offering every assistance to Local
Authorities in direct reference to the issuing of Safety Certificates to
Football Stadiums and areas of specified activity.

Secoanendation 17 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report states that an Advisory
Group of appropriate Officers should be established. I would like to
inform you that the Nominated Officer for this Service is Mr Roger Morley,
Assistant Chief Officer (Staff Officer).  I would ask that you inform Mr
Morley of your intention to formulate an Advisory Group and forward all
relevant information as to dates and times of meetings, so that he is able
to make the necessary arrangements to attend.

SecooHendation 40 relates to Accommodation and Equipment.  I would re­
iterate that this Service would require to be involved in an advisory
capacity as it has already become apparent that non-standardisation of
equipment could be a critical factor in the event of a major disaster.

Reconaendation 43 states that the Ambulance Service will be informed when
larger crowds are anticipated at any match and would most certainly expect
to advise on the provision for circumstances of this kind.

I would welcome any comments you may wish to make regarding the above and
if I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact
either myself or Mr Morley.

      sincere




A E
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER




                                                                                                    CP65/32586
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
m
mmm                                                AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                        FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                           ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                                   TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 8 2 88 20



                   O UR REF:                AP/RM/MDS/145:3                                M r-A .P A G E .jp , F.A.S.I.
                   YO UR REF:                                                                    CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                                 AM BULANCE O FFICER
                   P le a s e a s k fo r:   ACMAO Morley, ext . 261




 22 August 1989




 Rotherham Borough Council
 Environmental Health Department
 'Thorn Bank'
 Moorgate Road
 Rotherham


 Dear

 As you are aware this Service is offering every assistance to Local
 Authorities in direct reference to the issuing of Safety Certificates to
 Football Stadiums and areas of specified activity.

 Recoaaendation 17 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report states that an Advisory
 Group of appropriate Officers should be established.  I would like to
 inform you that the Nominated Officer for this Service is Mr Roger Morley,
 Assistant Chief Officer (Staff Officer).  I would ask that you inform Mr
 Morley of your intention to formulate an Advisory Group and forward all
 relevant information as to dates and times of meetings, so that he is able
 to make the necessary arrangements to attend.

 Reconaendation 40 relates to Accommodation and Equipment.  I would re­
 iterate that this Service would require to be involved in an advisory
 capacity as it has already become apparent that non-standardisation of
 equipment could be a critical factor in the event of a major disaster.

 Reconrendation 43 states that the Ambulance Service will be informed when
 larger crowds are anticipated at any match and would most certainly expect
 to advise on the provision for circumstances of this kind.

 I would welcome any comments you may wish to make regarding the above and
 if I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact




 CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                          AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                               FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                   ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                          TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 8 2 8 8 2 0



                  O UR REF:
                                    AP/RM/MDS/145:3                                 Mr. A. PAGE.JP, F.A.S.I.
                  YO UR REF:                                                             CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                         AM BULANCE O FFICER
                  Please ask for:   ACMAO Morley, ext. 261




22 August 1989




Barnsley Metropolitan Council
Building Control
Kendray Street
Barnsley


Dear

As you are aware this Service is offering every assistance to Local
Authorities in direct reference to the issuing of Safety Certificates to
Football Stadiums and areas of specified activity.

Recomendation 17 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report states that an Advisory
Group of appropriate Officers should be established.  I would like to
inform you that the Nominated Officer for this Service is Mr Roger Morley,
Assistant Chief Officer (Staff Officer).  I would ask that you inform Mr
Morley of your intention to formulate an Advisory Group and forward all
relevant information as to dates and times of meetings, so that he is able
to make the necessary arrangements to attend.

Reconendation 40 relates to Accommodation and Equipment.   I would re­
iterate that this Service would require to be involved in an advisory
capacity as it has already become apparent that non-standardisation of
equipment could be a critical factor in the event of a major disaster.

Reconendation 43 states that the Ambulance Service will be informed when
larger crowds are anticipated at any match and would most certainly expect
to advise on the provision for circumstances of this kind.

I would welcome any comments you may wish to make regarding the above and
if I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact
either mvself or Mr Morley.




CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                           AM BULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                   ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                           TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 8 8 2 0



                  O UR REF:         AP/RM/MDS/144:3                                 Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                  YO UR REF:                                                             CHIEF M ETROPOLITAN
                                                                                         AMBULANCE OFFICER
                  Please ask for:   ACMAO R Morley, ext 261




22 August 1989


Mr P Wright
Chief Constable
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
SI


Dear Mr Wright

May I bring to your attention certain recommendations made in Lord Justice
Taylor's report.

Recoaaendation 35 - The Nominated Officer for the South Yorkshire
                      Metropolitan Ambulance Service is Mr Roger Morley,
                      Assistant Chief Officer (Staff Officer).

Recoaaendation 36 - Makes direct reference to the provision of the Police
                      Operational Plan prior to each match, to be forwarded
                      to the Ambulance Service.  I should be grateful if you
                      would ensure that this information arrives at my
                      Headquarters in good time to enable Mr Morley to
                      process and distribute copies to my Liaison Officers
                      and Control Room.

Recoaaendation 41 - Refers to the specific location of the Medical
                      Practitioner. Again it is vital that my Service is
                      aware of the location of the Medical Practitioner and
                      also the qualifications held by the attending doctor.


I am sure you have already taken steps to ensure that the above
recommendations are fulfilled, if I can be of any further assistance to you
please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours Sincerely________




A Page
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                  AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                       FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                          ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                                  TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 8 8 2 0



                  our re f                 AP/RM/MDS/144:3                                 Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                  YOUR REF:                                                 CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                                 AM BULANCE OFFICER
                  P le a s e a s k fo r:   ACMAO Morley, ext. 261



22 August 1989


Mr H Wright
Chief Fire Officer
Command Headquarters
Wellington Street
SHEFFIELD


Dear Mr Wright

May I inform you, with reference to Recommendation 35 of Lord Justice
Taylor's Report, that Mr Roger Morley - Assistant Chief Officer (Staff
Officer) has been nominated by myself to act as co-ordinator for the South
Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service, with responsibility for all
Football Stadiums and areas of specific activity.

Please do not hesitate to contact either myself or Mr Morley on the above
telephone number if you require any further information.

Yours




A Page
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
       Chief Ambulance Officer,
       Peter J. Mann, J.P., F.A.S.I.
       L.H.S.M., A.M .Inst. T.A.
                                                         Wiltshire Ambulance
                                                         Service
                                                         Ambulance Service Headquarters,
                                                         Malmesbury Road, Chippenham, Wilts, SN15 5LN
                                                         Telephone:   Chippenham (0 2 4 9 ) 4 4 3 9 3 9




                                                         our ref.

                                                         yo ur ref.           PJM/AMB/42/ai
                                                         please ask for:
                                                                              Mr P J Mann                 e x t '




                                                                              22 August 1989


Mr A Page, JP, FASI
C h ie f M etro p o lita n Ambulance O f f ic e r
South Yorkshire M e tro p o lita n Ambulance S e r v ic e
F a ir fie ld
Moorgate Road
ROTHERHAM SBO 2BQ



Dear Don

THE HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

Thank you f o r yo u r l e t t e r o f th e 15 August and th e va lu a b le in fo rm a tio n
e n c lo se d w ith i t .

I have rung you a co u p le o f tim e s b u t you have been to o busy to ta k e
th e c a l l and I can u n derstand th a t.

C o n g ra tu la tio n s on yo u r f o r e s i g h t p r i o r to th e H illsb ro u g h in c id e n t.
You r e a l l y have shown th e Ambulance S e r v ic e how to do th in g s and you
sh o u ld be very proud o f y o u r s e lf !

I sh o u ld a ls o l i k e to thank you f o r yo u r comments on th e Emergency
Radio Channel. I made a s p e c ia l e f f o r t a t th e RAO's Group to
d isse m in a te th a t in fo rm a tio n and i t has been taken up by th e Major
I n c id e n t Planning Group fo r m a lly . I have a ls o r e f e r r e d yo u r l e t t e r ,
which was th e o r ig in a l in t e n tio n , to th e e n g in e e rs on Working Group 7.

I am su re a s a r e s u l t o f you r l e t t e r , we w i l l have some e f f e c t i v e
a c tio n .

Many thanks.

Yours^Sfncerely




P e te r J Mann
R e g io n a l/C h ie f Ambulance O f f ic e r
                       TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

                           DEPARTMENTAL MEMORANDUM

Ref: ASy                                       Date: 3rd August, 1989


From: Mr, A. Smith                             To: Mr. A. Page
      ACAO                                         CMAO




Consents on SYMAS interin recommendations reference planned attendance at
football grounds.

As an interim report the recommendations are comprehensive, and the
following observations are noteworthy but perhaps of lesser import.

1.   Ambulance Service Attendance

     The standby point of the vehicle and crew should be identified.

2.   First Aid Room

     Someone should be in charge of the first aid room and be identified as
     a contact point,

3.   Doctor

     Any change, due to illness etc., should be notified.

4.   Communication

     A portable telephone on site with the standby crews would be an
     advantage and of great use as a drop-back should other links fail.

5.   Liaison

     Any advance information relevant to particular visiting teams should
     be declared to emergency services in plent of time.

6.   Emergency Plan

     Comprehensive.

7.   Licensing Authority

     Comprehensive.




                                                                            .2
8,   Advice from Statutory Ambulance Authority

     Comprehensive.

9.   Amendmen-fe. to 1975 Act

     Comprehensive.




A, SrflTH
ACAO (CONTROL & COMMUNICATION)
                           AP/




15th August 1989.




Dear Colleague,




Following several telephone requests concerning ambulance provision for
football matches and stadiums, I am enclosing for your assistance a copy of
a letter which has been sent to the Secretary of the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club and which will be used as the basis of future costing within
South Yorkshire.    You should note that the provision has identified for non
league and cup matches, this is because the Football League and the
Football Association have responsibility for semi-finals and finals,
however, these costings will not differ.    For your information only, the
costing is based on charging £60 for the provision of ambulances and
equipment and then the associated hourly rates for each member of staff
attending with an on-cost of 20% to include profit margins.   This is in
fact the criteria and costings which were supplied to the Lord Justice
Taylor and the Football Association during the inquiry.


Obviously you may wish to alter the charging and this is left at your
discretion.   The second document I enclose is a draft document which has
been drawn up by SYMAS in conjunction with the Regional Solicitors
Department of the Trent Regional Health Authority and will be used as a
basic document between SYMAS and the clubs when entering into any form of
contractual agreement.


The third document I enclose is purely to assist you in understanding the
initial recommendations which have been made by Lord Justice Taylor as I am
sure many of the Football Clubs will have their own copy and may wish to
communicate with your service with regard some of the material.
15th August 1989




I have forwarded these documents purely to assist you in any dealings you
may have in the future and I hope that they will be accepted along these
lines.


The final point which is becoming very serious within South Yorkshire is
the involvement of the ambulance service on local licensing committees
associated to sports ground safety and should any documentation be sent to
SYMAS I will forward copies on.


If you require any further information or clarification on any of the
documentation enclosed, please do not hesitate to contact either myself or
Mr. Roger Morley, Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer, Staff
Officer who has been placed in total charge in any matters associated to
the sports stadium safety.


Best regards,


Yours sincerely,




A. Page,
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCfe OFFICER
   Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
   Tel: Sheffield ( 0 7 4 2 ) 6 3 0 3 0 0   Telex: 5 4 7 2 4 6 T R H A G   Fax: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 3 0 6 9 5 6
                                                                                                          trent
   Regional Solicitor: John D. Evans
  .Your Reference:                                                                                        REGIONAL
   Our Reference:               1 3 /G 0 2 /jD E /[                                                       HEALTH
                               Mr J D Evans                                                               AUTHORITY
   Please ask for:


Mr Truemen
Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer
Support Services
SYMAS
                                                                              RECEIVED BY
                                                                                         15 AUG 1989
10 August 1989
                                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE
Dear Mr Trueman
                                                                            AMBULANCE SERVICE
Ret flmhulanne Coverage at football matches


I thank you for your memo of the 8th August.   The exchange of correspondence
that you had with Sheffield Wednesday constitutes a contract, and so there is
no need for a separate written document to be signed by each of the parties.
However there are a number of matters which need to be dealt with or clarified
and I therefore attach a draft letter to Sheffield Wednesday in response to
their letter of the 3rd August.     If you are happy with what I say in this
draft it can be sent immediately to Sheffield Wednesday and we can deal with
any response from them.    Insofar as other football clubs are concerned the
same sort of matters need dealing with in your arrangements with them and if
they can all be covered in the initial letter, then so much the better.

I know from experience that football clubs are not very good payers of
invoices and it would be prudent to include in the arrangements for the
payment of invoices, a term that interest will be paid on any overdue
accounts.    It is probably too late to include such a term in the Sheffield
Wednesday arrangements.    However with other clubs and in future years this
can be done.   The appropriate sentence to be included in the letter would be
along the following lines:
         "All sums which are not paid by the due date shall bear interest from
         day to day at the annual rate of 3% over the daily base lending rate of
         Midland Bank PLC from the date of the invoice until the date of actual
         payment."

I presume that you are providing the services under income generation powers.
These powers allow you to $nsure, and I think that you ought to; one claim
could wipe out the entirety of your income. An alternative to insurance would
be to require the club to indemnify the Authority. All this means is that the
club would be contractually bound to reimburse the Authority for any loss that
the Authority suffered as a result of providing the service. This is not so
hard as it seems for the club's risk can simply be placed on their insurers.
If you choose to do this rather than insure yourself, then the appropriate
paragraph to put in the letter offering the service should be in the following
terms:
         "The club shall indemnify and keep indemnified the Authority from and
         against any and all loss damage or liability (whether criminal or civil)
         suffered and legal fees and costs incurred by the Authority arising
         directly or indirectly from the provision of the service and including
         andj loss damage or liability arising from any act neglect or default of
         th^ club's employees or agents and including also any claim by any third
         party against the Authority or its employees.    The club shall maintain
         at its own cost a comprehensive policy of insurance to cover the
         liability of the club in respect of any act or default for which it may
         become liable to indemnify the Authority under the terms of this
         arrangement.    The club shall produce on request to the Authority for
         inspection any or all of the insurance policies covering the club's
         liability under these arrangements and the insurer's receipts for the
         last premiums due in respect of such policies."
    V
v




        This indemnity clause will still leave with SYMAS the responsibility for the
        negligence of itself or its staff.      If you want to include claims arising
        from such negligence in the indemnity it will need to be done in express terms
        by including at the end of the first sentence the additional words: "      and
        also including any loss damage or liability arising from any negligence of the
        Authority or its employees."

        If there are any queries arising from this letter, please give me a ring. I
        should be in the office on Monday of next week, but if I am not here please
        have a word with Caroline Headley, my Deputy.


        Your    ncerely,




        Regional Legal Adviser.




                                              2
tt




     DRAFT LETTER


     From: SYMAS

     To:   Mr Mackrell
           Secretary
           Sheffield Wednesday


     Dear Mr Mackrell,
     Thank you for your letter of the 3rd August.     We will provide the agreed
     level of service for each of the home fixtures on the fixture list which you
     have given to Mr Morley.  If there are any additions or deletions I shall be
     grateful if you will make arrangements to notify us as soon as possible.

     The ambulances and personnel will be in position from forty minutes before the
     scheduled kick off for a period of three hours.          You will be invoiced
     folowing each match for which a service is provided and the invoices payable
     within twenty eight days of its date.    Any VAT is payable in addition to the
     price quoted and the Authority will issue a tax invoice.     The prices quoted
     are fixed for the 1989/90 season.
     If the Local Authority specifies any greater number of ambulances for any
     particular event then we will be happy to negotiate a price for whatever level
     of service is required.
     Mr Morley will be in contact with you and the Police to agree a position where
     the vehicles can wait and where the personnel will be stationed.

     I shall be grateful if you will let me know the name and address of the
     medical practitioner whom you are arranging to be present at each match so
     that we can liaise with him or her.

     Finally my thanks for the season tickets.   If there are any problems arising
     from this letter please give me a ring.

     Yours sincerely
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                             AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                  FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                     ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
 |g|5g^
                                             TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 8 8 2 0
                                                 Fax : ROTHERHAM(0709)829 842

                     OUR REF:                                                         Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                                       AP/
                     YOUR REF:                                                             CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                           AM BULANCE OFFICER
                     Please ask for:




DATE

TITLE INITIALS SURNAME
ADDRESS

Dear TITLE SURNAME

Thank you for your letter of 3rd August. We will provide the agreed level
of service for each of the home fixtures on the fixture list which you
have supplied to Mr Morley. If there are any additions or deletions I
shall be grateful if you will make arrangements to notify us as soon as
possible.

The Ambulances and staff will be in position from thirty minutes before
the scheduled kick-off time and will be on duty for a period of three
hours. You will be invoiced following each match for which a service is
provided and the invoices are payable within twenty eight days of invoice
date. Any VAT is payable in addition to the price quoted and the
Authority will issue a tax invoice. The prices quoted are subject to any
variation in the National pay-scales for Ambulance staff and any pay
increase will be applied retrospectively from the date of implementation
of the new rate of pay. All sums which are not paid by the due date shall
bear interest from day to day at the annual rate of 3% over the daily
base lending rate of Midland Bank PLC from the date of the invoice until
the date of actual payment.

If the Local Authority specifies a greater provision for any particular
match then we will be happy to negotiate a price for whatever level of
service is required.

Mr Morley will be in touch with you and the Police to confirm a position
where the vehicles can stand by and where the Liaison Officers will be
stationed,

I shall be grateful if you will let me know the name and address of the
medical practitioner whom you are arranging to be present at each match
so that we can liaise with him or her.




                                                                                                    C P 6 5 /3 2 5 8 6
The club shall indemnify and keep indemnified the Authority from and
against any and all loss damage or liability (whether criminal or civil)
suffered and legal fees and costs incurred by the Authority arising
directly or indirectly from the provision of the service and including
any loss damage or liability arising from any act neglect or default of
the clubs employees or agents and including also any claim by any third
party against the Authority or its employees. The club shall maintain at
its own cost a comprehensive policy of insurance to cover the liability
of the club in respect of any act or default for which it may become
liable to indemnify the Authority under the terms of this arrangement.
The club shall produce on request to the Authority for inspection any or
all of the insurance policies covering the club's liability under these
arrangements and the insurers receipts for the last premiums due in
respect of such policies,

I shall be grateful if you will confirm your acceptance of the above, in
the meantime, if there are any problems please give me a ring.

Yours sincerely




A Page
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                              AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                   FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                      ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                              TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 361581



                   OUR REF:          AH/MDS                                        Mr. A. PAGE, F.A.S.I.
                                                                                     CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                   YOUR REF:
                                                                                     AM BULANCE OFFICER
                   Please ask for:




4 August 1989


P R E S S   R E L E A S E


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - INTERIM REPORT


Please find attached SYMAS1 response to Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
Report following the Hillsborough Disaster 15th April 1989.




ONE OF TWO PAGES (1/2)
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                       P R E S S   R E L E A S E

4 August 1989 - 1200 hours


                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - INTERIM REPORT


The management of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
wish to re-iterate the statement made by our Managing Authority, the
Trent Regional Health Authority.

The Officers, Ambulancemen     and Ambulancewomen who were directly and
indirectly concerned with the tragic incident at Hillsborough on
Saturday the 15th April 1989 performed their duties in the highest
traditions of the Ambulance Service.

42 Ambulances attended the     scene and conveyed 172 casualties to the
Northern General Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. SYMAS are
indebted to   the neighbouring Ambulance Authorities      of Derbyshire
Nottinghamshire and West Yorkshire who supplied 11 vehicles to assist in
the casualty evacuation.

This Service   is justifiably proud that the interim report findings are
that no valid criticism can be be made of our response. The claims of
deficiencies in our response and levels of equipment by two Doctors have
been found to be totally without foundation.

The interim     recommendation thatan Ambulance from the appropriate
Ambulance Authority should    be in attendance atall matches where the
anticipated attendance is      in excess of 5000 is to be applauded.
Approaches have already been made by local clubs to implement this
arrangement. SYMAS welcomes the recommendation of inclusion of the
Ambulance Service in discussions relating to the numbers of Ambulances
attending at    large matches being made a requirement of the safety
certificate.

I am not in a position to make any comment on any other aspect of the
report and the Ambulance Service will not be making any further comment
at this time.

ENDS
                                                                                                                £-0(^-1'-         AU      S\-opjl


                Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH                                                            _                   -
               T e l: Sheffield (0742) 630300        Telex: 547246 TRH A G             F a x:(0 74 2) 306956                  X   l   d   l   l
               Chairman: Sir Michael Carlisle, B.Eng., F.I.Mech.E., F.I.Mar.E.                                                2 5 5 5 5 5

               Your Reference:                                                                          _ _ _. _ .. . ,
               n Bf                   tmp/__                                                                                  REGIONAL
               Our Reference:        JMC/j                                                                                    HFAITH
                                                                                                                              AUTHORITY



              8 th August 1989                                                                             j K E C H Y E D                    B Y     j
                                                                                                                          O f A U G *989
              Mr A P a g e ,
              C h i e f M e t r o p o l i t a n A m b u la n c e O f f i c e r ,
                                                                                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e M e t r o p o l i t a n A m b u la n c e S e r v i c e ,             j AMBULANCE SERVICE
              " F a irfield " ,
              M oorgate Road,
              R otherham .
              S 6 0 2BQ.



              DearC        ^     ^    v    )

              I j u s t w a n t e d t o w r i t e a s h o r t n o t e t o s a y how p l e a s e d I w as t h a t t h e
              H i l l s b o r o u g h R e p o r t was s o f a v o u r a b l e w i t h r e s p e c t t o SYMAS.        I know y o u and
              y o u r c o l l e a g u e s t o o k a g o o d d e a l o f c r i t i c i s m j u s t a f t e r t h e e v e n t a nd I h o p e
              t h a t yo u t a k e some c o m f o r t from t h e f i n d i n g s , a l t h o u g h t h a t i s d i f f i c u l t a f t e r
              such a t e r r i b l e e v e n t.

              I do h o p e y o u an d y o u r c o l l e a g u e s h a v e now com e t o                 term s w ith th e s i t u a t i o n
              an d l o o k f o r w a r d t o t h e f u t u r e w i t h c o n f i d e n c e .

              Yours s i n c e r e l y ,




              C h a ir m a n




T.R.H.A. 27
                                                                                     HQ, ixUL


                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                            AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                 FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                    ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                            TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 8 8 2 0
                                                 Fax : ROTHERHAM(0709)829842

                    O UR REF:                                                        Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                                      AH/
                    YO U R REF:                                                           CHIEF M ETROPOLITAN
                                                                                          AM BULANCE OFFICER
                    Please ask for:




10 August 1989

Dr J R Shorland

Sheffield




Dear Dr Shorland

Please find, enclosed, notes of the meeting which took place on 9 August
1989.

Would you please let me have your written acknowledgement of the points
raised, particularly those relating to equipment and role in a Major
Incident.

Please keep in touch on these matters and liaise with Mr Morley as you
feel appropriate.

If I, or any of my Officers, can be of any further assistance, please do
not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




A Hopkins
DEPUTY CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
H                                            AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                  FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                     ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                             TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 8 2 8 8 2 0
                                                  Fax : R0THERHAM(0709)829842

                    O UR REF:                                                          Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                                      AH/DT/wp
                    YO UR REF:                                                              CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                                            AM BULANCE OFFICER
                    Please ask for:




10 August 1989


BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY
South Yorkshire County Headquarters
53 Clarkegrove Road
Sheffield
S10 2NH


Dear

Please find, enclosed, notes of the meeting which took place on 9 August
1989

Would you please let me have your written acknowledgement of the points
raised, particularly those relating to equipment and role in a Major
Incident.

Please keep in touch on these matters and liaise with Mr Morley as you
feel appropriate.

If I, or any of my Officers, can be of any further assistance, please do
not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




A Hopkins
DEPUTY CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER




                                                                                                      CPf^/3?586
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

       Informal meeting to discuss implications of Taylor Report.

Present
    Dr J R Shorland - St John Ambulance
                - St John Ambulance
                 British Red Cross
                -              British Red Cross
    Mr A Hopkins - DCMAO SYMAS
    Mr D Trueman - ACMAO SYMAS

Mr Hopkins explained that the purpose of the meeting was       to clarify
roles in the light of publication of the Taylor report,

SYMAS does not have sufficient resources to be able to fulfil the role
of the first-aider and does not wish to take over, in any way, this
aspect of cover at sporting, or other, events.

The salient points in the Football League's correspondence to all clubs
was discussed followed by the recommendations of the Taylor report. It
was noted that the Taylor report figures for first aid cover were
greater than those proposed by the Football League.

It was stressed that a 'hard line' policy was likely to be adopted, in
as much as, 'no compliance - no Safety Certificate'. This was likely to
be the approach adopted by all the statutory bodies.

It was noted that approaches were now being received from clubs in the
South Yorkshire area, but the only club who had entered fully into
discussions was Sheffield Wednesday FC with whom a firm arrangement had
been made for the 1989/90 season to supply two Ambulances and two
Liaison Officers for all 'home' fixtures.

It was further stressed that the attendance of SYMAS vehicles was for
Major Incidents and not for general First Aid purposes. It was agreed,
however, that in the event of a Major Incident, the first aider's would
come under the direction of SYMAS Incident Officers. To facilitate this
aspect, it was felt important that liaison should take place between
SYMAS staff and the appropriate voluntary society Duty Officer. All
relevant intelligence received from informed sources would be made
available through this channel.

At large matches, or where major problems could be anticipated, it was
likely that SYMAS would have a 'foot squad' available for immediate
deployment.

Hillsborough had shown that identification of staff through a visible
number on fluorescent jackets would be a major help in the de-briefing.
Staff tend to lose all recognition of time and specific activities
performed and any assistance to pinpoint particular incidents from video
tapes etc would be extremely beneficial.
In order that a common basis was used at meetings and in discussions at
all grounds in South Yorkshire, SYMAS have nominated Mr Roger Morley -
Assistant Chief Officer (Staff Officer) as the responsible Officer. All
matters relating to Ambulance and First Aid cover at all stadia should
be referred to him, in the first instance.

The question of equipment in First Aid rooms was raised. It was again
stressed that there must be compatibility between what was provided at
the ground and what was currently in use by SYMAS - particularly if the
Football Club was supplying the equipment. Liaison in any problem areas
and advice from the SYMAS Training unit was offered. Any approach
should, initially, be made through Mr Morley.

As a final point, the World Student Games was raised. SYMAS stated that
its role would remain that of catering for the needs of a temporary
increased population and any specific duties relating to VIP's etc . The
First Aid role would be the responsibility of the Voluntary Societies.
                  Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
                  Tel: Sheffield ( 0 7 4 2 ) 6 3 0 3 0 0   Telex: 5 4 7 2 4 6 T R H A G       Fax: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 3 0 6 9 5 6    trent       ^
                  Your Reference:
                                                                                                                              REGIONAL
                  Our Reference:
                                                    JP/1                                                                      HEALTH
                  Please ask fo r                    Miss J Pooley (Ext 440/354)                                              AUTHORITY




                  Mr Don Paige
                  Chief Ambulance Officer
                  Rotherham Ambulance Station
                                                                                          I ® C E lV E p                     by
                  Moorgate Road                                                           I                24MAY 1989
                  Rotherham
                  S60 2UD


                   22 May 1989


                   Dear Mr Paige

                  Having recently discussed with Dr Alderslade, Regional Medical O fficer,
                  the proposed plans for a major conference shared by Trent Regional
                  Health Authority and Mersey Regional Health Authority following the
                  Hillsborough football disaster I understand that you would be w illin g to
                  present a paper at this conference, and I am writing to thank you and to
                  ask i f we might meet to discuss this fu rther. Perhaps you could contact
                  my secretary on the above number extension 354 to arrange a mutually
                  convenient time to meet. I am going to Mersey next week to discuss venue
                  arrangements and a proposed date for the conference, which I believe is
                  lik e ly to be held in November.

                   ( I think we have met at a meeting a t Nottingham City Hospital
                   Postgraduate Centre la s t year e n title d "Day Care Services for the
                   Elderly"?)

                   I look forward to hearing from you.

                  Yours sincerely




                  Miss J i l l Pooley RGN RM RHV FWT CHSM
                  Regional Nurse (Continuing Care)




T.R .H .A . 2 8
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                     FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                        ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ,
                                TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (07 09) 3 6 1 5 frt-   g^ 3 0



          OUR REF:      PP/.                                                Mr. A. PAGE, F.A.S.I.
          YOUR REF:                                                           CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                                                                              AMBULANCE OFFICER
          Please ask for:




O M ( c                        Oft?)        .
  FIRST AID

  A basic level of emergency care rendered by persons who have attended and
  passed a recognised First Aid Course run by the St John's Ambulance
  Brigade, British Red Cross Society and the Health and Safety Executive.




  AMBULANCE AID

  Emergency aid delivered by professional National Health Service Training
  Authority Qualified Ambulance persons using specialised procedures and
  items of Ambulance equipment.




                                       ^   i ed on ftont i ;ne              —
have personally issued kits cnnqist'           *nCu Personne^> paramedics also
shown on the attached sheet (A)                  1 e Extended Training Equipment
shown on the attached s h e «   (B).       ^     “    5 ^^Uator/Monitor       *1.0
                FRONT L IN E   EMERGENCY EQ U IPM ENT -   IN V EN TO R Y L IS T



                                                                         Reg . No

             Commencing                                                  Fleet No •

LIST ITEMS                                     MON   TUES     WED     THUR        FRI    SAT   SUN

Oxygen    F. 3/4 1/2 1/4

Entonox F. 3/4 1/2 1/4

Suction Unit

Resusitator (Robert Shaw/M.man)

Frac Splints

Bag and Mask

Chloride Tablets (6)

02 Masks

Blankets (x 6)

Pillows (x 2)

Maternity Pack

Waterproof Sheets

Burns Sheet

Nursing/Barrier Gown

Green Sheets (3)

Carrying Sheets                                                                    •40




Cervical Collar

Bed Pan

Urine Bottle

Vomit Bowl

Bucket and Lid

Air Freshener Spray

First Aid Box

Carrying Chair x 1

Scoop Stretcher x 1
Stretcher Poles x 2

Rescue Box

Fire Extinguishers (2)

Wheel Brace

Handle

Ferno Ked x 1

Chemical Protective Suit x 2

Details and Number of Crew
                      - 1
                      - 2

Body Bag

2 Pairs of Goggles
           AMBULANCE A ID   SATCHEL




                INVENTORY LIST


QUANTITY                                       ITEM




   3                         7.5 cm R o l l e r      Bandages

   i                         5cm R o l l e r    Bandages

   6                         T r ia n g u la r Bandages

   1                         1 5 g C o t t o n Wool P a c k e t

   4                         No.    1 Wound D r e s s i n g s

   4                         No.    2 Wound D r e s s i n g s

                              No.     ? W&und D r e s s i n g s

                              90c m + 1m G a u z e

                              P k t G a u z e Sw abs

                              No.     1 G uedal A irw ay

                              No.    2 G uedal A irw ay

                              No.     ^ G uedal A irw ay

                              S afety     P in s

                              B la n k e t P in s

                                    Z i n c Oxid*

                              R e f l e c t i v e Jacket

                              R ub b e r To rc h

                              B r o o k A i rw a y

                              Pai r Of D r e s s i n g     Scissors   5"
                                                                                          ©

                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                Extended Training Equipment


                                           INVENTORY




Carrying Case ..................... 1         Syringe Needles (19g) .............
Laerdal Resuscitator .............. 1         Catheter I4g ......................
Laerdal Adult Mask ................ 1         Catheter 12g ......................
Laerdal Child Mask ................ 1         Cannulae 16g ......................
Airway Size 1 ..................... 1         Cannulae 18g ......................
Airway Size 2 ...................... 1        Cannulae 20g ......................
Airway Size 3 ...................... 1        Administration Set ..... ..........
Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batteries .... 1          Hartmanns Fluid IV 500 mis .......
Laryngoscope Blade Size 3 ........ 1          Haemaccel Fluid IV 500 mis .......
Laryngoscope Blade Size 4 ........ 1          Pre-injection Swabs ...............
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 6mm ... 1         Tape Adhesive Hospital 20 metres ..
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 7mm ... 1         Tape Sleek 2.5 cm .................
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 8mm ... 1         Tape Sleek 5.0 cm .................
Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed)9mm     ... 1      Arm Splint 18" x 4" ...............
Catheter Mount (anti static) ..... 1          Cotton Wool .......................
Catheter Swivel Connector ......... 1         Gauze (1 metre) ...................
Adaptors Female ................... 1         Triangular Bandages ...............
Lubricating Jelly ................. 1         5.0 cm Bandages x 5 metres .......
Syringes 10 ml .................... 2         7.5 cm Bandages x 5 metres .......
Stethoscope ........................ 1        Gauze Swabs
Sphygmomanometer .................. 1         Extractor Mucous ..................         1
Needle Box     ...................... 1       Oxygen M a s k .......................      1
Scissors/shears ................... 1         Oxygen Tubing 3 metres ............         1
Magill Forceps .................... 1         Gloves Disposable .................         2
 Spencer Wells ..................... 1        Antiseptic Solution ...............         2
Aspirator .......................... 1        Waterproof Sheet ..................         1
Laryngoscope Spare Bulb ........... 1         Micro Pore Tape 2.5 c m ............        1
Tourniquet ......................... 1        Patient Report Form P a d ...........       1
Catheter Mount Connector .......... 1         Head Lamp and B a t t e r y .............   1
Vecafix ............................ 5         Security Strap and 2 keys .........        1
 Surgical Cloth..................... 1         Sharps Bin 500 ml .................        1




Received By:

Na me :   ....

Signature:                                     Date:


                                                                         /Revised 1989
SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


LIFE PAK 5 DEPLOYMENT AND SERIAL NUMBERS




NUMBER            STATION          INITIAL       MONITOR    DE FI B .   BATTERY    CHARGER
                                   INSPECTION

  1   (BHF)      D o n c a s ter   30/09/86      00045987   00025522    00021064
  2              Bentley           30/09/86      00045984   00025508    00021062
  3              Hoyland           30/09/86      00045986   00025515    00021065
 4               Longley           12/11/86      00046373   00025789    00021149
  5   (BHF)      Middlewood        12/11/86      00046370   00025777    00021150
  6              Parkway           12/11/86      00046372   00025788    00021148
  7              Training          10/12/86      00025983   00046404    00008073     (BSU)
  8   (BHF)      Maitby            07/11/87      00049675   00028905    00008092     (BSU)
 9    (BHF)      Rotherham         07/11/87      00049677   00028907    00021279
10               Longley           23/11/87      00049987   00029170    00008229     (BSU)
11               Batemoor          23/11/87      00049694   00029154    00008075
12               Rotherham         13/03/88      00050888   00030018    00008614     (BSU)
13               Middlewood        20/03/88      00050881   00030004    00008630     (BSU)
14               Hoyland           13/03/88      00050830   00029725    00009089     (BSU)
15    (BHF)      B a r n s ley     19/05/88      00051484   00030535    00009266     (BSU)
16               Parkway           18/10/88      00052763   00029723    00009776     (BSU)
17    (BHF)      P e n i s tone    16/11/88      00052757   00032095    00009768     (BSU)
18               Wath              16/11/88      00052754   00030511    00009603     (BSU)
19               Barnsley          16/11/88      00052759   00032102    00009604     (BSU)
20    (BHF)      Doncaster         21/04/89      00055583   00034056    00011186     (BSU)
21               Maltby            21/04/89      00055584   00034057    00011382     (BSU)




KEY:     BHF   - British    Heart Foundation




                                                                                             PAG E
         BSU   - Battery    Support Unit
tvX>nS
   '"''X
~-M) I •
                                                 1                              'TEL N a 3 a . - . ■                   ‘ ......                   ' “ ''% ¥ 6 f,8 9   15;15     f-. oi
V-     A > rf                ■'


                      F u lw o o d House, Old F ulw ood Road, Sheffield S ’ 0 3 T H

                      T* Sieft.eld (0 7 4 2 ) 6 3 0 3 0 0                                        547246 TRHA G         Fa*-. (0742;
                                                                                                                                  - 3,,W r36                     trent
                                                                                                                                                                 REGIONAL

                                                                                                                                                                 Al 1THDR1T Y




      facsim ile                 transm ission                        header                  SHEET




      TO: a d d r e s s e e                               U       £    ■        P       f l    ( 2   iz   .       ^   y    jL     /   f   t




                 1-AX NUMBt-r<                            O'/^f             -       7 t2 9 ? ch 'Z,
                 FOR the. ATTENTION OF


     FROM; NAME OF SENDER
                                                                      Nii-          j t         D




     FACE I OF'                   ■ ~ i      y




     F'A'i'F :
                                 f   '   Z   ?       / ? (j
                                                     l



     7 IK   F    :           •^ /                o




     IF YOU DO NOT RECEIVE ALL THE PAGES OR IF SOME OR ALL OF THE PAGES ARE ILLEGIBLE
     PLEASE RING SHEFFIELD 6 3 0 3 0 0 e y t . 3 4 9 ( R F.flTSTRV \ .



                       / A n n f i iqwal comments



            1 t-             umM                                                                          e h #       L ku                    w                        ; uU


                U l                                                                 i            * ' U            f i f e                                         ■       J
                (\    n , .. /                                I                 i
                                                                           U'lrld'VI.rtj-l IVJU __jJ      J
 «£T’
    Y
                                             TE L          No .
 f                        1          •' '    ■ I . vv ..     1.U- U'J 'A..h., ^    11
                                                                                  .. . ; ... •            0 6 1 0 7 >y 9     15 ' i 6       P .0p
     SENT BViDIBB LUPTON BROOMHSftD ; 5- 7-89                     5*.15PM ;                       05324<£66B6-»0742 306956                    ;U 1




                                            Di BB L U P T O N
                                            BROOMHEAD
                                            ------------- i O L l C I T O R S                     -
                                                 6 Bum C ourt Ltedi LSI 5JX
                                            Telephone 05)2 439301 F « 0M2 452652
                                               Telex 5S71I1 MDX 12.017L«d«



                              FAX TRANSMISSION HEADER NOTE
            I    .                                                                               <sn                                    ^

Dmu •&!/■ J . ^ 7             Timu                                                Tiw NuwKrr                    TViffil PflCflfi iniid4wiliiiiii
                                                                                                               (including tnis one;

Firm/Company         ZX.‘W^W./Gy     .................................                           Fortheattentionof         ....


From
                IF YOU DO N O T RECEIVE ALL THE PAGES PLEASE TELEPHONE OR TELEX IMMEDIATELY

                                                                  MESSAGE




                                                                                                                                                     ■4
                                                I) 1B ft 1 U P T O N
                                                BROOMHEA D
                                                      i        <
                                                               It r%
                                                                  O i| fI fC* fI T
                                                                                 T O '1
                                                                                      ft S
                                                                                         %
                                                                                         '««to
                                                                                                                                               ilil#cia4rt.
                                                                                                                                               i*adt LSI I p
                                                                                                                                       T(Mm    w   OSU

                                                                                                                                                   t*i«   » n ,«
             AJC/                                                                                                                        M D X u.ow I,**


                                                                                                                                               ii.f il® S



             M r,J a te fivana
             t r a il,t R a t io n a l H e a lth A u t h o r it y
             -#&* i f €2




             oaar joim



              I encl ov a tte following d o c u w a t a                                         which           1 intend t o                                     >*•
              all r ap ra a on ta d partiea t m o r r o w s

                    I   € n tittiaM* u i S W M
                II      S I M M * interin r t o o » w i i * % i M
              t tt      fttitH n ii m — in t >       i n v a r i o u s f a c t o r a r e l e v a n t to                                                      the
                                      with i n t h * Inquiry'1a T u h m o f w » » *                  ^
                if       s o u t h Y o r k s h i r a P o l i c a - f a i l u r # to r a c o g n i s a                                                         tha
                         d s a a tta r*

              if    y o u h a v a any f u r t l i a r c o ^ o n v p o n t i b k w docuiaanta                                                   in         ttis if
              p r e a e n t fo rm oan you p la a a e ta la p h o n a s»a u ap flan tly.

              Y o u ra a in o a f f t iy



              » . 5 * C ! * & M W h ££5




it'c wW-'r 5 1 Tb#m* > A       4   ^ C^ww^ * t? I*t*t f »t                              W'<*■               *    UaXu A * >■ }*! * $U4s*# A * f *                < } f&
*• C * * " D ' *•       A      * , * ? * X S £ — A j V S * * . * « f e * - r ft *, C H I P   T |, V IM iM t G .J. M M I t I— »
  ammniN. p. si,* r, w. fc*4J— Mi%J s th*. 1 o, irnmm                                                    n M r A / . * * ? ? ,* ,* .    -m *       « .•* * i . * ! * •
                h (         ib s »■           m« j jh™w n. a. I *         l . i owte M J * r ^           I r -ia *. d, ta n * Mm!• h * * * * j, \mu o,}, » %
          *
SENT B V *DIFB LUPTON BfcOOMHEftD 3 5- 7-89        5= i?PM i              0^i24266B6-i®7-2 30S9&6                        ;*t
      f




          A.    I m p l t i i i t or i t iOitJii® Of i f MAS                           ill
                o o n ta in e d i n *»n a r t i c l e w h ic h ap p eared i n The T im e * and Th®
                2 l l d « p # i i d « u l w r 17 K y ^ l l I f B f , T M f  » l * 0 BppiBIPOfl i n otlu»£
                n e w g p a p e re .         T h e re m a rk s w e re m ade b y tw o d o u to -ra who
                a t t e n d e d H ills b o r o u g h as L iv e r p o o l su p p o rt** r» m        lh A p r il
                1909.            D u rin g th e o o u re e o f th « e v id e n c e i t becam e c l e a r
                t h a t tli® f i r s t f i v e c r i t i c i s m s by D o c to r a r e l a t e d t o e v e n t*
                i n th a © roe b e h in d th e L ap p in g s L in a s ta n d and t e r r a c e (d a y
                2* p l 2 t S ) »

                DOCTOR A

                i,   " A t 3 . 3 0 pm t h e r e w ere no m e d ic a l p a *a o n n a l ap& r*
                     one o r two S t J o h n 's am bulancem an.          T h e re was no m e d ic a l
                     e q u ip m e n t and t h e r e was o n ly o n * am b u lan ce, *

                     FACTSI

                     a.    Am bulances a r r i v i n g a t ta p p in g *                   s *****   , ld e o U H 2 }

                                        2 6 °7 “     iv » e ( le a v e * 1 8 2 3 )
                           151©         Mdua    mfwm
                                                        ,_________ _ fro m t h i s         am bulance i s          on
                                        th e p i t c h - v id e o M A P I)
                           1821         82 06 a r r i v e s (le a v e s 1632 >
                           1535           liO « a r r i v e *

                           T h is     d o c to r c a n n o t have     arriv e d       la      th e    c o n c o u rs e
                           u n t i l u t a a t 1318*

                     b.    A bout 40 c a s u a lt ie s a r e ta k a a f r a i l th e L e p p in g * liana
                           and toy s t u n t , o f w h ich 5 war a removed by X532*                   A il
                           c a s u a l t i e s h ad b e e n rem o ve d fro m t h a t en d o f th e
                           grou nd by 1606 (SYMAS r e c o r d in g t r a c k 19 p a g e 1 9 } ,
                           T h e r e fo r e a b o u t 35 c a s u a lt ie s , a l l o f whom s u rv iv e d
                           * « * • c o n v e y e d b y SYMAS v e h i c l e s b e tw e e n 1 5 3 2 m id
                           wm>

               2,    "L eak o f t r i a g e *



                     it.   8fMHS p e r s o n * * ! o p e ra te d t r i a g e :

                                                           statement, paragraph ?
                                                                      „ iw       53   oaaa 126F
                           “ ®**J-------------------------J s ta te m e n t - p a ra g ra p n s a 3 vo * e
                           " ““    ____________ la ta ta e a a t - paragraphs 10 and 21

                                                           1
                                            tel    No ,
-a ’iT ®Y * I BE LiPTOH BROOMHEAP I 5 - 7 - 8 9       Si 09PM •                     , .......      Ub, 07, 39    I         D i*”
                                                                                    ®5JjJ4,56&SS-»3?-4£ 33S9S6




                         b*       O ther peraonnal » p o lio s - e la o i

                                       mm                                e v l <Am\m             t5ay   \/   page 159K~H

                                                                 M                re s u s c ita tio n equiptiient d id
                         not                5 «s     ***** r*s5i?-w^          -   _________




                         FACTS:

                         •    *     A f u l l c a s u a l t y t e e * a r r iv e d At tb a i e s i g n a t ^ i
                                  c a s u a lty c le a r in g s t a t io n { th o gyrtnasLutt) a t th e
                                  P e n is to n # Rood and o f th e g ro u n d •
                                  statem ent paragraph 12 shows t h a t th e m e d ic a l team
                                  l e f t N o rth e rn G e n e ra l H o a p it a l a t 1 5 4 4 i i t would
                                  th e re fo r e have kmmn a t th e gro-md by 1550 a t th e v a ry
                                  la te s t#

                         b.       A c a e u a lty tu r n d id n e t a tte n d a t Lepplngs Lana and
                                  a l l o a s u a itie a had been ramoved from th a t and o f th©
                                  ground by 1601 (mm ab o ve ).

                         c.       A f u r t h e r c a a u a ic *                       u * #' "‘u n tf.fa y
                                  D i s t r i c t G eneral H o s p ita l a t th e desig n ated c a e u a lty
                                  d in a rin g s ta tio n b a t was n o t itmqmlrta,

                         d.       Tha iia p lia e t io n th a t o n ly th e c a s u a lty tea ae would
                                  have re s u s o ita tio n e q u ip n a n t l a w r o n g .      A J t SfHAB
                                  fr o n tix n *                                 » o r t* b l» « and f I sad
                                  r e s u s c ita tio n e q u ip M n t which was us«a «%
                                  Lana.          F i r a • • r v l e e a ls o c a r r ie d r e s u s c it a t io n
                                  equipm ent»

                   4-    "There was n o oxygen, airw ay t u r * *                               ^ 4 &ripm,
                         FACTSS


                         a.       ko   osygsn             -      fc ra u i,   i l l              1 *. 4... i ; , f f
                                                                                 sw-srs?v s-naynao m<n>.at,a»an
                                                                 oxygen r t a u iu it f L w ..            -*« - *
                                                                 s ta i ti, supply o f oxygen on board.

                                  No eitfwsye - Mrong:
                                                              I , A i l #%ms f r o n t lin e v e h ic le s c
                                                                  * s e le c tio n u f airways,, ma a lmt§®
                                                                  number were in a e rte d *
                                                          ii»    I f th a           taaans to xmMm to t "'
                                                                 le a k o f in tu b a tio n equipm ent, suoh
                                                                 mttitlpmtml >« w o rried by pere*ieAi.oe
                                                                 f o r um fey thej«> * * u<*v n r* t.- ained
                                                                     2
                                        to u t» i t .         A lth o u g h t h a r a warm
                                        aoaw d o c to r * pmmmt I n th a crowd
                                        wfto              o o m p a ta n t to umm aueh
                                        aquipaant had i t baan a v a ila b le fo r
                                                         u « « ( a p a t t f,rcM* t h a t
                                        b r o u g h t by p a r a m e d ic * and t h e
                                        m adioal ta a s ) i t is im p ra c tic a l to
                                        axpaat a aupply o f »uah aqulpmant,
                                        w hich can o n ly t a f a l y ba uaad by
                                        th o a a t r a in a d t o u aa i t # t o b«
                                        a v a l l a b i a on th a o ffc h a n c a t h a t
                                        s u ita b ly g u a lif ia d p arao ne saay ba
                                        among a p a o t a t o r a « ( T h i s d o c to r
                                        s d m ltta d t h a t I t wa» soma tim a
                                        l i n e d ha had c a r r i e d o u t an
                                        in t u b a t io n h im s e lf - aaa day 25
                                        paga 124D)*



                                        w rongly in a a r ia a i t oouM k i l l th a
                                        p a t i a n t . Tha tr a a tm a n i t h a t was
                                        b a l n g a d n i n i a t a r a d by p o l i c a
                                        o f f io e r a , fa n * , S t John'a and SIM M
                                        ambulaneaman, namaly c p r# ms* the
                                        c o rn o t         tm tR B i.i        * u U tt*
                                        c irc u m s ta n c e s and undoubt&dly d id
                                        «*va i i v t i ,
     o*    No d rip s           -       Wrongs;

                                    i . in f u s io n aquipm ant is a a r r ia d by
                                         p a ra m a d ic s , and r a q u ir a a a p a o ia l
                                         t r a i n i n g , h o w a v a r , t h e r e i a no
                                        a v id o n o a t h a t any c a s u a l t y w»»
                                        p ra ju d io a d by t h * l a c k o f i n f u s i o n
                                        aquipM sxt .

                                lit     Mad l e a l Team ( gymnasium)          o b vio u sly
                                        had Jt*v» d r i p s beoauee           s p e c ta to r
                                        n u raa f 3 E c alaa to n gava         evidence
                                        th a t ha s a t up 10 d rip s         ready f o r
                                        doctora (T ra n s c rip t day 5        p l5 D ) .

5*   l l^ m             oould have been aavad i f s t a f f and equipment


     'FACTSt
     * -   ■nfft'rfc    Kmuan                       +.K mn.*.   t*«. fmnajt                _
           Statemant to tha            praaa^ nr          In «h±af (Amy 25pmsm iili
                                 te l    No,
                                                                          Ub >u f ,ny      i!
                                                                                                     r ,u
BViDIBB 'LUPTDM BROOMHEAD J S- 7 - 8 9     S.*10PM j
                                                               0&J242t)tj56-f0?42 3069SC-              ;rt s




                       w h e th e r o r n o t fu r th e r liv e n c o u l d have bean saved
                       (day 25 paga 1150 to U S D ) , and on c r o s s exam ination
                       ( d a y 2 6 p a g a 12 7 C         t o D ) a g r e e d t h a t i t was
                       "u n fo rtu n a te * t h a t ho   had Bought o u t th e p re e e to
                       maka p u b lic pronouneiHMnts which i t was n o t p o s s ib le
                       f o r him to » *k e .

                  b.    I f aa symas subm it, th a crush in g a ta rta d i t                  th a i w y
                        l a t e s t a t 1 4 5 9 , by        t h a t i t s * t h a t any       n a d ie al
                        aastatan aa got to                  thew i t s e v e re ly            om ahad
                        s p e c ta to rs th ey had bean d ep rive d o f oxygon                f o r w a if
                        4 m in u te s and t h a re f o r a i t iu u n l i k e ly            t h a t th e
                        p res en ce o r o th e rw is e ©f such eq u ip m en t               made any
                        p r a c t ic a l d iffe r e n c e ,



            S.    *e x p la in s about th a la c k o f d e f i b r il l a t o r s *
                  FACTS;

                  a.     We b e lie v e th a t th a In q u iry accepts t h a t th a uaa o f
                        d e f i b r i l l a t o r a on ■ th e p itc h in th e o ircu n atan cea o f
                        t h i s t r a g e d y w o u l d h a v e been p r o f a s a i o n f t l l y
                        irre s p o n s ib le , (day I t png# 31C1 (day 24 page 1Q3F>
                        (day 2 5 page 2 4 A and 2 § A } »

                  b*    In case anybody tuts any doubta about i t                       we l i a t th a
                        d iffic u ltie s ;

                           i.    I f wrongly uaad i t can k i l l s

                                 - t h * p a tia n t
                                 - th e o p e ra to r
                                 - any t h ir d par«y                  i n t o c o n ta c t w ith th e
                                   p a tia n t*

                         ii.    B e f o r e b # in g uaed f u s t i e r * ! y ^* >n i s t i f o r
                                aatoulanoaaan la y t o m t h a t an ICO read in g f o r
                                d ia g n o sia should be o b tain ed from th e machine,
                                i n o rd e r f o r th a re ad in g and d ia g n o s is t o be
                                ac cu ra te th e p a tie n t and th e d e f i b r i l l a t o r mmat
                                ba co m p lete ly is o la te d frc w any movement and
                                t h a m r r o u n d i ng a n */i r o n a a n t » « s t b e
                                s u f f i c i e n t l y s t a b le t o p a r a i t an a c c u r a t e
                                a s s e s s m e n t o f t h e ICO r e c o r d e d . S p u rio u s
                                read ing s can occur in a crowd*
                        iii.    i n t h e c ir c u m s ta n c e s o f t h i e tra g e d y when
                                o th e rw is e r e l a t i v e l y f i t i n d i v i d u a l * w er a
                                re n d e re d hypoxic (la c k o f oxygen), th e iike-Jy
                                h e a rt p a tte rn is a s y e tn le ( continuous l i n e o f

                                                       4
:rt.m   by   iL'*i©15 Lur'iu'^ Dr?.uui’incHy * «j—         *■**«-«-« 81
        *




                                             • i M t r i c a l a c t i v i t y w ith no • * f ; ® \ V 1V t 1 S t;
                                             c o n t r a c t io n ) and not v e n tr ic u la r f i b r i l l a t i o n ,
                                             Thu p urpose o f a defibrillator i s to J o lt a
                                             f i b r i l l a t i n g h e a rt rh y th a toaote in t o a norm al
                                             p a tte rn *           Tha atandard tre a tm e n t fo r
                                              la CPU,             Sucaaaaful CPI would n § n » i i if p ? o i «
                                              # re g u la r h e a rt p a tte r n r a th e r than v e n tr ic u la r
                                              fib rilla tio n .
                                     i V.     However, g iven th e le n g th o f tim e duringI ^h i® |
                                              5 5 t o f th e p a t ie n t a had b « ;n
                                              oxygen, even th e u *e o f a d e f i b r i l l a t o r wouia
                                              Z r L i m wmBm mw p r w r t ir n i d i
                                              P f * a t a t e m e n t t o t h e p o l i c e , Pa S® /
                                              th o u g h t* t h a t in view o f the le n ^ h of U » « ha
                                              w a i p u la e le s s i t would probably ^ * * na®r * * J?
                                              d ie d .     I an          he roust have been s e v e re ly
                                              b ra in damaged by t h a t tim e * and e t thw
                                              o f th e page " I looked d e a p e ra ta ly t o r iiomabody
                                              n ot dead b u t a e rio u s ly i l l who needed h e lp -    1
                                               eould n o t fin d anybody in t h a t c^ tag o ry in th«
                                               g o a l a re a .    Thay wero e it h a r a l l dead o r ©Kay
                                               w ith nothin® in b etw een ,")

               B.

                      1,     a  l i a t o f e q u ip m e n t c a r r ie d             by a l l   SYMAS f r o n t l i n e
                             (usbulanoea is appended h e re to .
                       3.     T h is a q u ip M n t i» in ten d ed            to t   < w by SYHM p « r*o r» ai u d
                              not by t h ir d p a r t ie a .
                       3.     Much o f th e a q u lp M B t h a* to b * k .p t w ith t h . w b u x«n «.
                              fo r use on th a jo u rn ey to h o s p ita l.
                       4      The p rim ary purpose o f th a ambulance i s to g iv e iw a e d ie te
                              tra a tm e n t to c a a u a ltie a and convey them to h o a p ita i.

                       S*     on 15 A p r i l 1 9 8 9 many SYMAS
                              o a a u a it ie e w ith C f l and r e a u a o i t a t i o n f as               v e il   •»
                              conveying 172 in ju re d to h o a p ita i*              5?J£iS
                              o f equipment on SYMAS v e h ic le ! ia ill- in f o r m e d .




                                                                          S
SENT         LUPTON BROQMHEOD ; 5 - 7-89         5!20PM ;                053242665640742 386956 -           e

   >
                                                    n
                                                   *****




       1,      A t any S p e c ifie d A c t iv it y where th e attendance ±m rnxpmtm
               to e *c e e d 2 5 , 0 0 0 a n d /o r th e p a s t h is t o r y s n d /© £
               Circumstances in d io a t e th a t ambulance » « rv io e                           tl
               d e s ira b le (a " c r i t i o a l ma t c h *) , th e h o ld e r o f th e
               c e r t i f i c a t e should in v it e th e s ta tu to ry o ^ u X e n ^ a u th o rity
               to a tte n d w ith such p e rs o n n el, v e h ic le s mnA equipm erit • •
               aha 11 be agreed between th en but in mm *v e n t n ot lesa than
               an O f f i c e r w ith one v e h ic le a n * o raw , th e
               payment being made by th e h o ld e r o f th e s a fe ty e e c t i f *               *
               t m i is in a d d itio n to th e p res en t a tte n d a n c e o f i t           John
               Ambulance Brigade o r th e B r it is h Red Cross*


       2,      Each C lub b e in g th e h o ld e r o f a s a fe ty c e r t i f i c a t e , "Jouia
               m a in ta in a f i r s t l i d roo», equipped to a b a s ic » t*n d a rd , a t
               s p e c ifie d by th e lic e n s in g a u th o r ity a f t e r e o n e u lta tlo n
               th e appropriate ambulance a u th o r ity *


       3,       The F o o tb a ll League, F o o tb a ll A s s o c ia tio n a*r* * * *
                lic e n s in g a u t h o r it y shouXd r e q u ir e o lu b s h o ld in g s a f e t y
                certificates and in te n d in g t o s t a g * a e r i f i c w l watch to
                arrange t h a t th e d o cto r in attendance t

                #»    is t r a in e d and com petent in advanced f i r s t                     a id t o a
                      standard e q u iv a le n t to a NH8 TA Paramedic:?
                b,    is a v a ila b le t o t r e a t any in ju r e d e p e c t e t o r e .end to
                      a tte n d th e f i r s t a id room, whan n a ile d upon t© do «0*


                There shaXX be an agreed and cowman wwithod wf u aw u 'ie a tio n
                between a l l th e efflexgenoy s e rv io e s , i f  ''n n
                B » « i8 tB lo e   or   a   v n ic a w     ta u iu   o i w / wj.           «>***•**«.
                to th e ground and th e re s p e c tiv e h ead q u arters.


        5.      B e f o r e eaoh c r i t i c a l n a tc h th e lia is o n o f t i c e t e t o n the
                p o lic e and ambulance s e rv ic e should ®*He c o n ta c t and arrange
                to be i n d ir e c t c o n ta c t w ith eaoh o th e r d u rin g th e match.
                The p o lic e lia is o n o f f i c e r should be in d ir e c t co n tac t w ith
                p o lic e c o n tr o l.
        6,      F o r n i l d e s ig n a te d grounds th e r e s h o u ld be a j o i n t and
                common emergency p la it drawn up b y th e n lw R n f c po ?. \ <*e
                a u t h o r it y , f i r e s e rv ic e , s ta tu to ry ambulance a u th o r ity and
                th e h o ld er o f th e s a fe ty c e r t i f i c a t e .  The «*n*ror»nfcy p.J
                Should d e t a i l t

                                                             i
                                        TEL No ,                                     0 6 «0 ?   <8 9
£ N T B iDIBB LUPTON BRDOMHEfil) I 5 - 7 -8 9     S ia m   J




                ftt   The r e l « v a n t       fu n c tio n       of    *ach    se rv ic e       d urin g   a»
                      emergency,
                b.    The liaison offlour from eaoh service, prefaraaiy toy
                      nto«, t h e i r r e s p e c tiv e                 s ta tio n   en&        p s rtic u l*f
                      re e p o n s ib ility *
                ©,     fh e ag rs ad rendezvous p o ittts f o r each s e rv ic e and the
                       ( named) p o lic e o f f i c e r who i a re s p o n s ib le f o r c o lla t in g
                       end I s e u l n g i n f o r m a t i o n t o# and c o o r d in a tin g th e
                       response o f , th e re le v a n t s e rv ic e s .

                 du    Emergency access and eg ress.

                 e,    C a s u a lty c le a rin g p o in t .

                 f.    P re fe rre d ro u tes to ami fro n h o s p ita ls , t o t o k e p t d e a r
                       by th e p o lic e d u rin g a * emergency,

         7*      The lic e n s in g a u th o r ity should s a t i e f y i t s e l f toeiora i s s u i n g
                 t h e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e t h a t a j o i n t and common e m e rg e n c y
                 p la n ( a t d e s c r i b e d i n p a r a g r a p h 6 ab o v e ) is I n e x i s t e n c e f o r
                 thy© desig n ated ground»


          8.     The s ta tu to r y ambulance a u th o r ity should be aalsed to advise
                 th e is s u in g a u th o r ity fo r each s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e on th a
                 q u e stio n o f i
                 a.     access and egress f o r ambulances

                 b,     wnrt $f e l equ iswmertt
                 c*     a t t e n d a n c e o f am b u lan ce p e rs o n n e l          and v e h ic le s     at
                        e x i t t e a l matches
                  and should be conaulted b e fo re th e re is any v a r ia t io n in the
                  term s o f th e s a fe ty c e r t i f i c a t e aa regards ttmm &f t  c




          9,      SSGA 1 9 7 5 be am ended so a * t o r e q u i r e th e lic e n s in g
                  a u th o r ity t o d e a l w i t h a p p lic a t io n f o r a a fa ty c e r t if ic a t e s
                  w ith in s ix months f a i l i n g w hioh i t s h a ll be deemed to have
                  b ee* j ofused.




                                                               2
                                       TEL No ,                                    0 6 . 0 7 -89      ] !~
             t

SENT BY ;„PtBB LUPTON BROOMHEAD ; 5- 7-89          5:22PM 1             0S324£66S6->0’?42 306956                       ;«I0


                                                   m
                                                                                                   tui
                  OtJTtiM




        PREAMBLE
        ”                            *.   «-w.           .* » * « « » s e t o u t b»low h * v * been
        H * e x p e c t t h a t moat o f p£e             «*a t #              ^ thttn to O eao n stret*
        accepted a lre a d y                                      t h * tfia a s te r should n o t have
        SYMAS ’ s tr e n g th o f f e e lin g           t h s t tn s o « « ' -
        no u*w »i and could have been                   avoided*

        J,       CHOICE OF OROUNB

                 A.

                       1.1

                                 grovtnd a t L o p p in g s Lane*

                       1 .2      « M I> i *     »n Obvious b o t t le                                        ‘ "edded
                                 I ' i T   x   S    T   ^     m    ^    • & >         ‘                          ;r.
                                 S o p ro p rie tB t u r m t i l M fo r th e r o r t h             s ta n d ,    th e
                                 M M t stand end th » w>»t t » r r * a i« g .
                       1    <9   T*. a t i n u i A h e n o t e d t h a t t h * s h o ri.o » t “ " v " * *>
                       X- 3      « r o . . t h t ? “« £ ; ; « i« a i * * » t h . o u te r p . r i » t e r
                                 g a te s i s          24 » e t r s s .

                       1 .4      one# th e .u p p o r te r . g .in * « « * ‘ n^ 0u^ ‘                     ''* ! s
                                 p e r i m e t e r g a t e s t h o s e h e a d in g f o r t u m u v * * * J j
                                 K v t t o n e g o t i a t e t m inim um b o t t l e n e c k o f 8
                                 Z   l r J     m tw lm      u rn   h * n d « ll                                 % lt
                                 t u r n s t i l e o end th e edge o f t u r n s t ile .   The
                                 maximum d is ta n c e «o ro *» & u*nsti *ear * r* M o n ly 14
                                 iSatres*.

                  1.   T u r n s tile Flow R a ti
                        i i       T h e L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s w t r t i»‘ ' ' I 7' 4 ; "
                                  aD prO M inJtely 2 4 ,5 0 0 t io k e ta f o r th e s e i a l - f i n s l ,
                                  c o v e r i n g t h e n o r t h s t a n d and t h e w e i t s t a n d ®u«
                                  te rra c in g *
                        i 1       P a r a n r a t i h 47 Of t h e G reen G uide g i v e s it m eaittu*
                                  n o t i o n a l r o t # p e r t u r n s t i l e a t w h ic h s p e c t a t o r !
                                  S I l l S . ? l 0 S I I t n o t e x a m i n e r 750 j * r * o n e p«*
                                  h o u r.
                           I a    Baaed on th e f l o u r * o f 23 t u r n s t ile s fo r 24,500
                                                  I t t l5 r v » w o f 750 p a r h ou r. I t would
                                  ta k e alm ost 1 1/2 hours f o r 24,500 s p e c ta to rs to
                                  g a in e n try in to t h * ground.
SENT E V i D I B B LU PTO N BRDOMHEAD J 5 -           7 -8 9         S i 23P M        ;             O S 3 2 4 2 6 6 5 '6 '^ 0 7 4 2   306955                    S till




                                                         t b a n * * * * * t m f i o t u * u,> ’ '‘* * I ^ ‘ e“ » n *
                           1.4         “        .‘’" f o f l T o  .P.ot.tor.           « , n « ' enw8t   r« .      in


                                                                                          to B .in • « * * .


                                                                                                                                            .iir
                                          ■■¥*»»—                   ,
                                                                .♦.■•♦•nip* t,rrfca
                                                                            PTO H    *
                                                                                    fi*-.--
                                           gSr re e^n Siiiao
                                                      aiiaTfigur."
                                                             iw « * —
                            1    6         The inadeq uacy ° f
                            1              24,500                                                    J o )I c e           an« S »*c '                  SB*
                                                                                                             .............

                            l 7             i n o u r * u b » l » s i o n i t i * 9^                                          “ «J ? ly        i   U   w   **

                                            ^     <   2   £      5     S          S        * &    » * • ,n           th* ttm* , v *
            2.      f?satt «                    « B S S J S * 3 d E                                                                       conMQl           ^

                     i J        The         te n !o f          of: « i o e r »                       ^ , / W                          th « o iiw d o t

                                                                                                                                               «   "   K0,t

                                ^ ,£ S i.* “                                                             ‘                                 Z „ .         _
                      i 2        It        th e re fo re             f o llo w * t h e * J jiS U y ’ » l S t                               '« *& >«»“ ;
                      *•*                                                » £ 8 V! X . K * r tSS W                                         - » " » thB,;
                                 Sn<s                      **"»                 P ^ 1. J !
                                 k i c K - o f f h ad b e e n d e l a y e d .

              3.      a H S S S J g J S S iS                   fl. t » c         w v .t-.u .
                      a 1 The d e o le lo n t o ° £ * n J l i i u r . to p rep a re end c a te r fo r
                             e irc w M ta n o e e , b u t th e ^ ^ L o r t a r a In to th a cOTcouraa
                             th e r e a u lta n t in jfe e a       * “«    n t o ttK) t e r r .o in s , « • *

                                                                                                          * by th* 5X51

               4.
                                                      A M r tA r l fo ttfti th*»n«A w<s« in                                   ,
                                                                                                                                               „
                                                                                                                                      _?m l« On to th e
                                                                                                                                                               „r..
                        ♦-1       s a r s r s s                       : s ™ - * . “ ~ £ g &
                                  t e r r a o l n o wae               *“ ^        ' ^    1,  d e o id in a * « « > . «
                                  o f s u p p o rte r,                q u i t e r w a w w :*o t h e r t h a n t h r o u g h t h e
                                  Ht,o
                                     O W»JT**Y onto                    th®
                                          .    t
                                      e e n tr e l
                                            .
                                                                      •   ...
                                                                                                                                                                 tm

                         4.2          The n it u f t t lo n » i                                                                       ^
                                          n S tm il                   w W * althougn w «*
                                      a
                                                                                                                       v « to«»..
                                                                                                                          „a ± m               tb m it         1• «
BV;DfBE LLJPTDN BPOOMHEf© I 5™ 7-89                  5:24PM I                     DS324266l.:.64e;742 3®




                        mm    PC Burton day 17 p 2 io to p22D                                               * ' 14f5i to ? ■ *7-
                                                                                                                       and     *

     *•       y * m - <sr..nKHum


                    an* b K r i m                                                           J » *i» a ta r fa n e . s,ta n
                    h « p h .*#rd ^                o T 'r lw     out                                       P‘« M * a T
                    tho ug ht oono«<ning t n , a a f a tv t «                                          or
                    te rra e ln g *                     w        *                      o f «upp0r t « r s         on th #
              8*2   Th« *mph*Ria i n              *v
                    ***** 9 &t«» mm b a r r i e r * ^ w a S * f ®no* * ‘ p#r±«M»t*r
                    « uv          u$         K   r on th *                                             s ? *s s s i «

                    “        s : is s s s a r s a ,.* : 5                         « *       - •   ° * * » e, * . .        ta
                             avaauatlon;                                     " th * •'™ n t o f aaaraancy
                             Or taatwood'a a i u r x . . ,
                             aanbars o f th * " S J jtin S  <u"» “» P °rt.< j by otha*
                             paragraph a s o f t t £ ^ L J T a .'& i t h , t tl*»»o h * f
                             p o lio y daolalon, P™                  w»« * daU barata
                             iiAlili             ‘
                                                 J i . L *!; „-u>*rc          .                                          ;<

                            2 - Mwar©
                            •nd                  i«ES ’SS«
                                  . W ««d» by 4 t h -    I at                2          cC1“b#
                                                                                          ’uh1* ?i»1"
                                                                                                   ® ,- " p ra-1978
                                                                                                                 tha
                            w ith no naw u p rig h t, b a in /o o M t r S t lj1" 9
6*                      inn m m                                                                         *
                                             PSFIMBTBR FENHS


          S     S       S         S          E      m            s   z        *         s    g     g        J sta
7,
                                       T B n m cg^ r M i i w ^


          ?                                                 V v Mt                                t.rraolna          ^

          “ hS f1/* .^ -          "o f“ r ce •*« ^ w u w d S *;s s 1“ #,4jr w™ n» ^
                                      " ^ Foot b . u c iu obdu ot as     r  -hr i: ?

      ^ S S " - v b ? S » S r f H  i     5


      &sr a ^ ^ S p w     ^ , § g I                                      5                        5




                                                        3
                                        TEL No .                                     Ub s ■J / *
             *


SENT BVJDiBB 1 UPTON BROQMHEOD i 5 - 7-89           5! 25PM ;                053Z 42S 656-*0742 306956               i#13




                 i»i    Whatever                                                                     tJ>»“ soSth
                        s u p p o rte r* ,   it     a p p e a r* *a               « ii» t e d      th e e o rt o i
                        ssx ?                                                                   « » ,
                        took p la c e on 19 A p c ii 1989.

                 8.2    I„     p a r tic u la r ,     ^               ^   • r ™ J 0 ^ 0Bth JutT „ 1(f e^ :
                        g a th a r.d b y t h e s o u t h Y o rk » h ir«      ^    la < t             of
                        c o u rea o f th e                              T h ie d o c u m e n t a t i o n
                        E S S           S S r S J S - S r S £ » 3 { « .K ': E £

                         t h a t which t o o l p lao e on 15 A p r il.

                 1 .3    The fo llo w in g a re eeaaplee o f eufih rep o rtss
                               i,   Humberside f o lio e - H u ll C ity v L iv e rp o o l dated
                                    18 February 1919*
                             i l , * w .p .h l« Constabulary - SouthMpten v W vm vo o I
                                   d a t e d 12 p«ae«slier 1981.
                             l t i . M etropolitan P o lio * - Arsanal v
                                     f Hovatftber 1988.
                              lv . Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Livarpool
                                    dated    2#     September       ilia .



                             s u p p o rte rs ? a r r i v e d a t t h e g ro u n d w ith o u
                             w ere a llo w e d in .




                                                                4
 jjp TOH BRDQMMCftD J   5- ?-89       B:25PM I             0532426656^8742 306956                   :»i«




                                               _   *     fkBOOGHIbte      fm    PXSMffigft
noyra y o w h ^ t a b    fowce                           -----




     gYMAS, gubaiaslort i . th e t S                   o      u    i    t   o     *
     p o e i t l o n t o id e n tify th e ~              In £ o * . >• th e • ^ a o h r t
     S u re «t th .                                    t o * £ b eio ra 1505 hours end
                                                       h o u r..


     ln view o f th e u n o h .llen B « i • * » £ £ £ M m e e l / e n d o f ' t i l
     *u b » i*e io n th a t thoee^ 9 » ln u                   ^        «av*d , t h i . ie       th e
     th # a l a t M t h i t l i v e * uuu* w
      only on* with any

                (submission i f th a t             *    ** a e ^ t^ b y *1459* h o u r* * a4
      .WOfftftTS      « ! «      l-if|              «                          ■if t*   « *     "I*

                                                                                    8 i t H *   *
      osntaffitl p«w**


       I t i« SIMAS1 TOtjaiwi®® th * t                                   t & p lig h t o£ th» ,
       p o s itio n to , and ehould have                           p o lio a o M io era In th e
       j S r . c n . i n p e n . 3 end * ■                               t l » p erim eter tra o k
       o o n tro i b o j. w rf^thow i^.toM oiw a ■


i.     Evldaaoe
        B.    Photograph. South ro rn e h lr. Co-0 0 . i t * A lb ® J.

        b.    f h o t OSr .p H    r   o Ju r       J* M       X - S S V t
               York*hif« P olio* on a*y
               m i l /i5 .

               s r a i i S ^ ' * h T c S » £ i r ^ u c * * * ™
               M soeietlon. Docu**nt 278*
        d.     T r e n .o x lp tv o f . . . . . g . .                            * •« » * » “ < W
                fcifo* Control a t Sftifj ******
         e.     Evidence o f w itn e w e . - both                      * .« v-n ^

6             , h. u d e a l w ith each o* t h . e b o « / “ ‘t ^       ut£of i S
         S i S 3 . 1 T to draw th* T rib u n e !’. a tte n tio n to th e ro x io
                        S p i l e d tto » v a r io u . eouroea.
                                          TEL       No ,                        0 b » U s' X ,
                                                                                             ;
                                                                                             -i
                                                                                      r “**£-
;EM7 BYJDI BB LUPTON BROOMHEflil) I    5 - 7 -B 9          i




                                                                                g r a n a fl g i p t a
                                mm   o f Tlm w TafcaJfr




                 V1PB0S?
                 Thnro ar« to w v ld .0 . to which r .f .r * n c e i« »•««, n u o iy t

                 RJH2                      ■mi. i. tn. w i n x w x a             ^
                                           f ilm takan fe e * th a Oftl»#ra which haa a « ■ « »
                                           v i.w o n to th a 6 *o k o f t t » c o u rty a rd bahlnd
                                           tu m a tiia a IH5.
                                           T h e n a ra ta p e . o f v id e o . w M        by i*K> o « t .ia »
                 MAPI i MAP9 -
                                           Broadcast Unit ono using «« “ S S J t w                         **t
                                           d a t a b a n and th* other u.ing »
                                           d atabaaa.       For th a purpoaaa o f t h ia aoheauia
                                           ha d ia t in c tio n is drawn.

                                      -    Thi. i. th. *il» ®ad» By South Vorkahiice
                  T12                      P o l l * on t h * CCTV ayatam m in e o p e ra to r »•%
                                           databaaa*

           B.     TRANSCRIPTS
                                                                     DOCHKHf 128* T h a i* a r a &
                  bymxs    i         - Trade ®
                                                                     tr a n s c r ip tio n o f tap®®
                  SYMAS 2            - Track® 10 ft 11               mad* a t SYMAS hq o f c e i l *
                                                                     ,f%u*4vn4             Fotm
                                                                     Contifoi SNIG H i lit .

                                          BA/1. KWP 3 0 /1 5 /1 7    T hia i s * tr a n s c r ip tio n
                   SNIG     1
                                          Document 34                o f ta p a s ■ • t o a t s n ig h i l l
                                                                      Fuic* Control,                     m n-
                                                                      tain<t>e a * a * a y * *       .»», *• ^ .
                                                                      from StffC Vntim Ground
                                                                      Coiit m l (0 /C ) and oasaagas
                                                                      tr a n a a itta d by F /c to
                                                                      Othf-f             Ur*lits

                   SNIG     2        - ' SA/2 KWP 3 0 /1 5 /1 8       f M * i« a c o n tin u a tio n o f
                                                                      th a t f a n a o r ip t o f SNIG I

                   smo         3          SA/6 W f 3 0 /9 /1 7        T h ia i s i t r a n s c r i p t o f
                                          Document 129                a s a p a r a t s t a p e mada a t
                                                                      w;m , r v 'n t a in l n § m i h q u
                                                                      frcwi f / C t o rh * . ' J i t
                                                                      S a rv l                  OS

                   mm          4          P1A 1230                    T h ia i# th a Kxtandad
                                          Dociimant 73                lA O id ant Log ocwftpnad
                                                                      F /C . For t h * puxpu <§«»** ai‘
                                                                      t h ia oteonoloey t h ia tapai
                                                                      lm n ot r a la v a n t„
   1 4 . 57*35            1 JH2 £ TB2                   flUMHI C olov& 0 *            At*® b e h in d C illfi C
                                                          1# ts lm m r .
   1«,5B                 SNI8 1 P.7                     Mport.          fro« t w f f l o                           th,t
                                                .       o itf     C M M ltff* IS 1 *1 *1   i   d   it if f ic *




                                                        fc   mmm tp srms




         «=i>                                                                                       t ■■ ■ «       to

        gs;      *       M a t    t i * po..m           . but                          ^           s WM        ^

could
        0&
         W*.


    *„„„                           ..                                   ” ° " 8 * ifl* * n t » “ *” ■*
    iSijBitwm   aUT^TCT1  SHM§*
                       !!!!        (day    I?       o.aooi         *t
                     w   ^ ” iS           im} m n a       * * *



                                                    2
                                       TEL No.                                    06,07,89              !r
SENT BY! Pit® LUPTON BRODMMERD I        V-fcjy bJiiYf-Tl I               us.MmtfBesww ."h* j h v b v -s v




                                                                      I‘ u     If   #   '
               SNIO    5      -    mf  3 o /i4 /iV                                       of S N X ®     *
                                   Doounant 284                       o o n t» in ii'S « » **ck|*oun<J
                                                                      aaaaagaa « t tr?#
                                                                       ra p ra a a n tin g in t« c a l i a
                                                                       t r a f f ic fio to f
                                                                       VHtr               22 wtiiOh waa
                                                                       tw in s a o n ito re d by F/C .
                                                                       T M t i n * " 1 on t h i« tsp «
                                                                        e ra id e n t ic a l to th a t oft
                                                                       S M S 1•




          e,    mWm
                W £S                          •                                                              «««** m

                Thor® i « . a i m m                                      te ^ V ip u "i£ k
                c o m p u te r t r a n s c r i p t and SglCt H I             ^     f o r t h * p u rp o a a a
                a m a tte r o f aattond* }n ? ? !? -. « u been t i t a n w har* two ara
                t h ia chronology t h * tirnaa have                        a iw o r tp t,    in auoh oaaaa
                a v a i l a b l e from th a SNIG H IM * t r a n e o r i p * and th a t i » a
                w hara t h a r a i a «o SK.i®_                         sy MAS t r a n a o r ip t , i * nJJfc
                 B *au an ce, aa re c o rd e d on                      aw »       th a            * a t i« a t * i f
                 U n a , a f i 0.w5*              ^ 1 ‘ m l l a c l t o t h a 8YHAS t r a n a o r i p t .
                 th # SPi® HILL t i e * i a a p p i i a a w
D1BB tlUPTON BROOMHEfiD i 5 - 7 - 8 9    Si27PM J            0 5 3 3 4 2 6 6 5 6 H»®742 3 0 6 9 5 6
*                       «




TIME                 gooses                  tm m
                                             OXTC C openad: S «r9» o t w o u « 160
14.48,04             V id eo 1512            people per n m impost p. /

    1 4 ,4 8 * 3 1   Video RJH2              GATE C OlOied.
                                             " t p i a e t i h e a r d in D f t O M g r ^ n ^
    1 4 ,5 1 .3 0    SNIG 3 P»1              " tie tt^ n g anybody th ro u g h .           ** ?
                                             b lo o d y o h io « a t c a p p in g *           _
                                             beoeuee th ou eand e oen t g a t ln »
                                             th«iy have j u a t
                                             and S u p e r in te n d e n t r t a r a h » u s
                                             e o re a n tin ®          them t o open th e
                                             in n e r g a te e and to l a t p e o p le in
                                             in# M u rrw y ' *                 4J£       l\V * ;
                                             wm*wrn g o t to m onitor t i c k e t * i f we
                                              g a t L iv e r p o o l » i* e d UP J * 1*?
                                              F o r e a t t h e y ' r e g o in g t o h a v e
                                              t r o u b le even i f we g e t a aario u a
                                              problem *"

                      Vidao RJH2              GATB C o p en ed f o r e to o n d
     1 4 .5 2 ,0 6                            E n try o f about 2 ,0 0 0 paopla par HSE
                                              ftepott p. ?«
                                               p /C g iv in g o u t imeaoog©® to o th e r
      14.53           8110 1
                                               p o lic e v e h iU • »                  •
                                               a ia a ln g p o iio e a e n .

                      SNIG 3 p p .2 -6         Chat and b a n te r between F/C (PC
      1 4 ,8 3 t o                             lo o k ) ana o th e r fo r c e ii about                  not
      14*58
                                               a c c e p tin g any ls a < t* «*'>«
                                               fo o tb a ll aatoh*
                                               SfMHB eubw it t h a t lia t e n in g to the
                                               t*ne oivea no in d io a t io f t of
                                              'c t la ia u *         in F/C *

      34*57            SNXG 1 p.7               Superintendent Brougham r a d io * to
                                                th a t to attend ed Lepp±ng» ton® end
                                                w ith a PA b ut " th e y ’ ve a lre a d y got
                                                * PA i n uee t h e r e so we a re now
                                                re e u a in g baok to d r iv in g school •
                                              ■ A g ain l i s t e n i n g t o t h e t a p * a *
                                                •u g g e e tio n o f any p an ic o r oonaem
                                               tt> t/e,

      14.57,35         H m 2 ft TB2            ©AfE C alo»*d»                Area behind SATB C
                                               le cslear.

       14.5#           SNXG I p . ?            R e p o rt* from t r a f f i c              c o n tro l th a t
                                               c i t y s e n t * ’* siisat o f t r a f f i c *
                           TEL                                          u i                    P .02
» «

    »-




   14 »59          SNIG 1 p . 8         Telephone c a l l to Ground C o n tro l *t
                                        d o n ’ t know w h e th e r w# n eed an y
                                        y e t 4 “ n o i ' a r i n g i n g G ro u n d
                                        G a t « r ,

                                       PC H u g h ring* G/C (PC               f
                                       i t ’ s d p i.      oo y o u w T n T n n y
                                       a m b u la n c e s . We        t r y in g to
                                       monitor t o you but you know i t r s
                                                 1     1 " i t 's ehao* a t tli*
                                       moment# w s, wti g o t no r e p o r t s o f
                                       in ju r ie s b u t we, i f you can m onitor
                                       th a s itu a tio n i f you can lu s t keep
                                       stend ing b y ,*
                  RJH2                 GATE c opened t h ir d tim e .          Steady
                                       stream b eing m o n ito red by mounted
                                       p o lic e .       f a n * h a v in g t o show
                                       t ic k e t s (s e e e v id e n c e o£ M a o r e ll
                                       tr a n s c r ip t      30 p .S fa -O I
  l b . 02        SNIG S p . 8        "Background Spwuoh" "S uperintendent
                                      H e rs h a ll e re you c e llin g urn, ovor*
                                      "Can we c lo s e th e g e te a a g a in ? *
                                                  t h e y oen be c l o s e d » God
                                      b less?*
 15.04           8N10 1 p .9          G/C a a lle f o r dog h an d lers*
 15.04 to        BWW 1 p p .9 £ 10    F/C summons dog h a n d le r* to GATE 0 .
 18. 06
 1 5 ,0 6 *1 0   SNIG 1 p , 10        G/C o * I I * operation Support.
 13.06.30        SNIG 1 p ,1 0        F/C sends more dog h an d lers*
 1 5 ,0 7 ,0 1   SNIG 3 p . 8         p /c p u t* sipum on n o t ie * th a t
                 SYMAS 1 p . l        "ambulances m ight be re q u ire d " ,

                                      C onversetion ■ between PC lo o k and
                                     • Superintend*** t C la rk e ,
1 5 .0 7 .8 0    8N1G 1 p . 11
                                             “ * / C| " F le e t o f ambulances to
                                      H ills b o ro u g h **
15.08            8M1C 3 p .9         G/C - SYMAS; (c o n tin u a tio n o f that
                 amm i p. 3          ■■■•     phone o a ll * *                a t 1 5 ,0 7 .0 1 )
                                     H illiX o w u g h * ,     * * b” 1* '            * 1    t *'
1 5 .0 8 .5 0    mm   1   p, 12      0 /C (R y a n ) to F/C* "Am bulance to
                                     &eppings Lane end p ls u m . u p p in g *
                                     fc e n e , • * H o p r , « i b v l « n c » a t o
                                     Lappings     Ia   m     ad'id. ■

                                     PC Waugh to S I M
:DIBB LUPTON BROOMHEAD J 5 - ?-S9   5:29P M ;            0 5324266S S -*0?42 306956




                  SYMAS    1 p*4
                  par SMI6 HILI.    >   Rjui&ul.ftiiQo« t© Lepplng* J**®
15.09                               )   o b ig f l m t i« o « id i* to ly , » *    mmf m
                                    )   you'vo f o t ploaoo»"

1 5 .0 9 .4 0     SNIG 1 p . 13         r / c to o/c* *i«
                                        "Floaoo csonfixti o p e ra tio n          Support
                                        M2G glvoo e « rili» s *tio n «
                  sue i p.io             f /C (Roofc) to SYHA8I         to l o t
 1 5 *1 0 .5 5                           you know wo tta v i o a ita d Opo*®tion
                  SYMAS 2 p . l          S u p p o rt.   tbmrm o r * H u n d ro d o
                                          in ju x « 6 t r * » p i» r t
                                         ovofythjng " §fH#w *»n*                      that
                                         t i m f * £ * *#*!*«'d i n g

                  8NX0 2 p . l           0/C t o P/Ci "Can you eonfi*» * •
 1 5 .2 0 .1 0                           hivt Bore aabulonco* on *outo-
                                         o n ly havo 3 a t t M * ir* ™ U o n * t
                                         prooont.*
                                         F/C to ©/Ci "Our lo o t inotruotiono
 I S . 23.50       B M W   3 V *
                                         wmrm f o ro»buloneo» to i«oypiui)*
                                         j*n o . m t m m any ohango? Ovor

  1 5 .2 4 .3 0    SNIG 2 p .4            F/C to i/c t *1* would l l t m f m m
                                          ambulonoot s l i o to OATE Q* T h in ® *
                                          o r a g o t t i n g b lo o K o d up a * th*
                                          Loppings t*ono, oooa oobulonooo t o
                                          ©ATI 0 plOOOO. *

                   INI® 2 p . 4           r/C    to 0/C: "lfhoro'o OATH 01*11
  15^24.50
  1 5 .2 8 .3 0    SNIG 2 p .7            0/C to F/Ci "Could you ook fo r o
                                          r a d io     K a lla * to xaguoat tho
                                                     m ooooo
                                          or©#* application - ?*• otond %
                                          AttOftd a t tno                      dOOtOSfS ftt
                                          th*- o ta d iu **M

   ig^SQ           SNIG 2 p . 7           r / c to O/Cs    *R o g a r, requooting
                                          Radio H allaw Jwi te s te r s to **t.#nd
                                          a t tho otodiuia, m ror*"
                                               TEL Nc




                  w ith ’ wTM«Sah “.“U a k L S 0 t'? U9h (l« -5 » -3 0 ) 1 . not o o n .i*t» ftt
                  " w ith in second. o£» h u r in g                                                        B t“ ^y f t t m r " o r
                  ?f              e n jftM ftf                                                                         No p an ic
                         a ) p rlc “       to        O '*     e b .in a                                                              v ta * °

                  S i^ tx : suty ssa .'^ - ^              7                                         c *« <*—>                            «,
                 tT ^ S S S . *                 “ y

         7.
                 r s ^ 8 t ^ 1ODm, 0 at«O? J 5 S                             l t 1* u n ii>WXy th a t i t waa t h *
                 t«l«ph on e c a l l a t 1 *.S 9                             ““ » « io n « j PC w .u tf. to « i ! S 2

        WAS I T     G A TE 119


        BSftaLgfti j g a t *    b   ..g ggjft*^


                »u‘ ^     “    ”**     —        «      « .      oontrcx         of       ,.r m         1S                     S , ^ , snt

        2*      Steward*                                  -------
                                                    w *r*                      m )m ‘ pm & m < t           «i    n mtm
                        »v i4«mo* *«« aA fo llo w * i

               t * i ¥ T I c s o rrw o t^ t*
                                                      • l i* ^ was
                                                               m m     t S S S ? ^ fo r * *41,59.30.
                                                                   n o t t*m m A
                                                                                           K ie k - o f f »*                            I f


               « " i : 5l daf                                                  « * ■ *          -      ^    op* ^                   i# t .


                                                                  ^     *°«*        L d T ^ ® 4"—          2°°    •jWwtor*
                                               ■ t   «y     w a tc h   I t   w a*    IB
                                                                                      »•.. LWH
                                                                                             a .** .              c io * * d         th *

               tim m i K                                              A itk in o o n firn * »4M,«                #
                               ~      i5,iMi* a           *° ^                      c • n      a * r z z &                r     •

                               “ #CC “ *               po“ Usl* b«                  « rt*M r                    a *M            op«

              L - * = J f e M              M         B M       ^ s a s f e w                a je a a ^            , . ,




2   ,
              " - ■" M                                    a :                                  * -                -- *
                                                            ^, s       3 ? 4                                    i n r ,tu‘
                                                                  i
      B U tl

     iu         We m ention o f p o s s ib le
     b,         No m ention o f req u est being made by ra d io ;
     c.         I n any e v e n t S e rg e a n t B u r n * ’ a xradio was n o t working
               (se e day 17 p.33G ) "Radio deed sin c e 14.30# Not working
               u n t i l I heard th e m i l f o r p itc h in v a s io n ,*

      xhspbcm n      w m m tt >   (d ay   is   f*6tts~®>

      a,       Not make any re q u e st to f/c to open G ate a ,
      b*       Not aware o f any auoh re q u e st to f / c . Old n o t n o t te a
               how o r why Gate B was opened.
      In t i l thtt e i f a M « t w u « ( end An view of th® evidence th a t
      h a * been g iv e n , we subm it i t i s e v id e n t th a t co n versatio n s
      r e l a t i n g t o th e G ate a to be opened could n o t have bmn
      overheard by PC Waugh.

      Fan* n o t shouting and sc reen in g ,   opening t h * g a te p ro b ab ly
      s u rp ris e d th en because i t was towards t h e i r s id e vmr A it k in
      (d ay 17 p .6 2 F -G ),


was i t    mm m

when was .Oats A op*nad7

1,    A c c o rd in g t o le a d in g C ounsel f o r th e      In q u ir y Gate A was
      opened a t 14•5$ (day . * , ) »
      INSPKCTOH S fK lS i statem en t p . 7 " I have no a c tu a l tints o f th e
      n e x t "event7 "but would e s tim a te i t to be a t 2 .5 0 and I then
      saw Gate A open w id e ,"

      8BR8BANT H iW IN S : (day 17 p.92C ) "Made a re q u e st t h a t G a t* A
      be' o ^ n e d 'b e c a u s e X thought aomeons n ig h t be k i l l e d o u ts id e »
      That message was re c e iv e d . *       No e v id e n c e as t o when t h i a
      re q u e st was made*

      mmm mt GODDARD* (d a y IS p . see) C o n fir m s r e c e iv in g
      H ig g in iirs message.        Says he p e rs o n a lly gave perm ission ( n )
      r e l y i n g upon th e p re v io u s i n s t r u c t i o n g iv e n by C h ie f
      S u p erin ten d en t D u c k in g fia ld . Ha p la c e s th e req u est 3 o r 4
      m inutes a f t e r th a opening o f Gate C.              i f he i s r ig h t th i»
      w i l l be between 14 .56 and 1 4 .3 7 ,

      Statem ent p*6 "By th e tim e Gate 8 was opened C Gate had                    bmmt
      c lo s e d . *


                                               3
                                  ^     2® p*38D"»r) "Had* my w if to S uperintendent
                                  ***   8      ^        on   th*            Asked     permission


         S L * S 5 id e n o i ^ ttt t h l * * * « u e s t w as t i d §          by ra d io   and
         t M i f t f o w s u b m it n o t b e e n h e a r d by PC Waugh.

         iS J S S rK * n ! J r     “ t a i t l 01* * * 1* * * < * » • * « » « * » « « ■ » * n tr y
                      « ?               o rd e rly and c o n t r o lle d b y * serx a l o t
                           ^ *2 L d ir e c tin g ^ba fans to w ard * th e n o rth stand,
         r?         even t th a w eig ht o f th e av id e n o e seems to su g gest
         +h !!?L£! ! * * « . * * *             beoau** Gate C was opened and i t was
         givan?                “ s* n* r a l P4ir“ ± « «io n to open g a te s had been

         F® sub « iit th a t in A l l t h * circum stances t h is is u n lik e ly to
         ta v a bean t h * u rg en t and unusual circum stances to cause JPC
         Waugh tc. ap t « h» f-ifiL

         In   any e v e n t th e r e i s no evidaflot* o l any requ ests havine
                Iff?                ra d io and no *via«mc:« th a t #uoh ro q w w t*
         !# •*• rapes ted b e fo re i t was g ran ted .


j^S I.T_TH1 FERIMETBR FENCE G&TI fO PlMfi |JUjfp 47

1*       T    * 4 Q tl t t h i i i ® t h a ®°*t i ^ o l f a p p l a n a t i o n f o r pc

                    *■ Ql«*r * w * other Bouiftii that toy 14,39 tna
     rflaaster had already owurrod                       *
     m m m cm
     L iv e rp o o l Echo Photo document 378,
     futon             i 4 , m*
     fo u r h a llm a rk * o f t h * crush ! i»g d e a f l y p r a * » n tr namely $
     ®*         " w . ittA i# i             openi

     b*         f l w ^ < it0 r f ° llm bA ng ov* Sf t h « t »P ©* *»»® p e r im e te r

     e
               Tms                      m   to th a »eated •« § « o f th a » e * t standf
     d
                      P ^ to g ra p h w r ta k in g a2o**~up p ic tu r e * o f people
               behind p e rim e te r fenfce in pen 3 .                            *

     F u r t h e r e v id e n c e fro m p h o to g ra p h D 8 1 7 - H i l a e u » § M
     tr a n s c r ip t day 19 p,33D-B> dooua*nt 12 « ,               “ 1            M


                                                    4
“That in tim ed a t 1 4 .5 9 mm i t d e a r l y shows th a was* and,
th a Lapping* t a n * ta rra o e a . t o * ean see to t h e r ig h t o f tha
photograph th© back o f th e § m lt th a g oal n a ilin g , end on*
oam see t h * g ates in tb a te rra c e s in t h * p e rir a e ta f tmcm
o p tn .   I t h in k tho«« gates mm 3 and 4, and a t t h a t t in s
th e m a r t ft c o n s id e ra b le number o f pnopli* a lr e a d y o u t t id e
th e p e r im e te r I t n c * . ? , . . and your i t John's people mm
e lm a d y a s a ia tin g ? - wwnmr - c o r r e c t .*



 *C S m ith (d a y 17 p . 1 1 4 -1 1 5 ) s t a t i o n * * a t O at* 3
 •1 c o u l d see people were ta in ® pressed up t i g h t a g a in s t tha
 fencw; t h a t th e y had n o t f a l l e n beak as th ay w ould nocinelly
 f a l l b a c k .“

• l t h i n * sane people tiara ahouting "Open th a gate# wa are
crushed* o r something l i k a t h a t , "

C uoi " D id you t r y to g a t through on your ra d io t o anyone?*

A: "1 t r i a d to shout * Gotta and open ta a e * g<*t©t?      P e e^ l* « t *
d vln e J n hmrm. * o r aonathing l i k a th » *     £ .,!* • »      <, #«m„*
p as t exp erien ce l had no d o u b t t h a t th a y w ould n o t have
r e c e iv e d t h a t a t th a t in a dua t o th a n oise of th a crowd,
a ir . *

Cues *D id you r e a lis e by than th a t people w»ra                    in   tro u b le ? *
li   T e r tM n ly , a i r , "

Cut i *so d id you in f a c t opan th a g a t e ! *

As "1® op en ed them , y e a a i r , "

.    IL L IN GWORTH ( day 17 p . 135C )              On d u ty a t Oata              i    a fte r
14, *>6 ( day 17 p.134D )

P .1 3 3 1 -E "Aa p eople became d ia tre a s e d and l /<&aU&#d they
Wftr* in P » in , 1 p u t a ra d io message ovat to say t h a t th e re
was a s e rio u s a itu a tio n a t th a f r o n t . "

                from aaaing people in d ia tr a a s ,               could yoa haar
w hether th a y wars In d ia tre a a ? ”
A;   mlrnrn*
Cues    *m     what way, what w ar* th ay ahouting?"

*'    "Word® t o      th e e f f e c t o f   " H e lp ,   I ’ m h u r t*      l* »       b e in g
« u » i a n . *"
                                                           T EL No ,                               0 b , 0 7 , fi Q   i    ;a1
SENT   B Y iD IB B   L,.U PTON   t f K U 'jm t H U    i   =~   r-u = -        "   •




                           Cues " I t whs obvious to you t h a t p e o p l* w e**                           bmlng         ftruahed 1
                           tftk®        It?*

                           *1 " B la t a n t ly                  o b v io u a ,   ye s*   PC t i l l n gw orth then o p m i
                           O at# 4 . "

                           gldd^«3e                  t^Ggu
                           Nueeroua fo n t gave evid en o * t h a t i n t h * t i n * r u n n in g up t o
                           k ic k - o f f and a t th a t in e o f k ld k - o f f fchare war* mavrnwm f o r
                           h e l p a n d scream s t o t h * p o l i o * d ra w in g a t te n tio n t o t h a
                           p lig h t o f those a t t h * fr o n t o f p*na 3 and 4*

                           Wo s u b m it t h a t i t ip u n n ec es sa ry t o r e c it e o i l t h * fa ft*
                           whoa* e v id e n c e i u i t be v a r y much i n th ® m in d o f t h a
                           T r ib u n a l. ' w * p a r t i c u l a r l y r e l y upon th a evidence o f mt
                           Hioka who waa • • • k in f f to draw a t t e n t io n o f s e n io r p o l i o *
                           o ffflo e ra In t h * p o lic e c o n tro l bo* to th o a v id e n t crushing
                           which he oould a * * from h ia p o a itio n in pen* 1 and 2*
                           S u t ry

                           Wm    su b m it t t i« t i t i a abundar1*^?                 tbm*                i t Is
                           p o a a ib l* th a t messages in r e la t io n to o th * r g ataa ooyifl have
                           b e *n p io k *d up by re Waugh which would have s a liv a te d M u
                           ta le p h o n a c a l l t o SYMAS h e a d g u e ct e r e , t h a b a i e u u * t>#
                           p r o b a b i l i t i e s in d io a t * th a t i t in f i o t wat o t i i i f o r h elp
                           em anating f* a a t h * fene crushed behind pen* 3 and 4 .

                           We re a a a e rt t h ia auboiaaion in view e f t h * f a c t t h a t ag ain ,
                           w ith o u t re q u e st from G/C fo r them to do a©, an o ther o f f ic e r
                           a t p /c te le p h o n e d 1YMAS a t I S , 06 ■ • t e i f t o p u t th e # on
                           n o tic e .      I t i s a v id e n t th a t many o f t h * o f fio e r a a t F/C in
                           f i n i f H i l l w ars d is tu r b e d by t h * m *asao*s that, itmf mrm
                           ra e a iv in g by m o n ito rin g ■ th e VHP ra d io otoaiwi#! 25 end th ese
                           w ar* b y 1 5 .0 8 t o t a l l y unconnected w ith any re a p e c t to open
                           g atea o u ta id * by th e tu r n s tile s *

                           in our submission these o a lla f o r h elp and oat I * o f 1 ^ncwm
                           » u e t have been coating from o f fio e r a a t th a patJ e a te r fa n o *
                           who were o l * a r l y upset and p ertu rb ed by th e evidence b efo re
                           “hmlt ayes.

                           I t i s s u b m itte d t h a t t h i s would have been e p p a re n t to
                           o f f ic e r s in th e p o lio © c o n tro l bos w ere t h e y p re p a re d to
                           f e e i i a v a t h e s v i d e n c e b e f o r e t h e i r wyec and # l # o u
                           S u perin tsn dent Murray and S u perin ten dent Sttaemfocjd when tltey
                           v m n t down to th e p it c h end to in v e a t ig a t e why fane wmtw
                           v J iv M n g over thm tw rim a ta r fan© *.



                                                                                      I
•u p arln ta n d a n t Oraamioodl (day 12 p . * » ig> id a n l i j: ia , <.»*-«**
a t the lnapaotor i n photograph South *orkatilira
fbundle F) photograph PR1/9A.                   At t j a t                 'J:V‘
Superintendent Qreenwood »naarfce* that ha w#« f * * i f
aceeeaing th e ■ i t u a f ’f on.         m aq M O M tm t i t w p i w I
one looked a t those ox-uahed bahJnd th e Emtam it\m >*!*#«&* a
i n rtJ f f l o v i t l s a and b t i P f o ru a h a d .   h p a ru s a l o * th a
fo llo w in g photograph *t 1/10A ahowa t h a t f a r 1t<p& «aspaaing
th e s i t u a t i o n S u p e rin te n d e n t Graanwood in file t h a . naught
h o l d o t « fa n and la p u llin g h i A back towards th® fe n \m,

AV^uoiuUtt Ai*vj>H fc*Kt mtmu                   .i.yUEJt—T-siL..!.,!(£
From w t e a r l y a t a g e s h o r t l y » l t « r t » , 0 0 t h a o o # » # n t a t ® r »
v i e w i n g t h e p i c t u r e s M i a® p ro d u c e d by t h a v i d a o
t h a t t h e p ro b le m l a M i n g o au a# d W o v e rc r o w d in g u n i fa n s
a r e a p i l l i n g over o n to t h e p i t c h .

Bvidange a t th t c i i i fo r                              A * **f
 in our eub&iaaion t h l t woe n e a r l y l*i m ? w p ‘ S JV?V i 'T l
 th en Id e n t if ie d • • a p ito b in v a s io n and r*>t recognising
 i n "f me t m m ajor saetflaiw y hed o ccu rred .
 V * n u b B it t h a t i t l a a b u n d a n tly u i a a r t h a . th® **agedj?
 oownanoad soma tim a b ifo ti# 1 3 - 0 0 . t h a t th© tra g e d y vaa
 i d e n t i f i e d by ju n i o r p o l l o a o f f i e a r s          **
 p e rim e te r g atea a t 1 4 .5 8 and onwards, th a t
 S e t i d e n t i f lad f o r w hatever reason by a a n io i           * **
 1 5 ,0 5 .2 4 (MAPI) utmii Superintendent Greenwood went o n to th a
        i.

 i t „ » 0 » t t . b l . t t a t no o . U « . » » « . W * * £ • '“- i 1
 f o r apibuleiteea b eo au a* Biven t h e i r                                 J*
 l i k e l y t h a t th e y w ou ld have                  at           *** * ,
 s u f f ic ie n t number. to have made a l^         1J *           '*
 number o f deoeaaed than th ey ware i»thai»Ja« abta i *

 0«® 1« n o t a b l e t o a a y i f i n f a c t an y * * * * '• l i t * *             (-1
 t w L m w m cue, i f a o f how many b u t on* l a
 u n d o u b te d ly had t h e d l e a a t a i M e n ;l ? ® 2 S m i a r * V* i ^ a l i n M
 a u t h o r i t y e a r l i e r t h a n I t i#«i   t h a W J Y U J*
 baftft. o a ll^ d IQ A * i m i n u t e * e e r l i a r th « n I t
 und^-tbtadiy th e csH®no«» o f a u rv iv a l f o r mmy of ib « p®opi®
 Wb*« -mrm p u lla d o u t dead would t a w                   «^hanoad.




                                           7
                                                                                         i




                                                                                M   j   <^-0


                  SOOTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                  D E P A R T M E N T A L     M E M O R A N D U M


REF:     AH/RM/C^000:4                            DATE:   18 September   1989

FROM:     Mr R Morley                             TO:     See below
          Staff Officer




Re:     Football Stadiuas and Areas of Specific Activity

Please find enclosed the policy document in relation to the above.

It is emphasised that the details of this document must be strictly adhered
to.

Also enclosed is a Liaison Officer's Report Form which is to assist Liaison
Officers when making their report to be submitted to myself.




R Morley
Staff Officer




cc:     Senior Officers                     Control Superintendents
        Divisional Superintendents          Control Officers
        Station Officers                    Planning Officers
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


       POLICY FOR FOOTBALL STADIUMS AND AREAS OF SPECIFIED ACTIVITY



Mr R Morley, Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Staff Officer)
is responsible for the co-ordination of information from all sources with
regard to Football Stadia and other areas of specified activity, ie, sports
complexes  etc.,   and as   a direct   result  of Lord Justice     Taylor's
recommendations, is the Nominated Officer for this Service's liaison with
all other bodies.

Set out below is the policy of this Service which will be adhered to for
the provision of cover as required by football clubs or any other
organisation.

Receipt of Information

All requests for provision of SYMAS resources will be directed immediately
to Mr Morley.    All enquiries from whatever sources will be dealt with
initially by Mr Morley or exceptionally, in his absence, by Mr P Eason
(Station Officer, Headquarters).

Provision

Mr Morley will liaise with ACMAO Jones on Monday of each week and inform
him of the required provision for the forthcoming week, which will include
any midweek matches.

Mr Jones will     then arrange to provide the required staff and vehicles as
requested.

Briefing

Mr Jones will brief Liaison Officers.

Mr Morley will collate all operational plans as received from the Police,
and make copies available for Liaison Officers, Control Officers and
Control Superintendents.   He will also emphasise any identified problem
area. Mr Morley will brief all Officers and staff as and when necessary.

Communicat ions

The type of communications will be decided in consultation with ACMAO Mr A
Smith, this will depend on the prevailing circumstances, ie, number of
matches, venues, crowd expectations etc.   It will normally be expected to
communicate on an un-utilised domestic channel which would be switched to
'talk-thro' and monitored by the Control Room Staff.     The channel to be
used will be defined depending on the area of South Yorkshire in which the
game is being played. Mr Morley will inform the Officers concerned of mode
of communication to be used.
Call Signs

Officers will use the call sign of the stadium as follows:-

Foxtrot   1   -   Sheffield   Wednesday (Hillsborough)
Foxtrot   2   -   Sheffield   United    (Bramall Lane)
Foxtrot   3   -   Barnsley              (Oakwell)
Foxtrot   4   -   Rotherham   United    (Millmoor)
Foxtrot   5   -   Doncaster   Rovers    (Belle Vue)

When more than one Liaison Officer is in attendance as at Hillsbrough, the
second Liaision Officer situated in the South Stand will use the call sign
'Foxtrot Sierra'.

These call signs will be recognised as the specific stadium and no other
call sign should be used.

Procedure for Liaison Officers

The Liasion Officer must:-

1   Wear full uniform at all times.
2   Complete the SYMAS Liaison Report Sheet.
3   Travel to the Ground in the Ambulance along with the Crew.
4   Establish communication with the Control Superintendent and test
     the radio channel being used before the kick off.
5   Ensure on arrival at the Ground, that the SYMAS vehicle isparked
     in the registered position.
6    Establish contact with the Police Liaison Officer to whom he should
     make his whereabouts known at all times.
7    Establish the location of the Club Doctor(s) and the equipment
     which is available to them.
8    Liaise with the St John's or Red Cross Duty Officer to whom he should
     make his whereabouts known at all times.
9   Inform the St John's or Red Cross Duty Officer of the role SYMAS will
     play, ie, SYMAS is present in the event of a major incident and at such
     time will take total charge of the situation. The voluntary services
     will continue to perform their duties as they have done in the past,
     SYMAS will not interfere unless:

    (a)   The Voluntary Services are exhausted, or
    (b)   SYMAS is asked to intervene, ie, life or death situation.

If3 Liaison Officer

On other occasions first aid should be left to the voluntary services, but
it is stressed that SYMAS are on-site and contracted to the Football Club.
Staff should bear this in mind when making the decision as to whether or
not to become involed in an incident.
Procedure for Ambulance Crews

All staff will attend in full uniform. The crew will book mobile using the
vehicle registered call sign and state their destination.  No unauthorised
passenger will be conveyed, ie, the crew and Liaison Officers will be the
only passengers.

The Ambulance Crew must maintain radio watch with the vehicle at all times,
at least one of the crew must remain with the vehicle.

If for any reason the vehicle is left unattended the Liaison Officer and
Control must be informed and a reason given for leaving the Ambulance which
must be appropriately secured.

The Ambulance Crey, a r e under the direct control of the Liaison Officer,
except if it becomes apparent to the Control Superintendent that a problem
has arisen and contact is lost with the Liaison Officer/s in which event
the Control Superintendent will assume responsibility for the deployment of
the crew, in consultation with Force Control and Police liaison at the
Ground.   It should be noted in the event of a major incident, a Police
Officer will attend the SYMAS Ambulance as Control co-ordinator.

A full written report should be forwarded to Mr Morley by the Match Liaison
Officer and the Control Superintendent      after every match even if no
incidents occur Mr Morley will require to have this fact made known to him
in writing.

The Liaison Officer will also need to identify any specific reason for
additional time over and above the three hour contractual period and the
reason for this extra time so Mr Morley can raise the appropriate charge to
the Club by invoice.
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                              LIAISION OFFICER REPORT FORM

                                          fttef 152:3)


Attendance at:                                                              A/ .

Date:                                                    Tiae:   ...... .

Liaison Officer(s):       ............................. ........

Crew(s) and Vehicle(s) Froa: ................... ..........



Expected Crowd Capacity:        .......

Identified Problea Areas (if any):



Tiae Vehicle Left Base:        ................... ............................

Tiae Arrived At Location:               >■<   /....... ........................ •••••

Tiae of Contact with Police Liaison Officer:                 ...........................
          (including location and identification of the nominated doctor(s) present)

Tiae of Contact with Voluntary Services Duty Officer:                  .................

Tiae Radio Tests Coaplet^d at Location:             ................................
* * * * * * * * * * *     i   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


Please make any relevant coments regarding the cover provided,
particularly any incidents attended by SYMAS.




               /

           /
        '*/ # # *
        /




                                                          (continue overleaf if necessary)
                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                           LIAISION OFFICER REPORT FORM

                                        Gtef 152:3)


Attendance at:    ............... .............

Date:                 ...................             Time:

Liaison Officer(s):     .................. .....

Crew(s) and Vehicle(s) From: ................



Expected Crowd Capacity:      .......

Identified Problea Areas (if any):



Tiae Vehicle Left Base:      .......................................... .

Tiae Arrived At Location:      .............................................

Tiae of Contact with Police Liaison Officer:              ...........................
        (including location and identification of the nominated doctor(s) present)

Tiae of Contact with Voluntary Services Duty Officer:             .................

Tiae Radio Tests Completed at Location:           ................................

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Please make any relevant conents regarding the cover provided,
particularly any incidents attended by SYMAS.




                                                       (continue overleaf if necessary)
         10 August 1989
                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                          YORKSHIRE
                                                                                                          TELEVISION
         Mr A Page
         Chief Ambulance Officer
         South Yorks Metropolitan Ambular ce Service
                                                             XJ A          RECEIVED
         Moorgate Road                          1 4 AUG 1989
         ROTHERHAM
         S60 2BQ                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                         AMBULANCE SERVIC                    j

         Dear Mr Page

         We are making a television documentary about the Hillsborough
         disaster which will probably be shown on the ITV newtwork in a
         few m o n t h s ' t i m e .

         We are making the film with the co-operation of the West Midlands
         Police, who, as you know, are conducting the investigation into
         the disaster.

         We hope to build up a definitive picture of what happened that
         day through the eyes of people who were there and also look to
         the future and the lessons to be learnt.

         We have already done some filming of the West Midlands police
         inquiry team at work and have interviewed a few of the fans who
         were at the match.  We would now like to meet some of the
         ambulance officers who were on duty at Hillsborough.  Obviously,
         there will have been quite a number involved, but the names of
         those who gave evidence to the Inquiry and who are mentioned in
         SYMAS's final submission are:

         Alan Hopkins, Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
         Raymond Clarke, Control Superintendent (Moorgate Road)
         Paul Eason, Station Officer, Longley
         Patrick Higgins, Station Officer

         Lawrence Yoxall (off-duty)



         Initially, this would simply be for background information, with
         no further obligation unless people are willing to consider
         participating in our film.

         I hope you will be able to help with my request.  If you would
         like to speak to the West Midlands Police, our contact there is
         Mark Stokes (021-233 2619) or if you would like more information
         about the film, please ring me at our London office on Ext 2386.

         I look foward to hearing from you.

         Y n n r   s in r p r e lv



        HELEN MAGEE
        Researcher, Documentaries

                                        Yorkshire Television Limited
Television House, 32 Bedford Row, London W C 1 R 4H E . Telephone 01 242 1666. Telex 2 9 5 3 8 6 . Fax 01 4 0 5 8 062
                            Registered No. 899713 England Registered Office The Television Centre Leeds
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                         AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                              FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                 ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                         TELEPHONE. ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 88 20



                    OUR REF:     AP/jR                                          Mr. A. PAGE.JP,   F.A.S.I.
                    YO UR REF:                                                      CHIEF M ETROPOLITAN
                                                                                     AM BU LA NCE OFFICER
                    Please ask for:




15th August 1989.


Ms. H. Magee,
Researcher, Documentaries,
Yorkshire Television Limited,
Television House,
32 Bedford Row,
London.
WC1R 4HE




Dear Ms. Magee,

Further to your letter dated 10th August 1989 regarding the television
documentary you are making with regard to the Hillsborough disaster.   I
write to confirm that this service would be willing to participate in this
documentary and look forward to hearing from you in the near future with
             • - *'         have.

Yours sincerely




A. PageL,--------------------
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                                                                                                                       Gu

                                                                                                              YORKSHIRE
                                                                                                              TELEVISION
                                                                    /   r e c e iv e d                      B ]

    Don Page                                                       I            0 6 0CTI9S9
    Chief Ambulance Officer
    South Yorkshire Metropolitan
             Ambulance Service                                     ^           S               2        &
    Moorgate Road
    ROTHERHAM
    S60 2BQ


    04 October 1989




    Dear Mr Page

    I wanted to write to thank you and your colleagues for all your
    help and co-operation with my research on the Hillsborough
    disaster.  I enjoyed the two days I spent talking to you all and
    very much appreciated the time you gave me.

    With regard to our programme, our major problem is the sheer
    mass of material and the many issues raised by a disaster of
    this magnitude.  Rather than attempt to cover every aspect and
    fail to do    justice to any of them,     we have decided to
    concentrate on just two or three.    For this reason, we will
    probably not be asking to film interviews with any of your
    officers.

    I hope that the people I met will not feel that I wasted their
    time.  It was very useful for me to get another perspective on
    the day and I am sorry I was not able to talk to more of the
    'blue shirts' who were on duty at Hillsborough, although I do
    understand their reasons for not going through it all again.

    Once again, many thanks to you all and a special thanks to Roger
    Morley for sending on my t-shirt so promptly!

    With very best regards.

    Yours sincerely




    HELEN MAGEE
    Researcher
    Documentaries


                                        Yorkshire Television Limited
Television House, 32 Bedford Row, London W C 1 R 4H E . Telephone 01 242 1666. Telex 295 38 6 . Fax 01 40 5 8 062
                         Registered No. 8 9 9 7 1 3 England Registered Office The Television Centre Leeds
                                                                                                                                   V
 NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE                                                                        Lincolnshire Ambulance
 HEALTH AUTHORITY                                                                          Service Headquarters
                                                                                           Cross O’Cliff Court
                                                                                           Bracebridge Heath
                                                                                           LINCOLN
 Y ou r Ref:                                                                               LN4 2HL
 Our Ref:             RP/                                                                  Tel:   Lincoln (0522) 45171
 P lease ask   for:   Mr R P a u l s o n                                                   Ext.   28


7     N ov em be r    19 89

Mr A H o p k i n s
D uty C h i e f M e t r o p o l i t a n Ambulance O f f i c e r                                    R E C E I V E D             b   y
S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e M e t r o p o l i t a n A m b u la n c e S e r v i c e
Ambulance S e r v i c e H e a d q u a r t e r s                                                           0 8 NOV 1989
F airfield
M o o r g a t e Road
Rotherham
S 6 0 2BQ

D e a r Mr H o p k i n s

LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS INTERIM REPORT

Many t h a n k s f o r y o u r l e t t e r        dated      1 No ve m be r      198 9 t h e c o n t e n t s o f w h i c h a r e
most u s e f u l .

Yours s i n c e r e l y




R P aulson
A s s i s t a n t C h i e f Ambulance O f f i c e r
f o r C h i e f Ambulance O f f i c e r


Enc

HS 122
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                               AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                    FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                        ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                               TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 82 88 20



                     O UR REF:                                                        Mr. A. PAGE, JP,F.A.S.I.
                     YO UR REF:                                                            CH IEF M ETROPOLITAN
                                                                                           AM BULANCE OFFICER
                     Please ask for:




18th April 1989.


PRESS RELEASE

SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989




The events at Hillsborough last Saturday were one of the most serious

disasters ever faced by the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

They will be the subject of a major public enquiry.                     This must limit

immediate comment.       Nevertheless, it is important for SYMAS to put the

record straight concerning some factual aspects of their involvement.




In accordance with standard procedures one SYMAS ambulance and its crew

plus two liaison officers were at the ground before the kick off.                           Another

SYMAS ambulance and its crew were on stand by in the vicinity.                          SYMAS

control at Rotherham were notified of the incident at 3.08 pm.                         Ten further

ambulances were immediately despatched.                 Two senior officers, including the

Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer, had arrived by 3.23 pm.                             By

3.25 pm 12 vehicles and their crews were operational at the ground.                             As

off-duty staff reported in, further vehicles were despatched and within one

hour of the incident 40 fully equipped emergency ambulances from South

Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and West Yorkshire were

operationally involved.                In this connection, SYMAS would like to place on




                                                                                                     C P 6 5 /3 2 5 8 6
record its thanks for the assistance rendered by neighbouring ambulance

authorities and their crews.     The officers deployed by SYMAS included fully

trained para-medics.




The stadium was cleared of all live casualties within 75 minutes of the

initial alert.




SYMAS and its staff did everything in their power to support life after

this terrible event.   It believes its response was both speedy and

efficient.   Its officers at Hillsborough worked hard and with determination

to relieve the injured and to convey them to hospital.     It deeply regrets

the loss of life that took place and offers its sincere condolences to the

bereaved.




The Service has issued this statement to record the basic framework of the

facts concerning its response.    It will co-operate fully with Lord Justice

Taylor's Enquiry and make available its records and staff as need be.
                                    Northern Regional Health Authority

                                        N O R T H U M B R I A A M B U L A N C E SERVICE



  Tel: (0 91 )2 7 3 1212                                                                                         Ambulance Headquarters,
  Fax: (091) 273 7070                                                                                            Interlink House,
                                                                                                                 Scotswood Road,
                                                                                                                 Newcastle upon Tyne.
                                                                   Our Ref:             LMC                      NE4 7BJ
                        Hr. L. M. Caple
  Please ask for                                                   Your Ref:

                         19th April, 1989


                        Mr. A. Page,
                        CHIEF MET. AMBULANCE OFFICER
                        South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance Service,
                        Fairfield,
                        Moorgate Road,
                        Rotherham.
                        S60 2BQ




                         Returning from London yesterday, I bought a copy of the London Evening
                         Standard newspaper and I was astounded to read the enclosed article which
                         suggests   that   Ambulancemen,   unlike Firemen,    are   untrained   in
                         resuscitation   and that the Fire Service took over the role           of
                         resuscitating the injured at Hillsborough.

                        I am sure the article does not reflect what I know actually happend that
                        day and that you will wish to pursue the statements attributed to Station
                        Officer Fletcher in particular.




                        L. M. Caple
                        REGIONAL AMBULANCE OFFICER
                                                                            r e c e iv e d        by

                        Enc.                                                        2 1APS.1989
                                                                        I   SOUTIIY;^:;

                                                                         i AM SU LA M f-;.




                                    REGIONAL A M B U L A N C E OFFICER: L. M. CAPLE,              fasi l h s m m b i m

A N o rth e rn R e g io n a l H e a lth A u th o r ity M a n a g e d S e r v ic e
                                                                                                 makeshift stretchers to "They        Mr Lockwood added;                     :
                                                                                                 carry the injured and deaa.                bad  to make    many      '
                                                                                                                                     heart-rending decisions.            - .
  by Peter Kingston                                                                                Mr Fletcher said; “It was They would be g i v i n g resus-
  ami Colin Adamson                                                                              terrible. People were citation to somebody
                                                                                                 shouting at us, pulling our would be hampered b
HEARTBROKEN Axe­                                                                                 sleeves. You were quickly I n k i n g
men today ctadnml there                                                                          moving to m one to aaottier?                       help our teo*
had been an important                                                                            and you lost count of tow OarorfallietV’.
eight-minute delay toy po­                                                                        many people you dealt with.
lo* in calling the tongade                                                                          “My instructions to m#',
to Hillsborough..                                                                                 men were whenever p * #
                                referee to abandon the               "The first pumps to arrive sible if they found
He and courageous batOe to                                        were given no directions be­ body dead to mom m to
save U m It was claimed for     game.                             cause of the confusion but next person
the first time that the au­        As a result of the lack of     the officers soon realised We used oar oxygen tenjpf■
                                detailed information South        there was no need for cut­ until they were a l empty. :.x
thorities in the stadium un­    Yorkshire fire brigade say        ting the fences because the
der-estimated the scale of       they sent only two appli­                                          The firemen found ttxsttr-
the disaster and the d e b ­                                      injured and dying were al- selves with a vital role^to
ate urgency to-can to fir*       ances to tbe disaster zone at    rcK&ciylying on the pttcEu      play in a situation whiete taw
                                 the Leppings Lane end of             The two pumps arrived at already b e m m a d e ^ ^ m
                                 the ground.                       the Hillsborough ground at two doctors in the crowa m
                                    The men who led these                                                                                                            fifths
                                                                   3.22pm, 16 minutes after the sheer chaos.                  r?.,;:
   South Yorkshfreflrehri- crews        told the Evening Stan­     game was abandoned.               Although
       assistant chiefottlcer dard      of the horrific scene,        Station Officer John were called out sooner tBSO
 C     stMwin said: /W e did that and of how it was only then
                                       they made a vital on-       Swain, in charge of one of the fire b r ^ e m a ^ o fto e
                                                                    the engines, immediately crews, unlike theflrenwn,
                                  the-spot, life-or-death deci­     radioed back to base re­ wwe said to bo untrained'#!
                                  sion to call for a full-scale     questing eight more appli­ . resuscitation.
 S * until 3.14pna on Satur­ turnout.                                                                                       .
 day And that initial call was                                      ances.                        - M Lockwood said:
 purely for cutting equip­ Lockwood,Divisional Officer David           The decision was de­ ' soon as our crews                         Tomlgkfc Mostly cloudy with f /
                                               who led the Are      scribed as “a quantum leap , they took over the role of*®*          cry non. More broken cloud w -
 ment.” , '                    , brigade operation, said;                                                                               and it wiDbe rather misty near
    The emerfeaef call went “The police originally called           by a fire brigade spokesman. sttscttsttng the tejtnwL
  oat eight Biiatttes after ase- us and said they had a major          Meanwhile Station Officer      “Each crew bad ostygiii.          5C (41F). Wind north-westerly • -
 nior police officer rushed incident at the stadium                  Brian Fletcher organised eear and, used with cardtot               Outlook: Predominantly clou
  through tbe crowds of Liver- which required ■ cutting              the fans to rip off advert­ massage, they were lies*?*             asar coasts- Maximum temptt
  oool fans already spilling on equipment.                           ising hoarding boards for ers.                                      westeriy moderate.     ........       ;
  tothe pitch and ordered the
