1.   I am employed as   a Leading Ambulance man for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is 30th January 1943.



3.   I began work for the Sheffield Corporation Ambulance Service

     in April 1968 as an ambulance man and became a Leading
     Ambulance man in October 1973.    The service was transferred
     to SYMAS in, I think, 1974.



4.   On Saturday 15th April I had come on duty at 1400 hours.    I
     had been off work the previous day.



5.   I am based at Longley Ambulance Station and on 15th April I
     was on duty with ambulance man        L

6.   At about 1500 hours we were sent out to a 999 call at

             , Sheffield where a boy of about 5 years old had
     dropped a flagstone on his foot and fractured his toe.     We

     took him to Northern General Hospital.



7.   Shortly after 1500 hours on the way to Northern General, I

     heard control talking to other ambulances and saying that

     there was an incident at the Wednesday ground but that it

     was not clear exactly what the incident was.
8.    At approximately 15.20 we arrived at Northern General and

      offloaded our patient.    I saw Charge Nurse Batty in the

      casualty area who passed our patient on to a staff nurse.   I

      told Charge Nurse Batty that there was an incident on at the
      Sheffield Wednesday ground.



9.    I went back to the ambulance.            had stayed with the

      ambulance and told me that the incident at Hillsborough was

      now a major incident with some deaths.   I went straight back

      into the hospital and told Charge Nurse Batty that it was a
      major incident with some deaths.    Mr Batty opened up some
      big cupboards by the casualty entrance as I was leaving, and

      then went off to a telephone.   I went back to the ambulance

      and radioed control.     By now we had gone onto the ERC
      channel.   Superintendent Clarke answered and I told him that
      Northern General was ready.


10.   I then asked a porter to stop traffic coming into the

      casualty area, including buses which use that area to turn

      round.     I also asked people who were near their cars to

      remove their cars to make more space.



11.   We assisted the first ambulances to arrive, which included

      one crewed by Leading Ambulance man Flack and one crewed by
                 and



12.   We spent the rest of the afternoon on 999 calls, coming off
        duty at 2300 hours.    We probably did not do any more 999

        calls during that time than I would normally expect but we
        did cover a much greater area than usual.




Signed




Dated           S '-   8^?
