I   ANDREW KENNETH LAWSON was born 13.4.59.        I am a part

time ambulanceman with no qualifications as such, but I have

attended a three week course in first aid training.        I am
also involved in part time catering.



On Saturday 15th April       1989   I was at the Hillsborough

football ground.      I was there in my capacity of part time
caterer.     I was employed in the Nottingham Forest Executive
box as a wine waiter.



I completed these duties at about 1450 and then I went into

South Stand, to watch the match.     I did not have a seat, but

stood near one of the entrances.


The game kicked off but it had not been in progress long
when I became aware of something happening in the West Stand

at the Leppings Lane end.    I saw people come over the top of
the fencing as if to invade the pitch.



It soon became apparent that it was not a pitch invasion

because I saw people with what appeared to be injured arms,

and others limping.



I saw the St.John's Ambulance Brigade attending and I made

my way down through the players tunnel to see if I could

help them.
I walked across the pitch towards the West Stand.    As I got

closer to it I could see what appeared to be bodies lying on
the pitch.     My attention was drawn to a young St.John's

ambulance woman who was attending a small boy who appeared

to have stopped breathing.     She was giving mouth to mouth

resuscitation and I began chest massage.


We were able to get the boy breathing again and then put him

in the recovery position.    We stayed with him for a short

time to ensure that he continued to breath.      We left him

with a St.John's boy, with instructions to call us if the
patient stopped breathing again.



Another patient was lying nearby and was not breathing.      We

tried to resuscitate him but that was not successful.



We moved to another patient andwere joined by a man who said
he was a doctor.     He took over the chest massage and I ran

back through the players tunnel to telephone control.     I was

shown a telephone and dialed 999.      I was put through to

ambulance control at Rotherham.



I spoke to someone in control,     I told them who I was and

where I was.       I described to them that it was a major

incident and that I had seen possibly forty people dead.

Control told me that they were already aware that it was a
Major Incident.
12.   Up to then I had only seen a Red Cross ambulance.             I ran

      back out onto the pitch to the West Stand.


13.   The situation was chaos; - casualties were lying all over

      the place.       The police, St.Johns and many members of the
      public were doing their best to give what help they could,

      to the injured people.


14.   I tried to help whoever I could.         I remember a doctor and I
      were trying to revive a young girl, but without success.

      We left her to go to another casualty but the young girl's
      father was very distressed and requested that we go back to

      to his daughter.       Unfortunately there was nothing we could
      do for her.


15.   We were made aware of the fact that the fire service had
      opened up a route near the South Stand close the police
      control point to enable stretchers to be carried out.

16.   Iassisted a young man with apparent chest injuries onto a

      St.John's stretcher and was joined by some injured fans.

      Together we carried the stretcher into the South Stand and

      past the police control point.        We were directed this way by

      a fireman, who seemed to be in charge.
17. We   went      outside    where      I noticed   other   patients   on

      stretchers.    I also noticed that close to Leppings Lane a
      number of ambulances were collecting even more casualties.



                                 3 V3>
18. It was obvious to me that we had to get our stretchers down
         to Lepplngs Lane so I mobilised everyone           I could   and
         carried all the stretchers down to the ambulances close
         Lepplngs Lane.


19.      I paseed one casualty to a Leading Ambulanceman and then I

         tended a line of casualties who were along a wall of the

         Inside perimeter of the ground.       There were patients also

         along the other fence along side the river, who were being
         tended to by ambulance men.


20   .   I was intending to go back to the west stand when I noticed

         an ambulance driven by                 .    He saw me and asked
         what I was doing.      I told him and he suggested we team up

         and transport sitting patients to hospital.


21 . We collected a number of sitting patients and then drove out

         onto Penistone Road.    We had four nurses on board as well as
         13 patients.


22 . We proceeded to Royal Hallamshire hospital where we left the
         nurses and casualties.      With a police escort we travelled

         without problem back to the ground.


23 . We then drove back to Leppings Lane,           on the instruction of

         control after we had reported "green".         We travelled as

         quickly as we could but did hot have blue light or horns.
24 . We drove into the ground off Leppings Lane and I noticed

      alongside the fence by the river that a morgue of sorts had
      been established.    Police officers were with the bodies and
      a tarpaulin cover had been erected to screen the bodies.


25.                    went to assess the situation and I tried to
      contact control by radio.     I could not get through.       I

      could hear control but I do not think they could hear me.


26.   Peter came back and I told him I could not get through to

      Control.     There were no more casualties for us to transport

      from the Leppings Lane end of the ground so we drove round
      to Penistone Road.


27.   Ambulances were parked on the dual carriageway on Penistone

      Road.     We parked behind these vehicles and went into the

      ground.     We were then informed that we were to stand by at
      Herries Road bus depot.


28.   I asked an officer if I was needed any further.   He   said no
      so I walked back over to the South Stand where I joined my
      brother in the stand.


29 . The St John's Ambulance Brigade worked very hard    as did the
      police, the fire service and the ambulance service.




                                5
Dated the           day of   1989


ANDREW KENNETH LAWSON
