•>

Callaghan, Andrew

From:
Sent:            27 June 1997 19:41
To:              Callaghan, Andrew
Subject:         Read: Hillsborough
Importance:       High


Your message

     To:         Chappell, Andrew;
     Subject:    Hillsborough
     Sent:       27/06/9715:58:00

was read on 27/06/9719:41:00




                                      Page 1
Callaghan, Andrew

From:
Sent:             27 June 1997 16:18
To:               Callaghan, Andrew
Subject:          Read: Hillsborough
Importance:       High


Your message

   To:            Chappell, Andrew;]
   Subject:       Hillsborough
   Sent:          27/06/9715:58:00

was read on 27/06/9716:18:00
Callaghan, Andrew

From:             Chappell, Andrew
Sent:             27 June 1997 16:24
To:               Callaghan, Andrew
Subject:          Read: Hillsborough
Importance:       High


Your message

   To:            Chappell, Andrew;
   Subject:       Hillsborough
   Sent:          27/06/9715:58:00

was read on 27/06/9716:24:00




                                       Page 1
•   \
        Callaghan, Andrew

        From:            Callaghan, Andrew
        Sent:            27 June 1997 15:58
        To:              Chappell, Andrew;
        Subject:         Hillsborough
        Importance:      High


        I have spoken to the Ambulance Service. They say they are sure that their insurance policy would not cover
        them for a new Inquiry and that they could not require the successors to the old region to fund any costs.

        If they need legal assistance arising out of any announcement that Jack Straw makes on Monday they will
        come to us but the costs will have to be met out of their operational budgets.

        The Chief Officer is away from tonight for 2 weeks but he has arranged that if anything "blows up" the
        Director of Finance will ring me to instruct us.

        If we are instructed, we should satisfy ourselves that they are right in their assessmant of the costs situation.




                                                                                                         \




                                                              Page 1
                                                                                                                        (




                 V\                                               r2,'^o.
No                                                                                                                                 V-°>^ <y\-

                                                                               «?■v^a5                              /V

                                          v?              \ o —aO-^         G^X-^SS* .
                   Cl^ Q -


                      M l

                                                                                                                     A/**?


           "G          _____
                                                                                         SO . Pc^-S»                        JW=>         --J
 o ^ y r^ r^                                                  'IVs^' '
                                                                     ’
                                                                     "
                                       .^"V^A-    \3c-=C o-^M. -                                       Y^
                                         q^-cA^ £> . -fc^A ^                                                         ^ ,-P \/>^-^ 'WS---
                      .✓e-VV „

     <o> f t r w ^ v                      o-v . ,.                                                                                       i
     °             ■£ * .              ‘. O ' ~ * V    —    ■"*
                                       <^WV ^W<\. u> V s^                                                                             '
                       _                    'YWV ''U** <-'^ 'Qa— ~1- ^ -                                                     ^    JV^U '
                       «_              Wa'.'t-'vu-  o-o^»                                                                     -— -\
                                                                                                                             —       fu -)16h y

            ------------------ ■----- ^                                        e^-A- U ^w V .
                        .                                                                    -v           ^         a              - *2-^-oA c-\

                   o ^ > A -              oX&   ^   ^Wy"3--       -          K.s             ^=~-*=-‘^i
                                                                                             <                ,_^                    ^       '^-X
                                                                                                                                             _^_ \
                       ^          1'                      .                   <■■'■««■             9      -f""'                    ^0»v&— '•^■cVq^j
                  ^ -o s                            V         ^       -       r> ,^n^ A
                                 <-«0->        —     .                                                                       ^           ^          —v ^
                                                                      .J2S>Xr—0 c-'~cJ-xC-=, ^
                   C^T?
                   C-v\> --                          —J
                V-^J^ oc^ V —                       --                                                                              'i-'l /6)C)-y
                                                              ^           ^ - > V        .
Cahaghan, Andrew

From:
Sent:          30 June 199717:20
To:            Callaghan, Andrew
Subject:       Hillsborough


Andrew,

I have been in touch with the Home Office. They are expecting some kind of press release but cant tell me
when (I have checked on Hermes tonight, please see attached). I will ring them in the morning, first thing.
Hermes is uptodate to about 4.00 this afternoon. It may appear in tomorrows press releases if the Home
office have left it until 4.30-5.00 to release any information.

Thanks


               Hills




                                                   Page 1
 2 - SCOTTISH OFFICE / HEALTH MINISTER WELCOMES TRANSPLANT AWARENESS (275)
 3 - SCOTTISH OFFICE / FURTHER APPOINTMENTS TO SCOTTISH HEALTH SERVICE (590)
 4 - SCOTTISH OFFICE / THE CURRICULUM IN PUBLICLY FUNDED SECONDARY SCHOOLS
     (335)
 5 - DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT / BETTER ACCESS TO THE
     CURRICULUM FOR DEAFBLIND CHILDREN (437)
 6 - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY / DELAYS TO BENEFIT APPEALS CANNOT BE
     ALLOWED TO CONTINUE (437)
 7 - OFFICE FOR NATIONAL STATISTICS / STOCKS : REVISED RESULTS 1ST QUARTER
     1997 (953)
 8 - SCOTTISH OFFICE / SECRETARY OF STATE WELCOMES FERRY LINK TO NORTHERN
     IR E L A N D (281)
 9 - OFFICE FOR NATIONAL STATISTICS / CAPITAL EXPENDITURE REVISED RESULTS
     1ST QUARTER 1997 (798)
10 — DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH / JOWELL SUMMARISES LEGAL RULINGS ON CONSENT TO
     TREATM ENT (742)
11 - EXPORT CREDIT GUARANTEE DEPARTMENT / ECGD'S FIRST DEAL IN KAZAKSTAN
     HELPS UK CONTRACTOR (381)
12 - DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY / RESPONSE TO THE 3RD GENERATION
     INDUSTRY DOCUMENT (267)
13 - SCOTTISH OFFICE / RE-APPOINTMENT OF SCOTTISH LEGAL SERVICES OMBUDSMAN
     (192)
14 - DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT / 1996 MARINE ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION
     BRANCH ANNUAL REPORT (709)
15 - DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY / MARGARET BECKETT PRAISES SMALL
     BUSINESS EXPORT WINNERS (928)
16 - HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE / BUILDING SITE SAFETY - THE HSE ISSUES
     NEW HOLIDAY WARNING (1045)
17 - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY / RUDDOCK HERALDS NEW ERA FOR BRITISH
     WOMEN (258)
18 - OFFICE OF WATER SERVICES / YORKSHIRE WATER - ECONOMICS OF LEAKAGE
     CONTROL (587)
19 - OFFICE OF FAIR TRADING / REVISED REGISTER OF UNDERTAKINGS AND ORDERS
     P U B L IS H E D (338)
20 - SCOTTISH OFFICE / HENRY MCLEISH GOES ON-LINE WITH THE DEVOLUTION
     MESSAGE (407)
21 -   DEPARTM ENT O F HEALTH/ BOARD M E E T IN G S O F NHS T R U S T S TO BE O PEN ED TO
       THE PUBLIC (480)
22 -   DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY / MARGARET BECKETT ANNOUNCES REVIEW
       OF UTILITY REGULATION (748)
23 -   SCOTTISH OFFICE / MALCOLM CHISHOLM ISSUES NEW PLANNING GUIDANCE ON
       SKIING (675)
24 -   FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE / FCO DAILY BULLETIN - MONDAY 30 JUNE
       1997 (99)
25 -    BANK OF ENGLAND / PROVISIONAL ESTIMATES OF NARROW MONEY (729)
26 -    SCOTTISH OFFICE / NON-SECTOR WHITEFISH QUOTA MANAGEMENT
       ARRANGEMENTS-AREA VII (462)
27 -   S C O T T IS H O F F IC E   /   W H IT E F IS H N O N -SE C T O R QUOTA MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS -
       NORTH SEA (736)
28 -   OFFICE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS / OFTEL WELCOMES GOV'T REVIEW OF UTILITY
       REGULATION (120)
29 -   DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT / NATIONAL VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS IN
       TRANSPORT (292)
30 -   SCOTTISH OFFICE / GLASGOW - MR CHISHOLM POINTS THE WAY AHEAD (258)
31 -   SCOTTISH OFFICE / 1.5 MILLION MORE EURO-FUNDING FOR GLASGOW AND
       PAISLEY (313)
32 -   O F F IC E O F E L E C T R IC IT Y R E G U L A T IO N / R EV IEW O F U T I L I T I E S R EG U LA T IO N -
       LITTLECHILD'S RESPONSE (101)
33 -   SCOTTISH OFFICE / TIME COMES TO HAND OVER LARGE CALIBRE HANDGUNS (298)
34 -   LORD C H A N C E L L O R 'S DEPARTM ENT /       C H IL D R E N ACT A D V ISO R Y COM M ITTEE
       PUBLISHES FIFTH REPORT (633)
35 -                              / STATEM ENT OF NUCLEAR IN C ID E N T S AT
       HEALTH AND S A FE T Y E X E C U T IV E
     NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS (1591)
36 - HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE / 1ST AGR NUCLEAR POWER STATIONS TO RUN UP
     TO 30 YRS (848)
i       ^      ^      £       i     h        5      T                      '       - 5 0 0 /   m ~ 7




    Hillsborough
    relatives win ;
    fresh inquiry
    Kathy Marks               '      1     Straw said: “I hope that this ex­
                                            amination will enable us to es-
     It took the screening of a tele-       tablish conclusively whether or
     vision programme, and a                not material evidence ... has
     change of government, but yes-         been overlooked. We owe it to
     terday relatives of football fans      everyone touched by the
     who died at Hillsborough finally       tragedy... to get to the bottom
     secured a review of how the dis-       of this matter once and for all.”
     aster was handled.                        Despite earlier inquiries, he
         The Home Secretary, Jack           said, “concerns have remained
     Straw, told the House of Com-          about whether the full facts
     mons that Lord Justice Stuart-         have yet emerged”.
     Smith, a senior Court of Appeal           The suffering of relatives
     judge, would scrutinise new            had been “exacerbated by their
    rvideo and medical evidence re-         belief that there are unresolved
     lating to the deaths of 96 fans        issues which should be investi-
     at Sheffield Wednesday’s Hills-        gated further”.        ‘        ;
    .borough stadium in April 1989.            The video evidence consists
         The announcement was wel-          of a tdpe taken from a surveil- j
     corned by Hevor Hicks, chairman        lance camera, trained on the
     of the Hillsborough Families           Leppings Lane stand, which
     Support Group, who described           shows events between noon and
     it as an important milestone in        5.22pm and is believed to be
     their quest for justice.               clear enough to identify faces of
         “This isn’t a quest for            individual fans.             .
     vengeance. It isn’t a witch-hunt.         Police told the inquest in
     We basically feel that we got          1990 and an inquiry by the late
     what we came for and it was a          Lord Taylor that they were un­
     well worthwhile trip,” he said,        aware of the build-up of fans in
         Mr Straw said that the judge       the pens because the camera was
     would advise him whether the           not working,
     evidence, which is believed to            Calls for a fresh investigation
     challenge the police version of        gained momentum after the
     events at the stadium, was sig-        broadcasting last December of
     nificant enough for a full pub-        a documentary drama which
     lie inquiry to be held.               suggested that officers must
         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith          have known that the terraces
     would also examine any other          were severely overcrowded,
     material submitted by interest-           The medical evidence sug-
     ed parties, he said, and would         gests that more could have
     identify any relevant evidence         been done to save lives. Dr Ed
     for the Attorney-General, the          Walker, who treated injured
     Director of Public Prosecu-            fens, says that one teenager was
     tions, and the Chief Constable         still alive 25 minutes after the
      of South Yorkshire police.            coroner decided that the victims
         Mr Straw’s statement fol-          m ust have been dead. The fam-
      lowed a long campaign for a           ilies believe the new evidence
      fresh investigation by families of    calls into question the inquest
      the victims, who were invited to      verdicts of accidental death.
      London to be briefed by him on        Lord Taylor laid most of the
      details of the review.                blame at the door of the police.
         The supporters were crushed           Since the tape came to fight in
      to death after police opened gates    March, the Crown Prosecution
      to let. people into the Leppings      Service has been reviewing the
      Lane terrace at the FA Cup semi-      case to establish if there is suffi-
      final match between Liverpool         cient evidence to bring charges
      and Nottingham Forest. Mr             against any police officers.
                            D IB B LUPTON ALSOP

                      A T T E N D A N C E     N O T E



CLIENT          Ambulance Service

MATTER          Hillsborough

ATTENDING                     South         Yorkshire   Police   Chief
                Constables' Sec

DATE        :   1 July 1997
REFERENCE :     AJC


I told her I was trying to find out who was dealing with the
administration of the new Hillsborough enquiry. She rang back and
said the person to speak to was           at the Home Office. His
number is
I rang Mr         His fax number is                I explained our
interest in Lord Justice Stuart Smith's new enquiry which he
described as a sort of pre-enquiry enquiry.      He said that the
enquiry would probably just be looking at papers and Mr     \would
be surprised if there were any matters which were involved which
affected the interests of the Ambulance Service.   I said we might
have an interest if there was any question of looking again at the
times beyond which people had survived as there had been "false"
allegations at the time that the reaction of the Ambulance Service
was not adequate.
He said that Lord Justice Stuart Smith was not likely to start work
until early September because of his Court commitments. We agreed
that I would probably fax Mr     1 just to note our interest. He is
the head of the Operational Policing Policy Unit.
\
    Callaghan, Andrew

    From:
    Sent:          02 July 1997 11:03
    To:            Callaghan, Andrew
    Cc:            Chappell, Andrew[
    Subject:       Hillsborough



    Message from

    I refer to your email dated 27 June 1997.

    I believe it would be of some assistance if I was to outline the likely position in
    respect of the Ambulance Service's liabilities incurred prior to the creation of the
    South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance and Paramedic Service NHS Trust ("the
    Ambulance Trust") on 1 April 1992.

    I believe that pre-1 April 1992, liabilities will have been incurred by the Health
    Authority as the body responsible for the Ambulance Service at the time of the
    Hillsborough diaster in 1989.

    I note we have discussed whether there is an insurance policy that may cover the
    legal costs that will be incurred in representing the Ambulance Service at the
    forthcoming inquest. As I have stated above, it is likely the responsible body will
    be the Health Authority and I doubt very much whether the Health Authority took
    out an insurance policy to cover this type of liability and further, any policy that
    the Ambulance Trust may have is unlikely to be retrospective.

    A further difficulty we will encounter is that the Health Authority is likely to have
    retained Solicitors, most probably Wansbroughs Willey Hargrave. Although the
    Ambulance Trust will also have their appointed Solicitors (and I presume, again, it
    is likely to be Wansbroughs Willey Hargrave), I doubt that the Ambulance Trust
    would be responsible, particularly from its operational budget, for the costs of
    representing the Ambulance Service for liabilities arising before the Ambulance
    Trust's creation. However, I am confident that its employees would co-operate
    fully if requested.

    In summary we will need to determine:

       (1) Whether the Health Authority is the responsible body; and

       (2) If so, clarify the source of fundings for the costs of          representation at the
       inquest; and

       (3) Impress upon the responsible body that DLA is the "right"              choice to
       represent them at the inquest.

    I note the Chief Officer is away for 2 weeks and that the Director of Finance will
    instruct us in the event of anything untoward occurring during his absence.
    Nonetheless, I believe it would be prudent to clarify whether my understanding of

                                                 Page 1
  ''N
the position is correct, possibly by a representative of DLA visiting the Ambulance
Trust (or Health Authority) in the course of the next few days as a means of
building good will and clarifying the above.

I am also confident we can provide a good reference from the North Yorkshire
Ambulance Service NHS Trust for the way in which we handled a recent Coroner's
Inquest regarding negligence by that Ambulance Trust should it be required.

I look forward to hearing of your opinion on my views.




                                           Page 2
                                       So u th   Yo r k s h ir e /M e tro p o lita n A m bulance
                                             an d P a r a m e d i c S e r v ic e (n h s t r u s t )______
                              Ambulance & Paramedic Service Headquarters, Fairfield, Moorgate Road, Rotherham, South Yorkshire S.60 2BQ
                                  Headquarters Telephone: 01709 820520. Headquarters Facsimile: 01709 827839
                                       Control Telephone: 01709 828829. Control Facsimile: 01709 827838


                         O U R REF.-   AH   [007       YOUR R E F :                    PLE A SE ASK F O R :




                         2 July 1997


                         Mr A Callaghan
                         Partner
                         Dibb Lupton Alsop
                         Fountain Precinct
                         Balm Green
                         Sheffield
                         SI 1RZ


                         Dear Andrew

                         I write further to our telephone conversation o f today confirming that we are content to
                         let matters he regarding the review o f new evidence surrounding the Hillsborough
                         disaster. Should this position change in the future, I shall o f course be in touch.

                         With all good wishes.

                         Yours sincerely




                                 ECTOR Xj                  'ENT                 1RGENGY SERVICES




                                            "P u t t i n g P e o p l e F i r s t ”
Ken Threlfall, Chief Executive                                                                            Bernard M. Kingston BSc Dm, cchem, f r s c , Chairman
                           D IB B LUPTON ALSOP

                     A T T E N D A N C E   N O T E



CLIENT         Ambulance Service

MATTER         Hillsborough

ATTENDING

DATE           2 July 1997
REFERENCE      AJC


I rang               | She wasn't there but I left a message on her
voicemail and Alan Hopkins rang back. He said they didn't want to
do anything at the moment.   He,                and Noel had had a
directors meeting in the absence of the Chief Officer and felt that
they shouldn't do anything at present, particularly as that was
apparently the stance being adopted by the Police. He will write
to me confirming that.
I  informed              of the position and said that I would
probably send a copy of the Hansard report to Alan Hopkins when I
had received his letter.
                                                                                                                   FILE COPY


                                                                                                                                     Fountain Precinct
                                                                                                                                           Balm Green
                                                                                                                                     Sheffield S I 1RZ
Y our ref    A H / 007                                                                                                      Direct T el 0114 283 3396
                                                                                                                            Direct Fax 0114 272 4941
                                                                                                                              DX 708580 Sheffield 10
Our ref      AJC/

                                                                                                                               3 July 1997


            Mr A Hopkins
            Director of Accident
            and Emergency Services
            South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
            and Paramedic Service
            Fairfield
            Moorgate
            ROTHERHAM
            S60 2BQ


            Dear Alan
            Hillsborough
            I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 2 July 1997 and note its
            contents. I enclose, for your information, a copy of the extract
            from Hansard dealing with the Home Secretary's announcement.

            Best wishes.
            Yours sincerely



            A J CALLAGHAN
            Partner



            Enc




                                         Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
Birmingham        Bradford       Leeds          Liverpool          London           Manchester         Sheffield    Hong Kong          New York
                        UK office contact numbers: Calls from UK 0345 262728         Calls from Overseas 444 114 272 0202
                                     A list of partners' names is available for inspection at the above address
   ..... ..   r.».««.« wewaios. iui ju jun \*\i( (pi i)     http://wvw.parllamer£the<tatione...btexV7a63a-07.htm#7O630-Q7_sprnin0


Montsefrat receives more aid per head of population than any country in the world?

The Hous#\vouid like to know, if not today perhaps in tomorrow's debate, how much money are Her
Majesty's Government are prepared to earmark to ensure that Montserrat is viable in future.

M r. Foulkes: I will certainly tiy to ensure that the hon. Gentleman's final question is answered in
tomorrow's debate—if not in the introductory speech, then in the reply for which I am directly
responsible.

It is not right to compare dependent territories with other countries. We have a special responsibility
for dependent territories as long as they remain in that role, which is why I said that we accept, jointly
with the elected Government of Montserrat, our responsibility to the people of Montserrat; and that
continues.

No doubt if the hon. Gentleman catches Madam Speaker's eye, he will have the opportunity tomorrow
to extend his ccitribution and tell us what the previous Government did. I do not believe, however,
that he will be able to say that they acted with the sense of urgency that has been shown in the past
eight weeks.

Mr. Andrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and Neston): My hon. Friend will be aware that, last year, I
saw the devastation in Montserrat from a Lynx helicopter flying from the back of HMS Argyll, the
West Indies guard ship on station at the time. In view of the risk to Lynx helicopters because of the
nature of the dust from the volcanic explosion, is my hon. Friend satisfied that, in the event of there
having to be a major evacuation, there is sufficient seaborne support to bring that about?

M r. Foutkes: Yes. As well as providing the ferry service, which started yesterday, we have had
discussions with the Governments of the other islands in the area, and we are satisfied that there is
sufficient seaborne capacity to cany out an evacuation. I can say, however, that we are currently
reviewing the evacuation procedures-the second issue of which was produced earlier this year-in the
light of recent happenings, to ascertain whether any updating and improvement are necessary.

                                                  Hillsborough Disaster

3.47 pm

 .’he Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam
Speaker, I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough stadium disaster.

Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster, which happened on 15 April
1989. That was more than eight years ago, but no one who saw the news reports on that dreadful
Saturday will have forgotten those terrible events. For those who lost loved members of their family,
the pain is ever present. Following Hillsborough, Members of the House were united in their
determination to do all in their power to prevent anything like that ever happening again.

After the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries and investigations took place. The most
thorough and wide ranging of those was the public inquiry led by the late Lord Taylor. The terms of
reference of that inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster, but making
recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.

Lord Taylor's inquiry took oral evidence from more than 170 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence from different sources. In his interim
report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number of causes. He did not
attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that, in his


                                                                                                                0 7 /0 1 /0 7 1 W l - A 'i
           —                IWI J U U U P 199/ \pl /}        nnp://vww.par1iamennhe-statione...btextf70630-07,htm#70630-07_3pmin0



view, '


       "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control'’.

Lord Taylor made 43 recommendations in his interim report. His final report in January 1990 made a
further 76 recommendations. The developments that have taken place since then in safety at football
grounds and in the policing of football matches have been based largely on those recommendations.
Football in this country has been transformed since the Taylor report. To a large extent, that is due to
Lord Taylor's wide-ranging and soundly based conclusions.

The deaths that occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject of inquests conducted by the coroner
of the western district o f South Yorkshire. After examining the evidence, the jury at the coroner's
inquest found in March 1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was accidental
death. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised by the Police
Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for criminal proceedings and to
consider whether any police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.

That investigation involved the taking of more than 5,000 statements and the scrutiny of all the
material that had been examined previously by the Taylor inquiry. After that investigation, the
evidence was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be
subject to criminal proceedings.

The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief superintendent and the superintendent in
charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty. In the event, the chief
superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a ruling by a disciplinary tribunal.

Column 25

Under police discipline rules, a disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when a police officer retires before
the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints Authority decided later that disciplinary proceedings
against the superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent
meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard fairly in the
absence of the more senior officer.

Hon. Members will be familiar with the unhappiness of the families of those who died regarding the
outcome of the inquest. They later applied for judicial review of the coroner's proceedings. In
November 1993, the divisional court ruled that none of the matters raised in the judicial review
proceedings justified intervention by that court in the verdict of the inquest jury. The events
surrounding the disaster have, therefore, been subject to investigation on several occasions. However,
concerns have remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there are unresolved issues
that should be investigated further.

Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me, to the Attorney-General
and to the Director of Public Prosecutions. A Granada television programme in December last year
dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues that, in the view of the programme makers,
represented new evidence. The programme prompted an Adjournment debate on 17 December 1996,
which was led by my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. Kilfoyle), and to which my
predecessor, the right hon. and learned Member for Folkestone and Hythe (Mr. Howard), replied. I
know how seriously my predecessor viewed the matter.

Since that programme, further material has been submitted on behalf of the Hillsborough families
support group. Those representations have related in particular to video evidence of the disaster and


                                                                                                               0 7 /0 1 /9 7 1V tt-A ?
House of Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 7)              http://www.pariiamentthe-statione...btext/70630-07.htm#7Q630-07_3pmin0



        to medical evidence about the time of death of the victims. My Department, the office of the
        Attorney-General and the Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence
        that has been put forward in recent months. The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view
        that the material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings. The former
        Attorney-General, the right hon. and learned Member for North-East Bedfordshire (Sir N. Lyell), also
        took the view—again, on the basis of the material presented to him—that any application to the High
        Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.

        None the less, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at Hillsborough and many
        others, including hon Members, are very concerned that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to
        go as far as I can to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a
        final conclusion without a full and independent examination of the evidence.

        The Attorney-General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have, therefore, agreed that it is in
        the public interest to establish an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new
        evidence relating to the disaster which was not previously available.

        Column 26

        We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that
        purpose. His full terms of reference are as follows:


               "To praftttin whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
               which was not available:


               (a) To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


               (b) To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the purpose of discharging thdr respective
               statutory responsibilities; or


               (c) To the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to police disciplinary matters;


               And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify
               establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry, and in relation to
               (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
               their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
               interest."

        I shall place a copy of those terms of reference in the Library.

        We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other evidence that has been
        submitted. He will also consider any further material that interested parties wish to submit to him. He
        will have two tasks. The first is to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
        significance to justify a further full public inquiry. His advice to me will be made available to the
        House, and will be made public. Secondly, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will identify for the Attorney-
        General, the DPP and the chief constable of South Yorkshire police any evidence that might be
        relevant to their decisions that has not previously been considered.

        I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether material evidence about
        the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked. I assure the House that, if it has, I will
        take whatever action is needed. We owe it to everyone who has been touched by the tragedy, but,


    5
               •-       .ui j U juri   133/   (pt i )     http://vAvw.partiament.the-8tab'one...btexy7Q630-07.htm#70630-07_spminO



above all, to the families of those who died to get to the bottom of the matter once and for all.


Next Section                                            Index                                           Home Page




                                                                                                              07 /01/97 •n-'M-ji'a
                ..- •tf'.wcubO IUI J U JUfl 130/ (pi 0)      rmp://www.parliamentthe-rStab'one...rsrd/cm970630/debtext/7063Q-Q8.htm



 Previous Section                                         Index                                           Home Page



Dr. Brian Mawhinney (North-West Cambridgeshire): I thank the Home Secretary for his
statement and for his personal courtesy in relation to it.

What happened at Hillsborough was a tragedy of almost unimaginable proportions. Thousands of
people-young and old alike-went to a football game; 96 did not return and others were injured.
Those realities have blighted the lives of thousands of people for ever. There remain hurt and loss
from which, in varying degrees, those people may never recover, and we are all affected by their
suffering.

We owe it to the families and ftiends of those who died, to members of the police force and the other
emergency services and to all who believe in justice to ensure-in the Home Secretary's words—


       "that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a full and
       independent examination of the evidence."

I agree with the right hon. Gentleman on that. I welcome his announcement and will support Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith in pursuing that important examination.

I have four specific questions to ask the Home Secretary about his statement. First, given the urgency
involved-not least for those most affected by those

Column 27

terrible events; primarily the families, but also the police officers-what timetable does the right hon.
Gentleman envisage and can the House have his assurance that the process will begin immediately?

 Secondly, the Home Secretary said that he would make Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's advice to him
available to the House and the public. Will he also publish all the evidence considered by the lord
justice on which that advice was based?

Thirdly, the right hon. Gentleman has said that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will consider any further
material that interested parties wish to submit. Will such material be examinable in public and will
those who may be affected by such material be given the opportunity respond to it before the lord
justice reaches any conclusions?

Finally, given the sensitivity of this matter and the Home Secretary's constructive attitude, which I
hope he feels that I have reciprocated, will he undertake to agree with his right hon. Friend the Leader
of the House that the House can debate this matter further when Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
concluded his investigation?

Positive responses by the right hon. Gentleman to those four questions will help to reassure the
families that we are genuinely seeking to help.

M r. Straw: I thank the right hon. Gentleman for his remarks and for his courtesy. If it is not wholly
inappropriate, I also congratulate him on his appointment as shadow Home Secretary. I am extremely
grateful to him for his welcome for these proceedings. This is not and never has been a matter of party
controversy. As I have said, I know how seriously my predecessor, the right hon. and learned Member
for Folkestone and Hythe took this matter.


                                                                                                                n7/fl1/Q7
nouse of commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 8)       http://www.par(iamentthe-statione...nsrd/cm970630/debtext/70630-08.htm




         The right hon. Gentleman asked four questions, the first of which was on the timetable. Lord Justice
         Stuart-Smith has told me that, subject to a case that he is currently hearing in the Court of Appeal
         being concluded as soon as possible, he intends to do some work in respect of the new duties before
         the end of July and to start his proceedings in September. We hope that the matter will be concluded
         and that he will be able to produce his report by the end of the year. However, the House will
         understand that that is a judgment which only Lord Justice Stuart-Smith can make in the light of all
         the representations that he receives.

         Secondly, the right hon. Gentleman asked whether, in addition to publishing the advice that I receive
         from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, I will publish all the evidence that is considered by him. My answer to
         the right hon. Gentleman is provisional. I shall do my best to ensure that that is the case, but there
         may be good reasons~for example, in respect of criminal or disciplinary proceedings--why such
         evidence cannot be published at the same time as the advice is published. However, if evidence is to
         be unpublished, I shall make that clear at the time.

         Thirdly, the right hon. Gentleman asked whether there can be examination in public and whether the
         families and others would be able to make representations. The answer to the latter part of the
         question is yes. As the House would expect, the exact proceedings of the scrutiny are

         Column 28

         matters for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to decide and he will base his decision on his long experience as
         a senior member of the judiciary.

        The fourth issue that the right hon. Gentleman raised was whether, when the advice is received, I
        would discuss with my right hon. Friend the Leader of the House the matter of a debate. Of course I
        shall do that.

         M aria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his statement. I also
         congratulate Granada Television and Jimmy McGovern whose efforts have brought this matter back
         to the attention of the House. Can my right hon. Friend assure the House that the families who have
         fought for so long will have the opportunity of legal representation to enable them to present their
         cases, whether orally or in writing, to the Lord Justice? Will they receive some financial assistance to
       - enable them to do that?

        Mr. Straw: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her remarks and for her welcome for the statement.
        The costs of those who have to travel to appear before the scrutiny will be met by my Department.
        My hon. Friend asks about legal representation. That issue has not been raised by me during my
        discussions with the families. I understand that they already have legal representation. If a further
        issue arises, I shall, of course, consider it.

        M r. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Is the Home Secretary aware that Liberal Democrat
        Members welcome this focused re-examination of the evidence, including recently found evidence, on
        these terrible events, which have been etched into the minds of all the people who saw the television
        coverage at the time and etched dreadfully into the lives of the people who lost family members, but
        will he confirm that it is very unlikely--and perhaps impossible—that police discipline proceedings
        could be reopened as a result of what might be found in the inquiry? Does he recognise that the public
        find it difficult to understand how police discipline proceedings can be brought to a halt when
        retirement on health grounds takes place before the hearing has begun? Given that Lord Taylor's main
        recommendation was that, although there were many factors, the main reason for the disaster was the
        failure of police control, that will leave questions in the public mind, which will pass beyond the
        inquiry into what can be done when conclusions are reached.


   3                                                                                                              f W / M 40.^4 <"»<"»
             n w u urcudies ror   ju jun 1 9 9 / (pt 8}      ht^5://www.parilament.the-statione...nsrd/cm970630/debtext/70630-0a.htm




M r. Straw: I thank the right hon. Gentleman for his welcome for my statement. He asked me to say
that further police discipline proceedings would be very unlikely. That is to anticipate the view that
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith may or may not come to and, with great respect to the right hon.
Gentleman, I shall not do that. He also invites me to make general comments on police discipline
regulations. There may be an occasion to debate the generality of such regulations, but I do not
believe that now is the time.

I say only that the police discipline regulations exist and have been approved from time to time by the
House; they are statutory regulations. It is, of course, open to Secretaries of State and to the House to
change them in the light of circumstances.

Helen Jackson (Sheffield, Hillsborough): I am sure that the Home Secretary realises that the most
tragic

Column 29

trauma of the event was suffered by the families of the Liverpool fens who attended the match, but it
was also one of the most traumatic events in their history for the people of the Hillsborough area of
Sheffield—the links that they have made and maintain with families in Liverpool bear witness to that.
While he considers the evidence that, I believe, he is rightly having another look at, will Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith consider in detail the lessons to be learned both for the communities living around big
football stadiums and for the policing of football matches?

M r. Straw: I accept entirely what my hon. Friend said: this tragedy went beyond the people directly
affected who were supporters of Liverpool football club and traumatised the people living around
Hillsborough and all the people in Sheffield and in south Yorkshire as well. We should not forget that,
on that day, there were many individual acts of great courage by people from south Yorkshire, by
people in the police, fire and ambulance services and by many other ordinary citizens.

My hon. Friend asked me whether wider lessons, including lessons about the policing of football
matches, can be considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his scrutiny. The answer to that, I am
afraid, is that we do not anticipate that they can be. The scrutiny will look at new evidence that has
come forward since the earlier inquiries, to find out whether that evidence is sufficiently significant to
trigger either a new public inquiry, ordered by myself) or action by the Attorney-General, the Director
 jf Public Prosecutions or the chief officer of South Yorkshire police. I do not believe that, at any
stage since the late Lord Justice Taylor reported, there has been any criticism of his wider
recommendations, most of which have been implemented, on the policing of football matches and on
crowd control.

Mr. Tony Baidry (Banbury): I am sure that no hon. Member would challenge the judgment that the
Home Secretary has come to today, but will he confirm that, in his statement, he said that, on the
evidence submitted to her, the Director of Public Prosecutions had concluded that nothing justified
fresh criminal investigations? Could he give two undertakings to the House: that, in due course, Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith will make it clear what new evidence he is considering that was not available to
the Director of Public Prosecutions in making that judgment, and why that evidence was not available
earlier?


Next Section                                              Index                                           Home Page
    .—    w o naiodio u w ares ror jo jun 1987 (pt 9)         http.7/www.parliamentthe^tatlone...nsrcl/cm970630/debtext/70630-09.htm



     Previous Section                                   Index                                              Home Page



    M r. Straw: I can confirm exactly what the hon. Gentleman says. I said that the Director of Public
    Prosecutions has taken the view that the material so far presented to her would not justify fresh
    criminal investigations. I also referred to a judgment made by the former Attorney-General, the right
    hon. and learned Member for North-East Bedfordshire (Sir N. Lyell), but I ought to make it clear
    that, as I understand it—as I am informed-he based that judgment on information other than that
    which arose following the television programme screened last December,

    It is in the nature of asking a senior and highly respected judge of the Court of Appeal to look at all
    the fresh allegations and the fresh evidence that he may come to a different view from that which the
    Director of Public Prosecutions has so far come to on the evidence that she

    Column 30

    has available. That is not in any sense to imply any criticism of the work of the Director of Public
    Prosecutions or the Crown Prosecution Service.

    Mr. Andrew M iller (Ellesmere Port and Neston): On behalf of constituents of mine who were so
    tragically affected by this event, may I ask my right hon. Friend whether the fresh inquiry will bring
    about some consideration of the way in which the coroner's court conducted its affairs during the
    inquiries immediately after the deaths? Does it constitute the possibility of fresh evidence-evidence
    that should have perhaps come to the coroner's court earlier—now becoming more widely available?

    Mr. Straw: There has been continuing concern about the way in which inquests generally are
    conducted. There was a working party report into large-scale disasters and inquests, which
    recommended significant changes, including a change whereby if there were, God forbid, a disaster of
    a similar scale and nature in the future, there would be one inquiry similar to that conducted by the
    late Lord Justice Taylor, which would be the general public inquiry and also take the form of an
    inquest, so that the relatives would be spared going through the agony caused by two separate
    inquiries.

    The issue of the way in which the first inquest was conducted was the subject of great consideration
    by the divisional court when there were proceedings for judicial review. It is a matter for Lord Justice
    Stuart-Smith, but I expect that he will not wish to go over that ground but will instead, as part of his
    scrutiny, wish to consider with great care the new allegations of evidence not put before the
    inquest-especially, as the House is well aware, arguments about the time of death which, in the view
    of the relatives and programme makers, the inquest was not properly able to take into account.

    Mr. Nicholas Soames (Mid-Sussex): I warmly welcome the right hon. Gentleman's statement and
    the measured and sensitive way in which he outlined his plans. I take the point about the issue of
    police discipline in respect o f this inquiry, but will he nevertheless undertake to consider a
    re-examination--not necessarily in the light of these events, but more generally--of the police
    disciplinary code, which provides that once an officer has retired, any matters under investigation
    lapse? Does he agree that that should be reconsidered, and will he undertake to do so?

    Mr. Straw: Yes, without reference to this particular case, I accept that many members of the public
    regard it as odd that when an officer retires, that is the end of all disciplinary processes. However, one
    of the things on which I am currently taking advice is the fact that, as I understand it, regulations
    expect chief officers not to permit the retirement of officers on grounds of ill health where disciplinary
    proceedings are still pending. There is, therefore, an issue not only of whether disciplinary regulations

3                                                       0 7 /0 1 /9 7 1 3 -3 5 -2 7
- —wiiiiiiviid ndn^ara ueDates ror JU Jun 1897 (pt 9)   http.7/www.partiamentthe-statione...nsrd/cm970£30/d8btext/70630-09.htm


  should 6e changed, but of whether chief officers of police are properly fulfiiling the terms of existing
  regulations. Both of these matters are subjects that I wish to investigate.

  Ms Louise EHman (Liverpool, Riverside): I welcome the Home Secretary's statement in that it
  opens up the

 Column 31

 possibility of justice for the families whose lives have been so cruelly devastated. Is my right hon.
 Friend able to assure the House that while the inevitable legal considerations take place, he will keep
 in mind the prime consideration of the feelings of the families involved and their belief that they have
 been denied justice, in that information was not brought forward at the appropriate time?

 M r. Straw: O f course I give that assurance to my hon. Friend. I made the decision to ask Lord
 Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct further scrutiny because I felt that there was fresh evidence that
 required proper and independent examination. In reaching that decision, of course I took full account
 of the profound distress and grief felt by relatives of those who lost their lives. As I said in my
 statement, those feelings have been compounded by a belief that some aspects of the tragedy~its
 causes and the culpability of those whose actions may or may not have led to the tragedy-have not
 been fully examined.

 M r. Damian Green (Ashford): I am sure that the Home Secretary will be aware that although the
 events of that day were particularly traumatic for the people of Liverpool and of Sheffield, they were
 traumatic also for football fens across the country. He will also be aware that, in the past 12 months,
 after years in which incidents of hooliganism at and around football matches was declining, there have
 been worrying signs that hooliganism is beginning to increase. In the light of his answer to the hon.
 Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Helen Jackson) that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will not be able to
 consider the wider issues arising from the Hillsborough tragedy, will he tell us whether,
 ultimately—should the incident be examined by a public inquiry-a public inquiry will be able to
 consider the wider issues of crowd control and policing at football matches?

 Mr. Straw: For well over the past 10 years, I have taken my children to football matches. The hon.
 Gentleman is right to say that, since implementation of Lord Taylor's recommendations, there has
 been profound improvement in football fans' behaviour at and around football grounds. The
 recommendations have led also to significant improvements in policing football matches. Now--as we
  aw during Euro 96--it is a pleasure to take anyone, including one's children, to football matches. Ten
 years ago, as I know for certain, it was often a frightening experience. I have received no
 representations that there need to be changes in the criminal law to deal with crowd control at football
 matches, although I will consider any such representations that might be made.

 I should make it clear that the purpose of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny will be to consider the
 fresh evidence that has become available on the Hillsborough tragedy. I cannot anticipate the full
 terms of reference of any full public inquiry that I may establish. As I said earlier in answer to my hon.
 Friends, however, what is clear and beyond peradventure is that no one has criticised Lord Taylor or
 the way in which he conducted his inquiry, particularly on crowd control at football matches.

 M r. Edward O 'H ara (Knowsley, South): May I again express my condolences to the Hillsborough
 families?

 Column 32

 Those of us from Merseyside know that, to this day, the nerves are still raw and the pain is still
 tangible when Hillsborough and Leppards lane are mentioned. I should therefore like to associate


                                                                                                           mm*trs^
House of Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 9)     http://www.parflamentthe-statione...nsrd/em970630/debtextf70630-09.htm


        myself with the remarks made by my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Ms Ellman)
        that, in the previous inquiry, the feelings of Hillsborough families were shamefully neglected.

        May I pursue that point and ask my right hon. Friend whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of
        reference will extend to consideration of past and possible future governmental support for those
        families? Although very strong support was provided—particularly locally, but also nationally-to
        those families in their grief, the amount of Government support was pitifiil. Will the Lord Justice's
        terms of reference extend also to examining certain newspapers' disgraceful accusations about the
        behaviour of fans who were killed, at a time when their families were feeling such pain?

        M r. Straw: I understand entirely the feelings of my hon. Friend, expressed on behalf of his
        constituents. He asked me whether the terms of reference extend to future Government support to the
        families. They do not. With great respect to my hon. Friend, I make no apologies for that. The
        scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is to ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the
        disaster at the Hillsborough stadium that was not available to the Taylor inquiry, the inquest, the
        Director of Public Prosecutions in respect of criminal prosecutions or the chief officer of the South
        Yorkshire police. As has been said, it is a focused scrutiny, led by someone who is senior and
        respected on the Court of Appeal bench to carry out a specific task that I believe the families have
        asked us to do.

        Mr. Ronnie Fearn (Southport): I welcome the statement as a Merseyside Member, at the end of a
        line that connects most supporters of Liverpool football club. From what I remember—I was in the
        House at the time-many people said that they had recollections of what happened, but never came
        forward because they were terrified to give evidence. Can we make an appeal—from the House or
        through the lord justice-to ordinary people and ask them to stretch their memories once more and, if
        they were frightened to do so at the time, to come forward now with any new evidence? That is a
        crucial part of the procedure.


        Next Section                                      Index                                          Home Page
nuuoo 01 commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 10)      http://www.pariiament.the^statione...nsrd/cm970630/debtextf70630-10.htm



         Previous Section                                  Index                                            Home Page



        Mr. Straw: If there are any individuals who have material evidence that was not produced at the
        inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor, at the inquest or in relation to the police disciplinary
        investigation by West Midlands Police, I appeal to them to come forward.

        I did not properly answer the second part of the question from my hon. Friend the Member for
        Knowsley, South (Mr. O'Hara) in relation to allegations by newspapers. Although I shall not go into
        that, let me make it quite clear that Lord Taylor's report dismissed entirely the allegations made by
        certain newspapers and clearly came to the view that the principal reason for the disaster was the
        failure of police control. I hope that remains a matter of reassurance for the families.

        M r. Joe Ashton (Bassetiaw): I declare an interest as a director of Sheffield Wednesday football club
        and an eye witness to the event who was no more than 50 yd away

        Column 33

        before and after the game. The only other hon. Member who was an eye witness was Eddie Loyden,
        who has since left the House. Sheffield Wednesday football club has the deepest sympathy with the
        victims and will be happy to co-operate in any way with the inquiry.

        I have two questions for my right hon. Friend. First, will the evidence be given on oath? There is a
        great interest in that. Secondly, he will recall that the previous inquiry cost some £250,000, excluding
        compensation. Will the Government pay for the inquiry and refund all the expenses to the parties
        concerned, including the witnesses and relatives of the victims? Will it be possible to reopen the
        matter of compensation? Can he give us some information about that?

        Mr. Straw: I am very grateful to my hon. Friend, especially given his position as a director of
        Sheffield Wednesday football club. He asked whether evidence before the scrutiny by Lord Justice
        Stuart-Smith will be given on oath. We are not planning that that should be the case. If Lord Justice
        Stuart-Smith considers that he has inadequate powers to conduct the scrutiny, I shall actively consider
        any such representations from him, but I do not expect that it will be a problem, given the nature of
        'he scrutiny that we are asking him to undertake in respect of the new evidence.

        My hon. Friend asked whether the Government will pay the costs of the inquiry. We shall certainly
        pay for the cost of the inquiry itself and will refund the travelling and incidental expenses of those who
        appear before it to make representations. I dealt with the issue of legal representation, which is a
        much wider issue. So far, I have had no calls for legal aid. That would involve some large decisions to
        which I cannot commit myself. With respect to my hon. Friend, the issue of compensation for trauma
        suffered does not arise as a result of this scrutiny.

        Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover): Does my right hon. Friend recall that, a short time before the
        general election, traumatised policemen were awarded substantial sums because they had witnessed
        the horrific events? It is well known that many of the Liverpool families of the victims have not
        received anything. I take it, from his answer today, that compensation will not be dealt with by the
        inquiry. Will he give a guarantee that if the results of the inquiry lean in the direction that many of us
        hope for, consequential payments could be made to those Liverpool families?

        Mr. Straw: The issue of some police officers receiving compensation while some of those who were
        on the terraces have not is not a matter for this scrutiny~not because it is unimportant, but because it
        is not directly related to the need for the scrutiny, which is to examine allegations of new material


    3
    "i. ^ .in H ^ M a in a u ueumoa iwi ou juh loaf ;pi   iuj     nnp://vww.parttamentthe-statione...nsrd/cm97063Q/clebtext/7063Q-i0.htm


      evidence. If that new material evidence is found to exist, it should trigger a new public inquiry or
      action by the Attorney-General, the Director of Public Prosecutions or the chief officer of the police. I
      fully understand the concerns that have been expressed by hon. Members on both sides of the House
      about the payment of compensation to police officers and its unavailability to others who were there.
      The issue could be raised in the debate that I promised to discuss with my right hon. Friend the
      Leader of the House in response to the shadow Home Secretary.

      Mr. Mike Hall (Weaver Vale): I represent a number of families who lost loved ones in the
      Hillsborough

      Column 34

      disaster and a number of people who were severely injured there. I am sure that the Hillsborough
      families support group will welcome the independent review of the evidence. 'Will that review look at
      the events that took place between 3.15 and 5.30 pm? The issue is very important for many of my
      constituents. I hope that what my right hon. Friend has announced today will lead to a full public
      inquiry.

      M r. Straw: The answer to my hon. Friend's first question is an unequivocal yes. One of the major
      issues raised by the Granada Television programme and by the families support group is the time of
      death-whether it was 3.15 for all those who died or whether it was later for some. Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith will examine that critical issue.

                                                           Points of Order

      4.26 pm

      M r. Michael Ancram (Devizes): On a point of order, Madam Speaker. With reference to the point
      of order raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Ribble Valley (Mr. Evans) on Friday, have you had
      time to complete your consideration of the letter that he sent you about the behaviour of the Secretary
      of State for Wales and its implications for the rights of Members of this House?

      In particular, as the further public utterances of the Secretary of State and the hon. Member for
      Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Smith) are so contradictory that they cannot both be telling the truth and given
      the Prime Minister's categorical assurances to the House last Wednesday, is it not paramount for the
      reputation o f the House and the rights of its members that the Secretary of State for Wales should
      make a personal statement to the House at the earliest opportunity?

      Madam Speaker: I have now seen the letter written to me by the hon. Member for Ribble Valley
      (Mr. Evans). As the House will understand, I do not divulge details of correspondence between
      myself and individual Members. I have responded to him today. I have no comment about the
      particular case that the right hon. Gentleman has raised, as the full facts are not available to me. As a
      matter of principle, however, I say clearly that freedom of speech is one of the most cherished
      privileges of parliamentary democracy. I expect Members to exercise that fundamental right at all
      times to the ftillest extent.

      M r. Simon Hughes (Southwark, North and Bermondsey): On a point of order, Madam Speaker.
      Is it appropriate to ask you, about half an hour before the end of British rule in Hong Kong, to
      express on behalf of the House two thoughts that are probably strongly in the minds of all Members of
      Parliament—those who have been privileged to go to Hong Kong and those who have not? First, very
      simply, will you pay tribute to all those who served the Crown and the people of Hong Kong during
      the past century and a half, including those in the legislative council? Secondly, will you express the
      hope of this Parliament that the democracy that has been cultivated in Hong Kong will be able to


3
 — ......                iui ju jun ias/ (pi i)      nttp://www.par(lamentthe-6tatione...btexV70630-07.htm#70630-07 spminO


Montseirat receives more aid per head of population than any country in the world?

The House would like to know, if not today perhaps in tomorrow’s debate, how much money are Her
Majesty's Government are prepared to earmark to ensure that Montserrat is viable in future.

M r. Foulkes: I will certainly try to ensure that the hon. Gentleman's final question is answered in
tomorrow's debate~if not in the introductory speech, then in the reply for which I am directly
responsible.

It is not right to compare dependent territories with other countries. We have a special responsibility
for dependent territories as long as they remain in that role, which is why I said that we accept, jointly
with the elected Government of Montserrat, our responsibility to the people of Montserrat; and that
continues.

No doubt if the hon. Gentleman catches Madam Speaker's eye, he will have the opportunity tomorrow
to extend his contribution and tell us what the previous Government did. I do not believe, however,
that he will be able to say that they acted with the sense of urgency that has been shown in the past
eight weeks.

xVIr. Andrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and Neston): My hon. Friend will be aware that, last year, I
saw the devastation in Montserrat from a Lynx helicopter flying from the back of HMS Argyll, the
West Indies guard ship on station at the time. In view of the risk to Lynx helicopters because of the
nature of the dust from the volcanic explosion, is my hon. Friend satisfied that, in the event of there
having to be a major evacuation, there is sufficient seaborne support to bring that about?

M r. Foulkes: Yes. As well as providing the ferry service, which started yesterday, we have had
discussions with the Governments of the other islands in the area, and we are satisfied that there is
sufficient seaborne capacity to carry out an evacuation. I can say, however, that we are currently
reviewing the evacuation procedures—the second issue of which was produced earlier this year—in the
light of recent happenings, to ascertain whether any updating and improvement are necessary.

                                         Hillsborough Disaster
3.47 pm

-he Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam
Speaker, I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough stadium disaster.

Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster, which happened on 15 April
1989. That was more than eight years ago, but no one who saw the news reports on that dreadful
Saturday will have forgotten those terrible events. For those who lost loved members of their family,
the pain is ever present. Following Hillsborough, Members of the House were united in their
determination to do all in their power to prevent anything like that ever happening again.

After the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries and investigations took place. The most
thorough and wide ranging of those was the public inquiry led by the late Lord Taylor. The terms of
reference of that inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster, but making
recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.

Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidence from more than 170 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence from different sources. In his interim
report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number of causes. He did not
attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that, in his


                                                                                                       07/01IV7
                                           39/
                   w w s w s iwi j u j u n 1     \pi / 1    ntqD://www.parliamenithe-station6...bte*t/70630-07.htm#7Q63Q-07_3pmin0


view, '


       "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control".

Lord Taylor made 43 recommendations in his interim report. His final report in January 1990 made a
further 76 recommendations. The developments that have taken place since then in safety at football
grounds and in the policing of football matches have been based largely on those recommendations.
Football in this country has been transformed since the Taylor report. To a large extent, that is due to
Lord Taylor's wide-ranging and soundly based conclusions.

The deaths that occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject of inquests conducted by the coroner
of the western district of South Yorkshire. After examining the evidence, the jury at the coroner’s
inquest found in March 1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was accidental
death. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised by the Police
Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for criminal proceedings and to
consider whether any police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.

That investigation involved the taking of more than 5,000 statements and the scrutiny of all the
material that had been examined previously by the Taylor inquiry. After that investigation, the
evidence was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be
subject to criminal proceedings.

The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief superintendent and the superintendent in
charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty. In the event, the chief
superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a ruling by a disciplinary tribunal.

Column 25

Under police discipline rules, a disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when a police officer retires before
the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints Authority decided later that disciplinary proceedings
against the superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent
meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard fairly in the
absence of the more senior officer.

'Ton. Members will be familiar with the unhappiness of the families of those who died regarding the
outcome of the inquest. They later applied for judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings. In
November 1993, the divisional court ruled that none of the matters raised in the judicial review
proceedings justified intervention by that court in the verdict of the inquest jury. The events
surrounding the disaster have, therefore, been subject to investigation on several occasions. However,
concerns have remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there are unresolved issues
that should be investigated further.

Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me, to the Attorney-General
and to the Director of Public Prosecutions. A Granada television programme in December last year
dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues that, in the view of the programme makers,
represented new evidence. The programme prompted an Adjournment debate on 17 December 1996,
which was led by my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. Kilfoyle), and to which my
predecessor, the right hon. and learned Member for Folkestone and Hythe (Mr. Howard), replied. I
know how seriously my predecessor viewed the matter.

Since that programme, further material has been submitted on behalf of the Hillsborough families
support group. Those representations have related in particular to video evidence of the disaster and


                                                                                                               07/01/07
House of Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 7)              http://www.pariiament.the-statione...bte)(V70630-O7.htm#7Q630-07_3pmin0



        to medical evidence about the time of death of the victims. My Department, the office of the
        Attorney-General and the Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence
        that has been put forward in recent months. The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view
        that the material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings. The foraier
        Attorney-General, the right hon. and learned Member for North-East Bedfordshire (Sir N. Lyell), also
        took the view—again, on the basis of the material presented to him—that any application to the High
        Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.

        None the less, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at Hillsborough and many
        others, including hon Members, are veiy concerned that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to
        go as fer as I can to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a
        final conclusion without a M and independent examination of the evidence.

        The Attorney-General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have, therefore, agreed that it is in
        the public interest to establish an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new
        evidence relating to the disaster which was not previously available.

        Column 26

        We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that
        purpose. His full terms of reference are as follows:


               "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
               which was not available:


               (a) To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


               (b) To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the purpose of discharging their respective
               statutoiy responsibilities; or


               (c) To the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to police disciplinary matters;


               And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify
               establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry, and in relation to
               (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
               their respective dudes; and to advise whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
               interest."

        I shall place a copy of those terms of reference in the Library.

        We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other evidence that has been
        submitted. He will also consider any further material that interested parties wish to submit to him. He
        will have two tasks. The first is to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
        significance to justify a further full public inquiry. His advice to me will be made available to the
        House, and will be made public. Secondly, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will identify for the Attorney-
        General, the DPP and the chief constable of South Yorkshire police any evidence that might be
        relevant to their decisions that has not previously been considered.

        I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether material evidence about
        the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked. I assure the House that, if it has, I will
        take whatever action is needed. We owe it to everyone who has been touched by the tragedy, but,


   5
                   .               .w< V.WJUH 1 3 3 / \pitt     nttp:/Avww.parflament.the-8tatione...bte)cW70630-07.htm#70630-07_spmin0


above ail, to the families of those who died to get to the bottom of the matter once and for all.
          1
C—■Trrr~—~ — T   — —   11   --H—       , _ —                                  w—                   ----------   _     .... a. — — _ —


 Next Section                                                 Index                                                 HomePage




                                                                                                                           07/(11/07    1-a.-a-a.x0
                          . . w v IVI v w *Wf ■ I0O( \ y w j     rrap://www.partiamenttheTStab'one...nsrd/cm970630/debtext/70630-08.htm



     Previous Section                                          Index                                          Home Page



    Dr. Brian Mawhinney (North-West Cambridgeshire): I thank the Home Secretary for his
    statement and for his personal courtesy in relation to it.

    What happened at Hillsborough was a tragedy of almost unimaginable proportions. Thousands of
    people-young and old alike-went to a football game; 96 did not return and others were injured.
    Those realities have blighted the lives of thousands of people for ever. There remain hurt and loss
    from which, in varying degrees, those people may never recover, and we are all affected by their
    suffering.

    We owe it to the families and friends of those who died, to members of the police force and the other
    emergency services and to all who believe in justice to ensure—in the Home Secretary’s words—


          "that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a full and
          independent examination of the evidence."

    I agree with the right hon. Gentleman on that. I welcome his announcement and will support Lord
    Justice Stuart-Smith in pursuing that important examination.

    I have four specific questions to ask the Home Secretary about his statement. First, given the urgency
    involved—not least for those most affected by those

    Column 27

    terrible events; primarily the fajmilies, but also the police officers-what timetable does the right hon.
    Gentleman envisage and can the House have his assurance that the process will begin immediately?

     Secondly, the Home Secretary said that he would make Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's advice to him
    available to the House and the public. Will he also publish all the evidence considered by the lord
    justice on which that advice was based?

      hirdly, the right hon. Gentleman has said that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will consider any further
    material that interested parties wish to submit. Will such material be examinable in public and will
    those who may be affected by such material be given the opportunity respond to it before the lord
    justice reaches any conclusions?

    Finally, given the sensitivity of this matter and the Home Secretary's constructive attitude, which I
    hope he feels that I have reciprocated, will he undertake to agree with his right hon. Friend the Leader
    of the House that the House can debate this matter further when Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
    concluded his investigation?

    Positive responses by the right hon. Gentleman to those four questions will help to reassure the
    families that we are genuinely seeking to help.

    M r. Straw: I thank the right hon. Gentleman for his remarks and for his courtesy. If it is not wholly
    inappropriate, I also congratulate him on his appointment as shadow Home Secretary. I am extremely
    grateful to Mm for his welcome for these proceedings. This is not and never has been a matter of party
    controversy. As I have said, I know how seriously my predecessor, the right hon. and learned Member
    for Folkestone and Hythe took this matter.


3                                                                                                                   ft7/m/QT
-louse or commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 8)    http://www.par(iament.ttie-statione...nsrd/cm970630/debtexV7Q630-08.htm




        The' right hon. Gentleman asked four questions, the first of which was on the timetable. Lord Justice
        Stuart-Smith has told me that, subject to a case that he is currently hearing in the Court of Appeal
        being concluded as soon as possible, he intends to do some work in respect of the new duties before
        the end of July and to start his proceedings in September. We hope that the matter will be concluded
        and that he will be able to produce his report by the end of the year. However, the House will
        understand that that is a judgment which only Lord Justice Stuart-Smith can make in the light of all
        the representations that he receives.

        Secondly, the right hon. Gentleman asked whether, in addition to publishing the advice that I receive
        from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, I will publish all the evidence that is considered by him. My answer to
        the right hon. Gentleman is provisional. I shall do my best to ensure that that is the case, but there
        may be good reasons~for example, in respect of criminal or disciplinary proceedings--why such
        evidence cannot be published at the same time as the advice is published. However, if evidence is to
        be unpublished, I shall make that clear at the time.

         Thirdly, the right hon. Gentleman asked whether there can be examination in public and whether the
         families and others would be able to make representations. The answer to the latter part of the
      -■ question is yes. As the House would expect, the exact proceedings of the scrutiny are

       Column 28

       matters for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to decide and he will base his decision on his long experience as
       a senior member of the judiciary.

       The fourth issue that the right hon. Gentleman raised was whether, when the advice is received, I
       would discuss with my right hon. Friend the Leader of the House the matter of a debate. Of course I
       shall do that.

       M aria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his statement. I also
       congratulate Granada Television and Jimmy McGovern whose efforts have brought this matter back
       to the attention of the House. Can my right hon. Friend assure the House that the families who have
       fought for so long will have the opportunity of legal representation to enable them to present their
       cases, whether orally or in writing, to the Lord Justice? Will they receive some financial assistance to
       •'nable them to do that?

       Mr. Straw: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her remarks and for her welcome for the statement.
       The costs of those who have to travel to appear before the scrutiny will be met by my Department.
       My hon. Friend asks about legal representation. That issue has not been raised by me during my
       discussions with the families. I understand that they already have legal representation. If a further
       issue arises, I shall, of course, consider it.

       M r. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Is the Home Secretary aware that Liberal Democrat
       Members welcome this focused re-examination of the evidence, including recently found evidence, on
       these terrible events, which have been etched into the minds of all the people who saw the television
       coverage at the time and etched dreadfully into the lives of the people who lost family members, but
       will he confirm that it is very unlikely—and perhaps impossible-that police discipline proceedings
       could be reopened as a result of what might be found in the inquiry? Does he recognise that the public
       find it difficult to understand how police discipline proceedings can be brought to a halt when
       retirement on health grounds takes place before the hearing has begun? Given that Lord Taylor's main
       recommendation was that, although there were many factors, the main reason for the disaster was the
       failure of police control, that will leave questions in the public mind, which will pass beyond the
       inquiry into what can be done when conclusions are reached.


  3
               m w w v c iw o tu i j u   stun   19%) t ( p i   0)     M^://www.parllament.the-ststione...n3rcl/cfn97O63O/debt0xtf7Q63O-Oa.htm




M r. Straw: I thank the right hon. Gentleman for his welcome for my statement. He asked me to say
that further police discipline proceedings would be very unlikely. That is to anticipate the view that
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith may or may not come to and, with great respect to the right hon.
Gentleman, I shall not do that. He also invites me to make general comments on police discipline
regulations. There may be an occasion to debate the generality of such regulations, but I do not
believe that now is the time.

I say only that the police discipline regulations exist and have been approved from time to time by the
House; they are statutory regulations. It is, of course, open to Secretaries of State and to the House to
change them in the light o f circumstances.

Helen Jackson (Sheffield, Hillsborough): I am sure that the Home Secretary realises that the most
tragic

Column 29

trauma of the event was suffered by the families of the Liverpool fens who attended the match, but it
was also one of the most traumatic events in their history for the people of the Hillsborough area of
Sheffield--the links that they have made and maintain with families in Liverpool bear witness to that.
While he considers the evidence that, I believe, he is rightly having another look at, will Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith consider in detail the lessons to be learned both for the communities living around big
football stadiums and for the policing of football matches?

M r. Straw: I accept entirely what my hon. Friend said: this tragedy went beyond the people directly
affected who were supporters of Liverpool football club and traumatised the people living around
Hillsborough and all the people in Sheffield and in south Yorkshire as well. We should not forget that,
on that day, there were many individual acts of great courage by people from south Yorkshire, by
people in the police, fire and ambulance services and by many other ordinary citizens.

My hon. Friend asked me whether wider lessons, including lessons about the policing of football
matches, can be considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his scrutiny. The answer to that, I am
afraid, is that we do not anticipate that they can be. The scrutiny will look at new evidence that has
come forward since the earlier inquiries, to find out whether that evidence is sufficiently significant to
trigger either a new public inquiry, ordered by myself or action by the Attorney-General, the Director
j f Public Prosecutions or the chief officer of South Yorkshire police. I do not believe that, at any
stage since the late Lord Justice Taylor reported, there has been any criticism of his wider
recommendations, most of which have been implemented, on the policing of football matches and on
crowd control.

Mr. Tony Baldry (Banbury): I am sure that no hon. Member would challenge the judgment that the
Home Secretary has come to today, but will he confirm that, in his statement, he said that, on the
evidence submitted to her, the Director of Public Prosecutions had concluded that nothing justified
fresh criminal investigations? Could he give two undertakings to the House: that, in due course, Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith will make it clear what new evidence he is considering that was not available to
the Director of Public Prosecutions in making that judgment, and why that evidence was not available
earlier?


Next Section                                                        Index                                          Home Page




                                                                                                                          minim n-o
           —    .«=, m u w « n s9 mr ju jun 1 887 (pt a)     http:/Awvw.pariiamentthe-statlone...nsrti/cm970630/debtext/70630-09.htrn



     Previous Section                                      Index                                           Home Pace



    Mr. Straw: I can confirm exactly what the hon. Gentleman says. I said that the Director of Public
    Prosecutions has taken the view that the material so far presented to her would not justify fresh
    criminal investigations. I also referred to a judgment made by the former Attorney-General, the right
    hon. and learned Member for North-East Bedfordshire (Sir N. Lyell), but I ought to make it clear
    that, as I understand it—as I am informed-he based that judgment on information other than that
    which arose following the television programme screened last December.

    It is in the nature of asking a senior and highly respected judge of the Court of Appeal to look at all
    the fresh allegations and the fresh evidence that he may come to a different view from that which the
    Director of Public Prosecutions has so far come to on the evidence that she

    Column 30

    has available. That is not in any sense to imply any criticism of the work of the Director of Public
' ' Prosecutions or the Crown Prosecution Service.

    Mr. Andrew M iller (Ellesmere Port and Neston): On behalf of constituents of mine who were so
    tragically affected by this event, may I ask my right hon. Friend whether the fresh inquiry will bring
    about some consideration of the way in which the coroner's court conducted its affairs during the
    inquiries immediately after the deaths? Does it constitute the possibility of fresh evidence-evidence
    that should have perhaps come to the coroner’s court earlier-now becoming more widely available?

    Mr. Straw: There has been continuing concern about the way in which inquests generally are
    conducted. There was a working party report into large-scale disasters and inquests, which
    recommended significant changes, including a change whereby if there were, God forbid, a disaster of
    a similar scale and nature in the future, there would be one inquiry similar to that conducted by the
    late Lord Justice Taylor, which would be the general public inquiry and also take the form of an
    inquest, so that the relatives would be spared going through the agony caused by two separate
    inquiries.

    The issue of the way in which the first inquest was conducted was the subject of great consideration
    by the divisional court when there were proceedings for judicial review. It is a matter for Lord Justice
    Stuart-Smith, but I expect that he will not wish to go over that ground but will instead, as part of his
    scrutiny, wish to consider with great care the new allegations of evidence not put before the
    inquest--especially, as the House is well aware, arguments about the time of death which, in the view
    of the relatives and programme makers, the inquest was not property able to take into account.

    Mr. Nicholas Soames (Mid-Sussex): I warmly welcome the right hon. Gentleman's statement and
    the measured and sensitive way in which he outlined his plans. I take the point about the issue of
    police discipline in respect of this inquiiy, but will he nevertheless undertake to consider a
    re-examination-not necessarily in the light of these events, but more generally-of the police
    disciplinary code, which provides that once an officer has retired, any matters under investigation
    lapse? Does he agree that that should be reconsidered, and will he undertake to do so?

    Mr. Straw: Yes, without reference to this particular case, I accept that many members of the public
    regard it as odd that when an officer retires, that is the end of all disciplinary processes. However, one
    of the things on which I am currently taking advice is the fact that, as I understand it, regulations
    expect chief officers not to permit the retirement of officers on grounds of ill health where disciplinary
    proceedings are still pending. There is, therefore, an issue not only of whether disciplinary regulations


3                                                                                                                  0 7 /01/97 13-35-27
  —        noiiMro ueoates ror jo Jun 18B7 (pt 9)      http.7/www.partiamentthe-€tatione...nsrd/cm970630/clebtext/70630-09.htrn


  should be changed, but of whether chief officers of police are properly fulfilling the terms of existing
  regulations. Both of these matters are subjects that I wish to investigate.

  Ms Louise Ellman (Liverpool, Riverside): I welcome the Home Secretary's statement in that it
  opens up the

  Column 31

  possibility of justice for the families whose lives have been so cruelly devastated. Is my right hon.
  Frieaid able to assure the House that while the inevitable legal considerations take place, he will keep
  in mind the prime consideration of the feelings of the families involved and their belief that they have
  been denied justice, in that information was not brought forward at the appropriate time?

  M r. Straw: O f course I give that assurance to my hon. Friend. I made the decision to ask Lord
  Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct further scrutiny because I felt that there was fresh evidence that
  required proper and independent examination. In reaching that decision, of course I took full account
  of the profound distress and grief felt by relatives of those who lost their lives. As I said in my
  statement, those feelings have been compounded by a belief that some aspects of the tragedy—its
- causes and the culpability o f those whose actions may or may not have led to the tragedy-have not
  been fully examined.

  M r. Damian Green (Ashford): I am sure that the Home Secretary will be aware that although the
  events of that day were particularly traumatic for the people of Liverpool and of Sheffield, they were
  traumatic also for football fens across the country. He will also be aware that, in the past 12 months,
  after years in which incidents of hooliganism at and around football matches was declining, there have
  been worrying signs that hooliganism is beginning to increase. In the light of his answer to the hon.
  Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Helen Jackson) that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will not be able to
  consider the wider issues arising from the Hillsborough tragedy, will he tell us whether,
  ultimately—should the incident be examined by a public inquiry-a public inquiry will be able to
  consider the wider issues of crowd control and policing at football matches?

 Mr. Straw: For well over the past 10 years, I have taken my children to football matches. The hon.
 Gentleman is right to say that, since implementation of Lord Taylor's recommendations, there has
 been profound improvement in football fens' behaviour at and around football grounds. The
 recommendations have led also to significant improvements in policing football matches. Now—as we
 „iw during Euro 96—it is a pleasure to take anyone, including one's children, to football matches. Ten
 years ago, as I know for certain, it was often a frightening experience. I have received no
 representations that there need to be changes in the criminal law to deal with crowd control at football
 matches, although I will consider any such representations that might be made.

 I should make it clear that the purpose of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny will be to consider the
 fresh evidence that has become available on the Hillsborough tragedy. I cannot anticipate the full
 terms of reference of any full public inquiry that I may establish. As I said earlier in answer to my hon.
 Friends, however, what is clear and beyond peradventure is that no one has criticised Lord Taylor or
 the way in which he conducted his inquiry, particularly on crowd control at football matches.

 M r. Edward O 'H ara (Knowsley, South): May I again express my condolences to the Hillsborough
 families?

 Column 32

 Those of us from Merseyside know that, to this day, the nerves are still raw and the pain is still
 tangible when Hillsborough and Leppards lane are mentioned. I should therefore like to associate
-louse of Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 9)     http:/Aiww.perllamentth0-statione...nsrd/cm97O63O/debtextf7O63O-O9.l


        myself with the remarks made by my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Ms Ellman)
        that, in the previous inquiry, the feelings of Hillsborough families were shamefully neglected.

       May I pursue that point and ask my right hon. Friend whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's terms of
       reference will extend to consideration of past and possible future governmental support for those
       families? Although very strong support was provided-particularly locally, but also nationalIy--to
       those families in their grief, the amount of Government support was pitiful. Will the Lord Justice's
       terms of reference extend also to examining certain newspapers' disgraceful accusations about the
       behaviour of fans who were killed, at a time when their families were feeling such pain?

       M r. Straw: I understand entirely the feelings of my hon. Friend, expressed on behalf of his
       constituents. He asked me whether the terms of reference extend to future Government support to the
       families. They do not. With great respect to my hon. Friend, I make no apologies for that. The
       scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is to ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the
       disaster at the Hillsborough stadium that was not available to the Taylor inquiry, the inquest, the
       Director of Public Prosecutions in respect of criminal prosecutions or the chief officer of the South
       Yorkshire police. As has been said, it is a focused scrutiny, led by someone who is senior and
       respected on the Court of Appeal bench to carry out a specific task that I believe the families have
       asked us to do.

       M r. Ronnie Feam (Southport): I welcome the statement as a Merseyside Member, at the end of a
       line that connects most supporters of Liverpool football club. From what I remember—I was in the
       House at the time-many people said that they had recollections of what happened, but never came
       forward because they were terrified to give evidence. Can we make an appeal-from the House or
       through the lord justice-to ordinary people and ask them to stretch their memories once more and, if
       they were frightened to do so at the time, to come forward now with any new evidence? That is a
       crucial part of the procedure.


        Next Section                                       Index                                          Home Pace
I IW M W W W l   yvmmons ciansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 10)      http://www.parliam»nt.the^statione...nsrd/cm970630/e!ebtexttf0630-1 O.htm



                  Previous Section                                  Index                                             Home Page



                 Mr. Straw: If there are any individuals who have material evidence that was not produced at the
                 inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor, at the inquest or in relation to the police disciplinary
                 investigation by West Midlands Police, I appeal to them to come forward.

                 I did not properly answer the second part of the question from my hon. Friend the Member for
                 Knowsley, South (Mr. O'Hara) in relation to allegations by newspapers. Although I shall not go into
                 that, let me make it quite clear that Lord Taylor's report dismissed entirely the allegations made by
                 certain newspapers and clearly came to the view that the principal reason for the disaster was the
                 failure of police control. I hope that remains a matter of reassurance for the families.

                 M r. Joe Ashton (Bassetlaw): I declare an interest as a director of Sheffield Wednesday football club
                 and an eye witness to the event who was no more than 50 yd away

                 Column 33

                 before and after the game. The only other hon. Member who was an eye witness was Eddie Loyden,
                 who has since left the House. Sheffield Wednesday football club has the deepest sympathy with the
                 victims and will be happy to co-operate in any way with the inquiry.

                 I have two questions for my right hon. Friend. First, will the evidence be given on oath? There is a
                 great interest in that. Secondly, he will recall that the previous inquiry cost some £250,000, excluding
                 compensation. Will the Government pay for the inquiry and refund all the expenses to the parties
                 concerned, including the witnesses and relatives of the victims? Will it be possible to reopen the
                 matter of compensation? Can he give us some information about that?

                 M r. Straw: I am very grateful to my hon. Friend, especially given his position as a director of
                 Sheffield Wednesday football club. He asked whether evidence before the scrutiny by Lord Justice
                 Stuart-Smith will be given on oath. We are not planning that that should be the case. If Lord Justice
                 Stuart-Smith considers that he has inadequate powers to conduct the scrutiny, I shall actively consider
                 any such representations from him, but I do not expect that it will be a problem, given the nature of
                  he scrutiny that we are asking him to undertake in respect of the new evidence.

                 My hon. Friend asked whether the Government will pay the costs of the inquiry. We shall certainly
                 pay for the cost of the inquiry itself and will refund the travelling and incidental expenses of those who
                 appear before it to make representations. I dealt with the issue of legal representation, which is a
                 much wider issue. So far, I have had no calls for legal aid. That would involve some large decisions to
                 which I cannot commit myself. With respect to my hon. Friend, the issue of compensation for trauma
                 suffered does not arise as a result of this scrutiny.

                 M r. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover): Does my right hon. Friend recall that, a short time before the
                 general election, traumatized policemen were awarded substantial sums because they had witnessed
                 the horrific events? It is well known that many of the Liverpool families of the victims have not
                 received anything. I take it, from his answer today, that compensation will not be dealt with by the
                 inquiry. Will he give a guarantee that if the results of the inquiry lean in the direction that many of us
                 hope for, consequential payments could be made to those Liverpool families?

                 M r. Straw: The issue of some police officers receiving compensation while some of those who were
                 on the terraces have not is not a matter for this scrutiny-not because it is unimportant, but because it
                 is not directly related to the need for the scrutiny, which is to examine allegations of new material


       5
           .txiaaiu UCWWS9 iui 4u juii tear \pi iu;      nitp:/ywww.parKamerttthe-statione...nsrd/cm970630/clebtext/70630-10.htm


 evidence. If that new material evidence is found to exist, it should trigger a new public inquiry or
 action by the Attorney-General, the Director of Public Prosecutions or the chief officer of the police. I
 fully understand the concerns that have been expressed by hon. Members on both sides of the House
 about the payment of compensation to police officers and its unavailability to others who were there.
 The issue could be raised in the debate that I promised to discuss with my right hon. Friend the
 Leader of the House in response to the shadow Home Secretary.

 M r. Mike Hall (Weaver Vale): I represent a number of families who lost loved ones in the
 Hillsborough

 Column 34

 disaster and a number of people who were severely injured there. I am sure that the Hillsborough
 families support group will welcome the independent review of the evidence. Will that review look at
 the events that took place between 3.15 and 5.30 pm? The issue is very important for many of my
 constituents. I hope that what my right hon. Friend has announced today will lead to a full public
 inquiry.

" M r. Straw: The answer to my hon. Friend's first question is an unequivocal yes. One of the major
  issues raised by the Granada Television programme and by the families support group is the time of
  death-whether it was 3.15 for all those who died or whether it was later for some. Lord Justice
  Stuart-Smith will examine that critical issue.

                                                  Points of Order

 4.26 pm

 M r. Michael Ancram (Devizes): On a point of order, Madam Speaker. With reference to the point
 of order raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Ribble Valley (Mr. Evans) on Friday, have you had
 time to complete your consideration of the letter that he sent you about the behaviour of the Secretary
 of State for Wales and its implications for the rights of Members of this House?

 In particular, as the further public utterances of the Secretary of State and the hon. Member for
 Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Smith) are so contradictory that they cannot both be telling the truth and given
' he Prime Minister's categorical assurances to the House last Wednesday, is it not paramount for the
 reputation of the House and the rights of its members that the Secretary of State for Wales should
 make a personal statement to the House at the earliest opportunity?

 Madam Speaker: I have now seen the letter written to me by the hon. Member for Ribble Valley
 (Mr. Evans). As the House will understand, I do not divulge details of correspondence between
 myself and individual Members. I have responded to him today. I have no comment about the
 particular case that the right hon. Gentleman has raised, as the full facts are not available to me. As a
 matter of principle, however, I say clearly that freedom of speech is one of the most cherished
 privileges of parliamentary democracy. I expect Members to exercise that fundamental right at all
 times to the ftillest extent.

 M r. Simon Hughes (Southwark, North and Bermondsey): On a point of order, Madam Speaker.
 Is it appropriate to ask you, about half an hour before the end of British rule in Hong Kong, to
 express on behalf of the House two thoughts that are probably strongly in the minds of all Members of
 Parliament—those who have been privileged to go to Hong Kong and those who have not? First, very
 simply, will you pay tribute to all those who served the Crown and the people of Hong Kong during
 the past century and a half, including those in the legislative council? Secondly, will you express the
 hope of this Parliament that the democracy that has been cultivated in Hong Kong will be able to
