Superintendent T. Dale.


At approximately 1450 hours I was stood by outside the White Horse Public
House on Halifax Road.     At this time there were still hundreds of Liverpool
supporters making their way to the match.     I left this position, thinking
the match would be starting soon and there would be less chance of any
incident once the game was underway.


At some time after 1500 hours I was on the other side of the city, I heard
Alpha 3 and 4 calling from inside the ground at Hillsborough and I thought
there was something wrong.     Radio Sheffield reported the game had been
halted for some reason but did not report why.      I contacted control who
were aware something had happened but could not give me much information.
At this stage I made all possible haste just in case I was needed at the
ground.    I heard control direct crews to the Penistone Road end of the
ground towards the gymnasium entrance.


I do not know what time I arrived at the ground but I contacted Station
Officer Eason who was stood in the middle of Penistone Road informing
ambulance crews to reverse into the gateway, the driver to stay with the
ambulance and the attendant to go and help with the injured.      I asked
Station Officer Eason how bad he thought the incident was and if there were
any dead, he replied he thought there were about nine dead at the time.         At
this stage, I think Station Officer Eason asked me to continue with the
loading of ambulances whilst he found Mr. Hopkins, this I did.      At this
time there were only two or three ambulances there and supporters with the
injured and dying were trying to put people into the vehicles either on
stretchers or on bill boards.     My handset from the staff car did not work
and I tried to contact control on several occasions but eventually gave up
trying with the handset.


Whilst out on the road waiting for ambulances to arrive, I was approached
by dozens of fans wanting information about relatives, how to get to
hospital etc.     I saw an ambulance come out of the South Stand entrance with
blue lights and horns on.       I thought he was coming to the incident and I
became frustrated because      he was stuck in traffic unable to move.   The
police appeared to be making     no progress with the traffic situation at this
time.     I asked the Police   to make sure the ambulances got through as a
Superintendent T. Dale.


priority.     I think the ambulances in the loading area at this time had
loaded and gone to the Northern General Hospital with a Police motorcycle
escort.     I ran   up the road to this crew the driver was Ambulanceman Q
          from Middlewood, he had two patients on board but at that time I did
not know where from.      Later I found out the patients were from the Leppings
Lane end of the ground.      I returned to the loading area to Station Officer
Eason.


At this I went into the gymnasium to see Mr. Hopkins.      His instructions to
me were "get the major incident vehicle here fast” .     I returned to the
staff car and called control regarding the major incident vehicle, but the
reception on the radio was very bad.      I could not make out what the Control
Officer was saying.      Eventually I think he said the Accident Tender was on-
route to the scene.      He also asked about the number of deaths.     I reported
from what I had seen in the gymnasium at that time there were about 30
bodies.     I do not know if I was asked anything else as reception on ERC
could not be understood.      I later found out that Station Officer Eason had
contacted control re the Major Accident Vehicle.


I returned to the loading area.      At this time more ambulances were arriving
and were asked to reverse into the gate side by side.      Other crews were
asked to wait until the vehicles in the loading area left before carrying
out the same procedure.      One vehicle was left with no driver or keys this
caused a problem for a minute or two until the driver and keys were
located.    Back on the road, the police had moved some vehicles and told
them to go round to Leppings Lane.      Certain crews followed these
instructions instead of staying put.      Police also instructed vehicles that
were parked waiting on Penistone Road to drive into the next gate as
injured people were being brought to that location.      Some crews did this.
We then had two loading areas.      Had police vehicles not been in the way we
would have been able to drive in the first door, load the injured at the
gymnasium, drive out of the second gate and away.
Superintendent T. Dale.




Sometime around now Station Officer             arrived with the Major
Accident Vehicle, he was instructed by Mr. Hopkins to pull the vehicle into
the space at the first gate, Station Officer Eason was at Gate One.        I went
around to the second entrance where I found a number of vehicles stood
waiting for patients, drivers at the ready.     There were also some police
mini buses which had been hired to move policemen to the game.     These
vehicles were used to move the walking wounded.     Communications between on
site officers could only be done by sending a runner or going oneself,
which happened to be more reliable, as any ambulanceman that left the
ambulances appeared to be utilised somewhere else.


Injured were being brought out on boards and I had to stop several groups
from just putting the injured, boards and the lot into the ambulance.
Patients were put on to cots, some being resuscitated.     One young boy
arrived on a hoarding and was transferred to a cot, Qualified Ambulanceman
       and myself using CPR until I found a policeman to help.     I then
continued trying to organise the loading and movement of patients.


I found a problem in that patients were being loaded by spectators helped
by our drivers, but then the attendant could not be found, this happened
more than once.   I despatched the vehicle with our man attending in the
back and a policeman driving.     Some ambulancemen (          1 and another
had filled a mini bus with less seriously injured, taking about ten
patients in one go.     The other police mini buses were gradually being
filled with walking wounded and people in bad shock.     There were people sat
all round the loading area in a state of shock, most were being looked
after by friends or other supporters.     I found that I was being approached
by dozens of people either wanting help or information about relatives or
loved ones.   Unfortunately, I could not help these people as I had other
more important things to attend to.     At this stage we appeared to be
reasonably organised.     Vehicles available with drivers waiting, attendants
taking cots and returning with the injured.     When looking for ambulance
Superintendent T. Dale.




staff in the gymnasium, or among the police outside, it became very
difficult to find them.    Apart from motorway jackets which both police and
ambulance staff had on, identification became difficult.


As the scene became less hectic, I was informed by Mr. Hopkins to get some
more body bags as all the ones in the Major Accident Vehicle had been used.
I tried to contact control through the radio on the Major Accident Vehicle
but had no success, so I went back to the staff car and called.     Once
again, I could not make out what control were saying to me.      Later I
established that a Major Accident Vehicle from West Yorkshire was on its
way with more equipment.    Also at this time, we seemed to have an abundance
of ambulances waiting on Penistone Road.


At some stage, Mr. Hopkins asked me to go and wait with the surplus
vehicles at Herries Road Bus Garage.    I went to the staff car and informed
control who then informed me that Station Officer Eason was already there.
During all this Mr. Jones arrived at some stage and ran the loading and
operations at the Number One gate.


At some stage the Emergency Tender from WYMAS arrived, Station Officer
         and myself met him and informed him we needed more body bags.
Eventually when he found them there were only about    twelve.   All were taken
to Mr. Hopkins who used them in the gymnasium.


Mr. Jones asked me to take two vehicles around to the Leppings Lane end and
collect some bodies and return to the gymnasium.      I took a WYMAS and
Nottingham ambulance around only to find StationOfficer     Higgins had
already dealt with the bodies and was in the process of loading the last
two.   I returned to the gymnasium with the crews.
Superintendent T. Dale.




I was told by either Mr. Jones or Mr. Hopkins to take Station Officer
Higgins down to the Medico Legal Centre and prepare for the bodies
arriving.   This I did, but we had great difficulty getting through the
traffic.    On arrival at Medico Legal Centre I dropped off Station Officer
Higgins and contracted control - reception outside Medico Legal Centre on
ERC was excellent.    Control told me to go to Herries Road Bus Garage and
establish a land line.    On arrival at the Garage, Leading Ambulanceman
      informed me this had already been done and the message from Mr. Page
was to tell either Mr. Hopkins or Mr. Jones to contact him at Headquarters.


I then returned to the Sheffield Wednesday's Football Club Gymnasium and
passed Mr. Page's message to both Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Jones.       Control also
informed me at some time during the operation that walking wounded needed
to be taken to Barnsley District General Hospital.       This information was
passed late on in the incident when most casualties had been removed.


Mr. Hopkins informed me he wanted six ambulances to stay and the rest could
go to Herries Road Bus Garage.    I passed this information to Mr. Jones who
dealt with it.


At this time, most of the incident had been cleared, all that remained were
the 90 or so bodies in the gymnasium.


Mr. Page arrived on scene and the incident began to wind down.


I was instructed by Mr. Page to bring in some night men early to help ease
the work load.    This was done from the Control Unit.     I later collected
Station Officer Higgins from the Medico Legal Centre and returned to
Hillsborough and assisted until midnight.
