A K LAWSON - DDT - MIDDLEWOOD STATION


Date:   19.4.89

Time:   1455-1525

Duty:   Day Off


On my day off I was working in the Hillsborough restaurant as a wine
waiter. I had finished my job at 1450 and went out to look at the match.

I noticed that about 1500 hours that people had come over the barrier with
injuries and were limping, so I went down to see if I could help the St
John's Ambulancemen. As I came out of the tunnel onto the pitch I noticed
that the people they were bringing out were people who were dead or dying.

We (St John's) revived one young chap with CPR and left him with a junior
St John due to the numbers of dying people we tried CPR on another two
patients, whilst working on a third patient a Doctor came over and asked if
I required any help, he took over CPR.

I could only see one Red Cross ambulance so I ran over to the "Dug Out" and
telephoned Control. I told our Control what was happening and to the best
of my knowledge I could see 40 people dead.

I ran back onto the field and tried to revive more patients with no
success. The Fire Service arrived and in the absence of a Senior Ambulance
Officer the Fire Service Senior Officer ordered us to take out casualties
to the side of the River side suite (no time).

The patients were all seriously ill but alive. When I arrived there an off
duty ambulanceman had made his way to this point. Me and the other
Ambulanceman made everyone as comfortable as possible.

I noticed that when ambulances came past they were all full, so I walked
aroung the corner and noticed ambulances parked at the top of Leppings
Lane.

We carried the patients from this point up to the parked ambulances, when
we got up there I saw           with a Renault vehicle. He then said you
stay with me and we loaded the Renault with patients - 13 patients and 3
nurses. With a police escort we went to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

We were sent back to the scene firstly to Leppings Lane end where there
were no more casualties but a temporary mortuary at the side of the Lane.

We then went to the gym, I was told I wouldn't be needed any longer and I
rejoined my family.
