                            date of birth 12th August 1945 states


1.   I joined the Ambulance Service as a driver in 1968 and
     became a Station Officer in 1972. I have always worked in
     South Yorkshire and became a Control Office for SYMAS in
     1974.   I now work as Control Officer from Headquarters at
     Heather Close.

2.   I hold a Miller Certificate and am an Associate of the
      Institute of Certified Ambulance Personnel. I also have a
      certificate from the National Examination Board and
     Supervisory Studies.

3.   My duties involve controlling Ambulances by telephone and
     radio.    Some shifts I work on emergency work only and on
     others I deal with out patients. Shifts are organised on a
      12 week rota and I was not scheduled to be on duty at all on
     Saturday the 15th April.    I had been on nights the previous
      Friday the 14th April on a shift running from -l O Q O ^ o -t&dtyf
     I went home as usual after this shift and had not expected
     to return until 2200 on Saturday night.       There were no
     special arrangements affecting the Saturday night duty
     because of the match, although I expected it was likely to
     be a busy night, depending on the result of the game.

4.   I got up at about 1330 on Saturday and had been in the
     garden.  When I came in the television was on and I saw
     that something was clearly wrong.          It was about 1510 or
     1515.   At the same time the telephone rang and my wife
     answered it. She said - "Its work. Will you go in straight
     away". I spoke briefly to Control and was asked to come in
     early.   No explanation was given and I did not ask for one
     because I put two and two together and knew there was an
     incident at Hillsborough.  I simply agreed. Knowing that I
     was due to work the night shift and would be likely to have
     to stay through, I changed into my uniform and then made my
way to control on my motorbike, arriving at about 1545.


The control room was full of staff and I looked    through the
hatch into the Major Incident Room and realised    that it was
also crowded.   I looked for the Senior Officer    on duty and
found            \  I asked him for instructions   and he said
everything seemed to be covered.    I decided to   stand by to
keep an eye on the control assistants and stand    in for them
if they needed to go out.


About 10 minutes after I arrived I answered a phone call
from the press.   I do not know which newspaper it was.    A
man asked "is there any news - I understand there are
fatalities".  I replied I had no information and he should
ring back in half an hour.     At that time I had not yet
enquired as to the casualty position and did not know there
were any fatalities at all.   As soon as the press man rang
off I asked at the centre desk and someone said there were
53 fatalities at that stage.      This was the first time I
realised fully the extent of the incident although I had a
good idea on arriving because of the number of people in
control and the use for the first time of the MajorIncident
Room.   No one specifically informed me theyhad gone onto
ERC channel but I assumed this was the case because this was
the whole purpose of the incident room.


By the time I arrived the operation was already being run
from the Major Incident Room.  However this only had radio
links and all the telephone contact in relation to
assistance for Hillsborough came into the normal control
room.   Also the ERC channel was overloaded and crews who
could not get through occasionally came through on the
ordinary channels.  There are three ordinary channels for
Barnsley and Rotherham, Sheffield and Doncaster and
emergency use for the whole of the SYMAS region.   ERC is
      the emergency channel available nationwide.

      It was then about 1600 and every position in the control
      room was filled.   I simply stood by to supervise the less
      experienced staff.  I took two further calls from the press
      asking for information on similar lines to the first call,
      but I did not tell them anything nor refer them through to
      the incident room.

9.    At about 1630 I noticed that            had left the control
      room and asked the assistant next to him, Control Assistant
      i      1, where he had gone.    Mr Collins said he had gone
      into the incident room to deal with press calls.      I then
      heard the girls in the control room had been told to put all
      press calls through to                  However I did not
      personally receive any further calls from the press after
      this.

10. Next Control Officer           asked me to contact the duty
    fitter to attend a vehicle that had broken down in
    Sheffield.    This was an out-patient vehicle which had
    stopped on Glossop Road near the Hallamshire Hospital and
    would not restart.       I telephoned the fitter and he
    confirmed he would attend.      Shortly after
    informed me that the vehicle had restarted after all and
    did not require attention.   However the fitter would still
    be required to deal with vehicles from outside the SYMAS
    area which had overheated in coming in to assist at
    Hillsborough and had broken down at Herries Road bus
    station.  I did not speak to the fitter myself.   I believe
    Mr Bidmead redirected him.

11 . A f t e r   this   I sat   down       in       place   on   the
      Rotherham/Barnsley domestic control. There was not much to
      do and I did not in fact take any calls.

                                       8
12 . At about 1800 I relieved             bn the emergency board
     which he had been manning since 1400.      This channel was
     busy with ordinary domestic calls and the operation of this
     part of the service was particularly demanding because so
     many ambulances were tied up at Hillsborough.


13.   By 1900 when            returned things had calmed down and
      everything was fairly well organised.  I therefore reported
      to Mr Smith, Assistant Chief Metropolitan Officer In charge
      of Control, and said I Intended to take my own break before
      starting my usual shift.   He agreed and told me to take a
      good break.

14.   I went out and had a meal and watched television returning
      to control at approximately 2115.    I took over from __
              for the 22.00 shift at about 21.50 and remained
      until 0600 the next morning.    By 2115 the major incident
      room had closed down, although it had still been in
      operation when I left for my break.


15.   I worked a normal night shift dealing with domestic
      emergency calls. In addition I controlled the operation of
      vehicles detailed to move bodies from the gymnasium to the
      Medico Legal Centre.  This operation went on until 0530  I
      was in radio contact all the time with officer’s at the
      ground on the ordinary channel and had no difficulty
      receiving them.


16 . I normally have 20 vehicles under my control and on that
      evening there were an extra 3 which had been detailed to
      assist with the transfer of bodies.    Every time a vehicle
      left the ground one of the duty officers at the gym radioed
      in to confirm and to notify how many bodies had been moved.
      At 0530 a final total of 94 was radioed to me.

                                 «
17.   At about 0100 Mr Hopkins came into the control room before
      leaving for the ground and instructed me to arrange for 3
      crews who had been on the domestic evening shift (from 1800
      to 0200) to stay on to relieve the 3 crews handling the
      transfers of bodies who had been working all day.      I had
      anticipated this and radioed               at the ground to
      tell him that his 3 crews would be relieved at 0200. One of
      my control Assistants telephoned three separate stations and
      asked the evening crews to stay on. They agreed to do so.

18.   I was relieved by the day officer at 0600 by which time the
      Hillsborough operation was complete.


19.   I am aware of a major incident plan, but this only affects
      me in so far as I am required to come into work whether or
      not scheduled for duty.



Signed..



Dated this   (o   day of            1989




                               10
