           - AMBULANCEMAN - HOYLAND AMBULANCE STATION


My colleague and I received the call to attend an incident at Hillsborough,
the time was approximately 1510. We were instructed by control to standby
at the Five Arches on Herries Road. A few moments later we were instructed
to standby on Leppings Lane, then again to attend the gym entrance to the
ground.

At Grenoside, we picked up a police escort and we arrived at the gym
entrance to the ground at approximately 1520. We were instructed to
reverse into the entrance and remove our stretcher and take it underneath
the stand at the side of the gym. We were ordered by Mr Hopkins to ignore
casualties being brought towards us by fans.

Under the stand we loaded a casualty onto the stretcher and returned with
him to the vehicle. He was then conveyed along with 5 or 6 other walking
casualties who were pushed onto the vehicle. We were then instructed to
convey to the Northern General Hospital and return to the same location.

Under police escort we conveyed the casualties to Northern General Hospital
and returned to the gym entrance. Again under instruction we reversed into
the ground. A casualty was brought to us by the police on a makeshift
stretcher and we loaded and conveyed him, again to the Northern General
Hospital then returned to the ground, again under escort.

By this time there was a line of ambulances waiting to enter the ground .
We stood in line for some ten minutes before we re-entered the ground. We
were instructed, there were no more casualties and, that we had to remove
all our blankets and body bags along with a stretcher and take it to the
doorway to the gym which had become a mortuary.

For some time after that our role was to convey bodies from police vehicles
and St John vehicles, which ad been brought elsewhere in the ground, and
take them into the gym. This went on for about 45 minutes when we
collected our stretcher and positioned the vehicle around to the rear of
the gym where all the crews were collecting. It is here where we were
informed that all casualties had to be conveyed and all that was left to do
was to transport the dead to the Medico Legal Centre after they had been
identified. A majority of the crews were stood down leaving my colleague
and I, and also 4 other vehicles and crews.

At approximately 1830 hours we were instructed to go to the Northern
General Hospital and transfer the bodies of the victims back to the
Northern General. There were 11 in all; 3 of which we transferred. We
then returned to the ground and were told to standby.

From approximately 2100 hours onwards the relatives of the victims began to
arrive and when three bodies had been identified, we conveyed them to the
medico-legal centre. This went on until 0200, conveying 24 bodies in all,
when we were relieved by another crew and told to return to station.

We left Hillsborough at 0215 and returned to Hoyland.   We cleaned the
vehicle and equipment and signed off duty at 0300 am.
