                  states :


1.   I was born on 20th August, 1962.              I am an ambulanceman at

     SYMAS.

2.   SYMAS operate a three tier system for ambulances, namely

     emergency,       out-patients and part time - dedicated day

     transport.
3.   I have been an ambulanceman for three years, Initially I was

     part time.
4.   I became a full time ambulanceman In about December, 1988.

     For the part time training I attended a two week course at
     SYMAS H.Q., In Rotherham.

5.   When made up to full time I had an upgrading course of one

     week     again    at   SYMAS    H.Q.   This    gave   me   background
     Information and In addition to this I learned by "in service
     training".

6.   I presently work on out-patients               based   at Rotherham

     Ambulance Station.           In addition to this there are emergency

     vehicles in use.         I am able to cover emergency work with a

     Qualified Ambulanceman who has attended the six weeks

     training course in Leicester.

7.   In the last resort if all other vehicles are in use then two

     "unqualified"          out   patient   ambulancemen        can   attend

     emergencies.

8.   I usually work a rota system of :

     0900 to 1800 or
     0800 to 1630.

     There is also a floater system to cover the whole of the
         South Yorkshire area where required i.e. absences through

         holiday or sickness.
          In relation to major incidents there is a manual in each

         Station which gives detailed information of procedure for

         ambulancemen      in the event of being called to such an

         incident.
10   .   In accordance with usual practice I have read the major

         Incident Booklet.      This is drawn to your attention at the

         Station by the Station Officer.
11 . In addition to the Incident Booklet SYMAS also hold dry run
         events simulating Major Incidents although I personally have

         not been on one of these.


12 . I arrived for work that morning at about 0845 as far as I
         can recall and logged in for 0900.      The vehicle was call

         sign Romeo 553.
13.      It was a single handed ambulance for use by the driver only.

         All patients were "walking patients".      I did the normal

         checks on tyres and fluids.


14.      At approximately 1100 Control told me to proceed to Royal

         Hallamshire Hospital at Sheffield.        They wanted me to

         collect a patient and return him to his home near Stockport.

          I requested Control permission to return to Rotherham

         Station to fill up with petrol.      This is normal procedure

         when leaving the county.
15.   I collected      the patient    and took    him to his home In

      Stockport.     Having done this I returned to the Rotherham
      base.

16.   On my   return    I noticed     a lot of   football   supporters

      travelling to Sheffield.        As soon as I returned within

      radio contact I told Control of my position.            I cannot
      recall the exact time but I would estimate I returned to
      base between 1415 and 1430.

17.   The afternoon crew received a call to go to Hillsborough.

      They mentioned something to the effect that there was
      probably crowd trouble.

18.   Sometime later at the Station I noticed one of our Officers,

      Mr             come round the corner.      I went to meet him and
      he informed me that there had been a Major Incident at
      Hillsborough and would I accompany him.

19.   I secured the Station and accompanied Mr                  in the

      Duty Range Rover.    Mr            is Station Officer at Maltby

      Ambulance Station.

20. I cannot recall the exact time but it was on or shortly
      after 1500.

21. We got into the range Rover and came to SYMAS H.Q.              Mr

      Bettison called in and got some equipment.        He got back in

      and we then went back to Rotherham Ambulance Station which

      is about 900 yards away.        We parked up and got the Major

      Incident Vehicle.

22.   We came back to SYMAS H.Q. in the Major Incident vehicle.

      Mr            called in SYMAS H.Q. again and then we set off




                                 $3
      for Hillsborough.

23.   We were on red proceeding at speed.           We approached the

      Hillsborough ground at the Penistone Road entrance by the
      gymnasium.

24.   As we approached there were a lot of supporters leaving the

      ground.      There were a lot of police at the gymnasium

      entrance to the ground who directed us straight in.
25.   We parked up to keep the exit clear and Mr             |said for
      me to stay with him.

26.   As   I got out of the Major         Incident vehicle I saw an

      ambulanceman with Sierra 408 vehicle.        He asked if I was
      free as he was on his own.

27.   As far as I was aware he had come in off duty and brought a

      vehicle down single handed.       He was not in uniform.
28.   He said he had three stretcher casualties in the back and
      would I assist.

29.   I said     that   as   he was   a Qualified Am bulanceman   for

      emergencies he should go in the back and I would drive the
      vehicle.

30.   I drove the vehicle and we had a police-motor cycle escort

      and there was a Derbyshire ambulance in front.

31.   We went to Northern General Hospital Casualty Department at
      speed.

32.   On arrival at the Northern General Hospital we were met by

      medical staff who helped unload and assist casualties.

33.   While I was helping there was a man who I assume to have

      been a Senior Doctor who said that he did not want any more
      casualties as they were overloaded.

34.   He asked    that   all   future casualties     go to the Royal

      Hallamshire Hospital.      As far as I can recall that message
      also came over the radio from Control.

35.   We came down Herries Road south and back to the Gymnasium

      entrance.    On arrival at the gymnasium there were tow to
      three ambulances waiting on Penistone Road and a Senior
      Ambulance Officer on duty directing them.

36.   The vehicles were reversing in to ease loading and so that

      they could leave immediately.
37. We parked up and both went into the gymnasium.           On entering

      the gymnasium I realised        that   I had   the   keys   to the

      ambulance and could have been blocking somebody in.
38.   I went straight back to the vehicle.            On return it was

      already loaded up with       three casualties.          Two were

      unconscious with drips and the other was a young police
      officer with crush injuries.

39.   I did not have time to go back to look for my        assistant and

      I therefore shouted to Leading Ambulanceman                 who was
      nearby and also from Rotherham Station.

40.   I asked if he could attend to the casualties for me while I

      drove to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.             I know from
      working with him that he is a Qualified Paramedic.

41.   We turned right into Penistone Road and straight to the

      Royal Hallamshire casualty.      We again had a police escort

      bike.   On arrival we were met by helpers including medical

      staff who were loading and transferring patients onto their
      own trolleys.               then contacted       Control to get

      Instructions and to say we were green (clear).

42.   Control      asked us to go to Herrles Road Bus Depot and
      standby.

43.   On arrival      at the Herrles   Road    Bus   Depot there were
      ambulances from :

      Nottinghamshire,      South Yorkshire,     West Yorkshire and
      Derbyshire.

44.   There were two Senior Ambulance Officers present who told us
      to standby.     There were approximately 25 vehicles.
45.   We waited approximately 30 minutes.            The Senior Officer
      told all vehicles from outside the region to return to their
      areas.

46.   All South Yorkshire vehicles were asked to proceed to the
      gymnasium car park.

47.   On arrival another Senior Officer, Mr Jones, the Assistant

      Chief, got all crews out of vehicles to speak to us.

48.   He asked for all evening rota staff to go back to base and
      continue with normal emergency duties.             He asked   for

      volunteers of the day staff to stay back and help.

49.   We were asked to go to the hospitals to collect the        bodies

      that had been certified dead       and    return    them to the
      gymnasium.

50.   I waited at the gymnasium with                      On return of

      the ambulances with the bodies I helped to unload them.

51.   There were between 11 and 14 bodies from NorthernGeneral

      and I think 1 from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.




                                  86
52.   The Senior Officers then instructed the crews that only

      three need remain and the others could return to base.

53.   We were told that we would be required to assist until the

      end of the incident and that this would take some time.     We
      agreed to stay back and help.

54.   The relatives would attend to identify the bodies and as

      soon as there were three bodies identified we would load

      them up into the ambulances to transfer to the Medico Legal

      Centre in Sheffield.    On each occasion there would be one
      police officer for each body who signed for it at the Medico
      Legal Centre.

55.   We continued until about 0200 on Sunday 16th April, 1989.
56.   We were told at that time to contact Control when clear     at

      the Medico Legal Centre and unless told otherwise to return

      to base.   I was dropped off a Rotherham Station and signed
      off at 1445.


                 K
Dated this   0 5“ day of         1989.




                                 V
