I                         born 23.8.63 am 25 years old.   I am

employed as Personal Secretary to Mr.Page and also as Public
Relations Officer by SYMAS.   I am based at Rotherham.



I normally work office hours 0900 to 1700 hours Monday to

Friday. On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was at my home when at
about 1510 I took a telephone call from a control room

assistant.    She asked If I would speak to Mr.Clarke,        I

agreed and Mr.Clarke spoke to me.


He   said control were    receiving   a lot of press calls

regarding an Incident at Hillsborough,     so I asked If he

would like me to go In he said yes, so I went at once.


I went Into control and as I entered I saw Mr.Clarke opening

the Incident room. I did not go into the control room but

into the incident room.


At that time we knew it was a major incident, but we were

not aware of exactly what it was.       My first job was to
contact Mr.Page at the request of Mr.Clarke.    Mr.Page was at

home when I rang him and he came in at once.



Mr.Clarke asked me next to contact off duty control room
staff.   I obtained a list from                she was already

contacting control officers to inform them of the incident.
7.    I think I contacted three members of staff b e f o r e c a m e

      and took the list.   She had contacted all officers and then

      began to contact the assistants.       It would be about 1530 by

      this time.



8.    I remained in the incident room for the next four hours or

      so taking press calls almost non stop.


9.    All the information I gave out, whether it was confirmed or

      unconfirmed was with the authority of Mr.Page.            As he
      obtained more details and they were confirmed he gave them

      to me, if they were to be released.


10.   I remember at one time, it would be about 1730 there were so
      many calls coming in that the switchboard was           getting

      blocked so for about two hours a colleague and I were

      engaged in taking press calls.


11.   A press conference was arranged for Mr. Page at about 1930

      and I contacted as many members of the press as I could to

      tell them of this.     The conference was held and at about

      2015 Mr.Page told me I could leave.



Dated the                  day of   ITIg j             1989
