               - AMBULANCEMAN - BARNSLEY AMBULANCE STATION


Date:   20.4.89

Time:   1135-1210

Duty:   0900-1630

Call Sign:    B1101

Crewed with


We became green at BDGH A/E at 1515 during this case we had heard the build
up to the incident.

The Control Officer told us to proceed Red to Sheffield Wednesday Football
ground. He also said that there were some injured and some fatalities.

It took us approximately 12-15 minutes to get there. On the way we asked
if we were required on ERC because it was quite hectic stay on Channel 2.

We had trouble reaching the ground due to the traffic and number of people.
We pulled into the gym entrance, one other ambulance was already there.

Getting out, about 7-10 patients were laid around. Someone was with each
patient and all the bystanders were calling us to go to their patient.

We checked four or five each and chose the two with the most obstructed
airways and difficulty breathing. These were loaded onto the ambulance.

QAM        |
           w as assisted by WPC   ~|in treating the patients, oxygen from
the flowmeter was used on one patient.

I used the pneu-pac on my patient and established a better airway.  I
quickly instructed a friend who was coming with us on how to hold the
oxygen mask.

While this was going on, our ambulance was reversed out of the way.  I made
one last check on my patient and asked QAM        if it was okay to go and
jumped into the driving seat proceeding on red to NGH with a police escort.

Both patients were showing slight improvement. On reaching NGH about six
ambulances were already there and things were a bit hectic. As I walked
through the cas doors a doctor checked both patients and instructed us to
take them both into a resuscitation area. We both handed over the history
to the staff.

After handover we returned on red to the ground. We got back to the
ground, several ambulances were already there and queing up to the gym
entrance.
SHEET 2 -              - AMBULANCEMAN - BARNSLEY AMBULANCE STATION


At the front of the queue Superintendent Dale told us to reverse up to the
gym entrance.

A patient was waiting for us, so we loaded a patient with a dislocated left
knee and a walking patient with slight cuts to the head.

With having three seats empty I asked Superintendent Dale if there were any
more patients, he sent me to ACMAO Jones, who at that time I couldn’t find.

So I went to the Casualty clearing post and asked an L/A if there were any
more patients. He said as far as he knew there were no more patients -
1715.

So we told Control what patients we had on and he said that the Northern
General Hospital couldn't cope with any more and to go to the Royal
Hallamshire Hosptial.

Although these patients were not "life or death" we had a police escort due
to the number of people outside the ground.

We arrived at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and were instruced to go in
through the orthopaedic doors where the patients were handed over. We then
reported Green to Control.

He said go round to B road at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and report in
there to Standards and Efficiency Officer

            had arranged transfers from F ward to King Edwards Hospital.
Two stretcher cases were transfered to C and D wards at King Edwards
Hospital. We reported green approximately 1845 where we were told to
return to base and stand down.
