ATTENDANT AMBULANCEMAN


Vehicle:   B1101      Shift:   0900 - 1630   Drivers




Hillsborough Disaster - 15th April 1989


The times related to this resume are approximate.


Incident Recognition


At around 1505 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, I witnessed the
Hillsborough incident on television at the Keresforth Centre.      We were
collecting a patient for casualty.      When we arrived at Barnsley District
General Hospital, control said get clear as soon as possible.      Then I
realised what was happening.


Mobile


At around 1520 hours control sent us to Hillsborough.      I enquired about ERC
after hearing a message that all vehicles should change to 1 who were en
route to Hillsborough.     Control said to stay on out-patient channel 3 as
ERC was packed out.


Preparation


I went in the back on the ambulance and set the oxygen, Pneu-Pac and
suction up to save time and we donned yellow jackets.      We arrived at
Hillsborough at around 1535 hours - a 15 minute journey.


Arrival


On arrival Police flagged us over the central reserve and down the wrong
side of the road to the gymnasium entrance (our carriageway was blocked by
busses).   As we arrived, a Sheffield vehicle was leaving on red (__________
was driving).   We were pointed into the forecourt outside the gymnasium
area by Police and I noticed a Middlewood vehicle already inside.      Several
Ambulanceman




patients were scattered across the tarmac, some on advertising-stretchers,
Some patients were unconscious and needed looking at straight away.       My
driver,                checked around some of the patients, while I was
pointed towards one that was in great difficulty.


Patient (hie


He was laid in the recovery position but having trouble breathing, it was
irregular and noisy.    A Policewoman was in attendance and she was very
worried.     I learned she had resuscitated the man by E.A.R. three times up
until now.     I attempted to get the Portex airway out in order to do a
finger sweep, but found his jaw to be locked solid as in a fit.       I left the
airway and decided to move the patient to the Ambulance.       Police and myself
carried him on an advertising stretcher.      The York 4 nearside stretcher was
unloaded.     I arranged a row of Police either side of the patient and when I
ordered the lift, the stretcher was placed underneath.      We (     and myself)
loaded the stretcher and the Policewoman offered to come with us.       At this
point        shouted "can we carry another stretcher" pointing at a young lad
in respiratory distress and fitting.       I said yes I could handle them both.
I then invited the Policewoman in.     The second patient was loaded.


Patient 2


After putting my first patient on full oxygen and adjusting his position to
ensure a good airway, I asked the Policewoman to hold the mask over his
face.     I did not use the elastic as I knew I would be removing the mask
occasionally.         was showing two friends of the second patient how to
apply the Pneu-Pac.     This patient was taking deep gasps then arching his
back.     I suspected internal injuries.    I asked them if he was OK from the
outside, ie broken bones, wounds.     At this point I had not seen this
patient.     He appeared to have no outside injuries.    I insisted that they
Ambulanceman


kept the mask over his face all the way to hospital.     They were glad to
help.


Departure


Now one of the Middlewood drivers backed us out into the street, then
took over and under Police escort we headed for the Northern General
Hospital.    This was around 1545 hours.


Priorities


My priority patient was still the one on the nearside.     I was considering
using the bag and mask over his own intermittent breathing.     I used suction
to clear the airway and the Policewoman helped.     I checked pupil reaction
to light which was slow, colour was blush but improving.     After clearing
the airway with suction, I left him on full oxygen and checked for signs of
internal bleeding.     I could not find any.


Nearer Hospital I found the patient was releasing his grip on the Portex
airway and I was able to remove mucus by hand.     Also Capillary Nail Bed
reaction was improving and pupil reaction to light was faster.


Hospital Arrival


We arrived at the Northern General Hospital around 1550 hours.     By this
time the nearside patients colour was pink and pupil response was
spontaneous due to the saturating of 0£» the Policewoman was much relieved
by this, I shall never forget her face, she had saved his life.


The offside patient was unloaded first, I said there was no panic over my
patient now.         passed over information on his patient, I unloaded mine,
we both went into Resuscitation.     I cleared more mucus from mjr patient who
Ambulanceman




has now spit his airway out.    I said to the Policewoman that’s what we have
been waiting for! she was very moved.


After handing the patient over, we got two stretchers, not ours, and
control sent us back to the incident.    I never saw the Policewoman again.


Second Visit - 1410 hoars


When we arrived for the second time we queued with other vehicles.     Station
Officer Eason and Trevor Dale were working a system of backing vehicles
into the gymnasium entrance and releasing them, then letting some more in.
While we queued I think it was Paul Eason who asked for our body bag.        I
gave it to              who had a lot more.


Patient Three


When we backed into the entrance, the St. John brought us a patient on a
wire stretcher with ?dislocated knees.    We loaded him on the nearside
stretcher and I showed him how to use the Entonox which he took.


Also a walking wounded patient with blood running from his left ear was
loaded.   I was unsure if this was more serious than it looked.    Also a
Batemoor ambulanceman got on, he said he had been kicked around in the
stomach by fans.   The ambulanceman was on duty.    At this point, all our
blankets were taken by an officer.


Royal Hallaashire Hospital


When we left the scene, control said "do not go to the Northern General
because it was full, go to the Royal Hallamshire.     Police escorted us
there.    I noted the times but I cannot remember them.   The stretcher case
was also epileptic and I passed all information on to the Doctor at the
Ambulanceman




Royal Hallamshire Hospital.   The entrance we used was the Fracture
entrance.


Transfers


After this control said see                 about some transfers from F2 to
King Edwards.   I said we could manage two stretchers if we pushed one each.


We went to B road then to the ward, loaded the patients and went to King
Edwards, informing control of all steps.    We were clear there about 1845
hours.   Control sent us back to station.


On arriving at base I said to control "Well done all you in there" and
control said "well done to all you out there".         and I booked off duty
around 1910 hours.
