Trent Regional Health Authority

Notes of a meeting held on Tuesday, 2nd May 1989 at the Regional
Conference Centre to discuss action taken by the hospitals and Ambulance
Service involved with the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April 1989______

PRESENT:

Trent Regional Health Authority

Dr R Alderslade (Chairman)   Director of Public Health Medicine/Regional
                               Medical Officer
Mr   J   A Costley           Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
Mr   F   J Kenny             Assistant Regional General Manager (Admin)
Mr   D   Hull                Regional Public Relations Officer
Mr   J   D Evans             Regional Solicitor
Mr   A   J Callaghan         Solicitor to the RHA
Mr   A   G Chappell          Solicitor to the RHA
                             Assistant Secretary (General Administration)
                             Secretary to RHEPO

Sheffield Health Authority

Mr A Mapplebeck              District General Manager
Mr K Thornton                Deputy District General Manager
Miss D Hallatt               Solicitor to Sheffield HA

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

Mr   A   Page                Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
Mr   A   Hopkins             Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer
Mr   D   Jones               Assistant CAO (Operations)
Mr   A   Smith               Assistant CAO (Control and Communications)

Northern General Hospital

Mr N     S McKay             Unit General Manager
Miss     R A Dando           Director of Nursing Services
Mr J     Wardrope            Consultant in Accident and Emergency
Mr C     L Welch             Consultant Vascular Surgeon

Royal Hallamshire Hospital

Mr D     H Baldwin           Unit General Manager
Miss     C Boyd              Assistant Matron
Dr D     L Edbrooke          Consultant Anaesthetist
Mr D     G Ferguson          Consultant in Accident and Emergency
Mr D     Hockey              Senior Registrar in Accident and Emergency

Barnsley Health Authority

Mr R Akroyd                  District General Manager
Mr P Eaglesfield             Unit General Manager, Barnsley District General
                               Hospital
                                   -   2   -
                                                                                   %



1.   Dr Alderslade opened the meeting by welcoming those present and thanking
     them for attending.    He wished to make it clear at the outset that the
     purpose of the meeting was not to find fault and apportion blame but to
      establish a common understanding of the main structure of events on the
     day and to identify issues and details, which could be learned from and
      fed back into future planning and management.

2.   Despite the fact that he had been in post for only a short time, this was
      unfortunately the second occasion he had been involved with the aftermath
      of a major disaster, the first one being, of course, the Kegworth air
      crash.   A similar debriefing meeting had followed this and proved to be
      extremely useful to all concerned.    There were differences, however, in
      that on the previous occasion there were more participants from three
     Health Authorities involved.     For this reason, it had taken some time to
      put together a report but this was now in final draft form and would be
      presented to the RHA in June.    The meeting was being minuted and a
      similar report would be prepared following Hillsborough.     There would
      be an opportunity for the agencies involved to comment on the draft
      report.   One major difference, of course, was that a formal Judicial
      Inquiry was to be held into events at Hillsborough.

3.   Mr Evans was invited to explain the involvement of the legal
     representatives who were present.   He explained that firstly, because of
     the Judicial Inquiry, it was necessary for the parties to be legally
     represented so that any criticism could be properly answered.    There was
     also, of course, the possibility of future claims from those involved or
     their relatives.   The main purpose of the presence of the lawyers was to
     listen and learn and those present should not feel inhibited to speak
     freely.

4.   Dr Alderslade outlined the responsibility of the Regional Health
     Authority.   Firstly, there was its strategic role in determining that
     all DHAs had satisfactory plans for dealing with emergency situations.
     Secondly, it was the managing authority for the SYMAS and BTS, although
     in this case there was little involvement of the latter because of the
     nature of the injuries.   He also referred to the duty imposed by
     Circular HC(77)1 to conduct a debriefing and prepare a comprehensive
     report for the Regional Health Authority and the Department of Health.
     Before seeking reports from the parties concerned, Dr Alderslade paid
     tribute to all those involved at an operational level, who had responded
     so magnificently and to whom a great deal of credit was due.   Despite
     this, however, he stressed there would inevitably be issues from which
     Authorities could learn and in so doing improve their plans.

5.   Mr Mapplebeck expressed his reservations about the timing of the meeting,
     for he felt that as it was only two weeks after the event, the various
     parties were not ready to participate fully.   There had been anxieties
     about the legal advice they had received about the implications on
     debriefing discussions of the forthcoming Judicial Inquiry.   He was very
     concerned that the two hospitals and SYMAS had not had the opportunity to
     discuss the events of the day.   It was vital that this should and would
     take place.   For this reason, detailed reports were not yet ready and
     the meeting, therefore, would not be conclusive.

6.   Dr Alderslade replied that it was felt necessary to hold a debriefing
     quicker than it had been possible to arrange following Kegworth,
     particularly as there was to be a Judicial Inquiry.   The intention of
*




          this meeting was to discuss matters at a strategic level and fuller and
          more detailed reports could be produced when the individual parties were
          satisfied with them.

    7.    In answer to a question about the implications of Lord Justice Taylor's
          decision to refuse the Health Authority's application to be legally
          represented, Mr Evans confirmed that the Health Authority had the right
          to make a further application to be represented, at one or both parts of
          the Inquiry, to protect the legitimate interests of the Authority.

    8.    Mr Page was then invited to make a report on the involvement of SYMAS.
          He began by stating that following the Bradford fire, SYMAS had drawn up
          its own action plan to deal with similar major incidents, part of which
          was a decision to have an ambulance presence at all football grounds in
          South Yorkshire on a voluntary basis.    Although the officers were paid,
          this was without any financial help from the clubs.    Although there was
          no statutory obligation to be involved, SYMAS had made an approach to all
          football clubs in South Yorkshire.    The clubs had been slow to respond
          to the SYMAS initiative but, so far as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
          was concerned, two stand tickets were normally provided.    These were
          withdrawn, however, for major matches, as in this instance, and the two
          liaison officers were stationed at pitch level.    Mr Page then gave a
          brief factual report of the involvement of SYMAS.    A copy is attached
          (Appendix A).    Mr Page mentioned briefly the problems encountered by the
          ambulances entering the ground.    The only access to the pitch, via the
          Penistone Road entrance by the side of the North Stand was very
          restricted and many vehicles were damaged trying to get in.    These
          problems were exacerbated by parked police/other vehicles and, therefore,
          the waiting ambulances had to line up on Penistone Road.    He explained
          that before the 15.08 call from the police the staff of the standby
          vehicle (already at the ground) were attending to a leg injury at pitch
          level.   Following the police request, when the second standby vehicle
          arrived at C gate at the Leppings Lane end there was no indication of the
          scale of the problem.    Within minutes, however, the crew was surrounded
          by the crowd and more ambulances arrived.    At 15.23 hours Mr Hopkins had
          arrived at the Penistone Road entrance.    It was difficult to see what
          was happening at the Leppings Lane end because of the line of police
          separating one end of the pitch from the other.    It was not until Mr
          Hopkins had managed to get through the police line that the nature and
          scale of the problem became apparent.    It was then apparent that there
          were two incidents - one inside the ground and one outside.

    9.    Those present   were then invited to put questions to Mr Page.

    10.   Mr Ferguson, Consultant in Accident and Emergency, referred to the
           statement in the SYMAS report that a request had been made to the Royal
           Hallamshire Hospital to supply a medical team and stated that it had not
           been possible to trace receipt of such a request.   Mr Page confirmed
           that a call had been made on the direct link line, which existed with
           both hospitals, to the casualty sister and, in line with normal practice,
           the call was taped.

    11.   In answer to a question from Mr Wardrope, Consultant in Accident and
          Emergency, Mr Page confirmed that in line with their action plan
          (referred to above), the first wave of casualties was transferred to the
          Northern General Hospital because of its proximity to the Sheffield
          Wednesday football ground.
                                                                                    /


                                    _   4   -




12.   Reference was made to the difficulty being experienced by the hospital
       staff in approximating timings of various events.   Mr McKay asked
      whether there was a transcript available of the call timed at 15.38 to
       the Northern General Hospital requesting a medical team giving more
      detail.    Mr Page explained that because of the size of the task in
      obtaining more than 100 statements from staff and making transcripts of
       the calls, it had not yet been possible to obtain this information.

13.   Mr Page reiterated that by 15.19 hours, it was made clear to SYMAS that
      the police had informed both hospitals of the incident.   He also made
      the point that doctors, nurses and other staff had inundated SYMAS with
      calls offering help and seeking more information because they could not
      get through to hospitals.   In so doing all the lines were blocked.

14.   On the subject of communication, Mr Hopkins was asked whether he had been
       carrying mobile communication equipment.   In reply it was stated that
       the two liaison officers mentioned previously were in possession of radio
       links.   It was acknowledged, however, that there were problems with
       radio communication inside the ground.


15.   Mr Ferguson asked what mode of transport would be sent to pick up medical
       teams, once they had been requested.    Mr Page stated that one of the
       ambulances bringing in casualties would be earmarked to transport the
       team back.    Mr Ferguson then asked what the involvement of the Ambulance
       Liaison Officer had been and whether use had been made of one of the
       direct lines.    It was confirmed that            |had been at the Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital throughout the incident but that she had had
       difficulty getting the use of a telephone.

16.   Mr Mapplebeck referred to the two main issues which had been identified
      so far.   The first was the fact that it had not been possible to trace
      receipt of the request at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital to supply a
      medical team.   The second associated issue was that it appeared that the
      "incoming" ambulance which had been earmarked for collecting the medical
      team did not appear to have reported as such at the Royal Hallamshire
      Hospital.   Mr Mapplebeck stated that this had caused a great deal of
      frustration at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital since there were a number
      of doctors waiting to assist, because they knew the Northern General
      Hospital was taking the initial pressure.   Mr Page undertook to check
      exactly what instructions had been given to the "earmarked" ambulance
      team.

17.   Discussion then took place on the two quite different roles of the site
      medical team and the site medical offer.   Mr Ferguson stated that the
      role of the SMO had been excluded from their major disaster plan in 1988
      since there was a general consensus that, in an urban setting like
      Sheffield, it was far better to bring casualties to hospital as soon as
      possible in order to have the full range of back-up expertise and
      equipment.   SYMAS concurred with this view.   Mr Wardrope added,
      however, that following the Kegworth air crash, 20 sets of equipment (IV
      drips etc) were kept in readiness at the Northern General Hospital.

18.   Mr Mapplebeck felt that the issue of the definition and role of the SMO
      might warrant further discussion, especially in view of the adverse
      comments by Dr Ashton.   Mr Costley replied that the Department had been
      pressed to change the Circular to clarify this issue but no movement had
                                    -   5   -




      yet been made nationally.   In answer to a question as to why site
      medical teams had been requested, Mr Page replied that they were required
      to certify death so as to avoid as far as possible DOAs at the hospitals.

Sheffield Health Authority

Northern General Hospital

19.   Mr McKay, Unit General Manager, presented a brief factual account of
      events on the day (Appendix B).   He explained the initial difficulties
      experienced because of the instructions by the police to "stand by".
      Further confusion was caused by the fact that the message referred only
      to "Hillsborough" and no mention was made of the actual football ground.
      Referring to the fact that the Northern General Hospital had received the
      first wave of casualties, although they had coped well he stated because
      of the volume of casualties they had eventually had to request SYMAS to
      convey patients directly from the scene to the Royal Hallamshire
      Hospital.   He added that they had been surprised by the fact that SYMAS
      had requested a medical team to be sent since the Northern General
      Hospital had been first on call and the plan provided for the second
      on-call to provide a mobile team.   Nevertheless two doctors had been
      dispatched.

20.   Communications between the two hospitals had been good and regular
      contact had been maintained.  (The plan provided for the Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital to assume "District" control.)   Because of the
      media coverage of the event, many staff has reported for duty without
      being asked.

21.   One of the main difficulties was dealing with the volume of relatives and
      friends who came to the hospital seeking information, many of whom stayed
      from the afternoon right through the night.   A cafeteria had been
      provided and social workers and chaplains had provided good support.

22.   The media, which had arrived quickly and in force, were ably shepherded
      by the Assistant Public Relations Officer and the only real problems had
      involved the foreign press.

23.   Discussion then turned to the visits to the hospital by the many VIPs.
      Their presence had been welcomed as a boost for the morale of both
      patients and staff.   It was acknowledged, however, that a balance had to
      be struck between this and too many official visits by dignitaries, which
      in time could become counter productive.   Dr Alderslade explained the
      reaction to VIP visits previously experienced by the District Health
      Authorities involved in the Kegworth incident.

24.   In answer to a question about the setting up of the police casualty
      bureau, Mr McKay experienced difficulty in recalling the precise timing
      although he knew that the police had had difficulty in reaching their own
      control.   It was agreed that there would need to be a joint meeting with
      the police to discuss a number of important issues, including the
      identification difficulties.

Royal Hallamshire Hospital

25.   Mr Baldwin, Unit General Manager, likewise presented a brief factual
      account of events on the day (Appendix B).   Their experiences were very
      similar to those of the Northern General Hospital.
                                    -   6   -




26.   Before the cascade system had been put into operation, many of the staff
      had reported in, having learned of the tragedy from media reports.   He
      referred to the fact that in some ways it was fortunate that the incident
      had occurred on a weekend, because of the greater availability of beds
      and, of course, theatres.   There were more than sufficient surgical
      staff available but, because of the nature of the injuries, these were
      not required.   He emphasised, however, that further thought would have
      to be given as to how they would have been able to respond, had the
      incident occurred on a week-day.   As it was, the action taken by the
      hospital had been very satisfactory.

27.   They too had experienced difficulty in accommodating the large numbers of
      anxious friends and relatives, which gathered mainly in the Out-Patient
      Department.   The latter was manned by volunteers, who also provided food
      and drinks.   The same problems had occurred because of insufficient
      information about the deceased and injured and a larger police presence
      would have helped.   He added that the aftermath of dealing with bereaved
      and distressed relatives was very difficult and time consuming to manage.

28.   Communications had been greatly assisted by having the facility to
      by-pass the switchboard with a number of telephone lines and, therefore,
      maintain outside contact.

29.   Arrangements so far as the press was concerned had gone well.

30.   The view expressed by Mr McKay concerning the influx of VIP visitors was
      shared by Mr Baldwin.

31.   He confirmed that the process of debriefing was well underway.

32.   Dr Alderslade referred to the difference in the type of injuries
      sustained between this and the Kegworth incident, and asked whether there
      would have been any problems if more "hardware", chiefly ventilators, had
      been required.   He was informed that there had been no problems with
      shortage of ventilators although they had received many offers of more,
      had they been required.   Dr Edgebrook pointed out that in any event it
      would have been quite acceptable to "hand bag" patients for a sustained
      period of time if necessary.

33.   For his part, Mr Mapplebeck, District General Manager, Sheffield Health
      Authority, referred to the various elements of the major disaster plan
      including the role played by the bed bureau.   He also referred to the
      system at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital for transferring patients to
      other hospitals in Shjeffield so as to free beds.

34.   Again, on the question of the media, he felt that arrangements had worked
      well because of the presence of the PRO and his assistant.   The "pool"
      arrangements, whereby one TV crew acting on behalf of others had worked
      particularly well.

35.   He confirmed the view that discussions with the police were required,
      especially with regard to the need for more information about deceased
      and injured to be provided quicker on the day.   He referred to the fact
      that an ex-directory number for the hospital had evidently been released
      by an unknown source and they had been inundated with calls from anxious
      relatives and friends.
                                     -   7   -




36.   He stated that Social Services had responded well and had provided a 24
      hour service for two or three days. He felt, however, that this was an
      area which needed to be given more thought for the future.    Providing
      the physical space for the counselling service, both the bereaved and
      injured, had been a problem at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital although it
      had been possible at the Northern General Hospital to use the new
      geriatric unit.    It was understood thatSocial Services had set up their
      own major control centre.

37.   On the need for discussions with the police, Mr Costley confirmed that
      there had been no contact with the RHA on Hillsborough to date.    Mr Page
      reported that he had spoken to the Chief Constable who had informed him
      that for the time being information exchange had been restricted to the
      West Midlands Force who were conducting the Inquiry into the police
      action on the day.    It was unanimously agreed, however, that discussions
      should take place as soon as possible and Mr Evans confirmed that there
      should be no problem with the timing of this at the level being proposed.

38.   On the question of VIP visiting, Mr Mapplebeck felt that caution should
      be exercised in reaching conclusions since there were mixed views about
       the benefits.

39.   Further views expressed on the operation of the police casualty bureau
       confirmed there had been significant operational problems.   Mr Wardrope
      reported that one member of his staff had had to deal at home with 106
       calls from distressed relatives that night.   The fact that nothing had
      been known by NHS staff until the early hours of Sunday morning of those
       supporters detained in police cells had significantly exacerbated the
      problem.    Mr Thornton agreed that the role of the bureau needed precise
       definition and talks with the police were vital to improve the
       information flow in the event of a similar incident occurring.   What was
      needed was a single information point, a single list of casualties/deaths
       and their whereabouts.   Mr Costley stated that similar problems had been
      experienced in the Kegworth incident.    It was therefore necessary for
      shared training to be undertaken with the police to try to overcome these
      problems.    Altogether there were a number of issues requiring joint
      attention, some of which would need national initiatives to resolve.

40.   Mr Page outlined difficulties which had been experienced regarding
      liaison with the police force.   It appeared police communications inside
      and outside the ground had not been satisfactory and he pointed out that
      several decisions of the ambulance service had been countermanded by the
      police eg redirecting ambulances to Leppings Lane instead of Penistone
      Road - the only access point to the ground.

41.   Mr Ferguson briefly outlined the work already done over a period of time
       in conjunction with the police at Snig Hill.   It was agreed, however,
       that no firm plans could be made without first talking through all the
       issues with the police.   Mr Page pointed out that British Telecom had
       had practical problems in dealing with the influx of calls.   Because
       relatives had not been able to contact the emergency numbers, many had
       travelled during the night and had reported to police stations seeking
       information.

42.   Reference was made to the confusion caused by the transfer of    a number of
       bodies (12) from hospital to the Medico Legal Centre and then   back to the
       gym at Hillsborough.
                                      -   8   -




43.   Reference was also made to the urgent need for stress counselling for
      many of the staff involved, including many experienced staff such as
      pathologists and ambulance personnel.      Mr Page referred to the good
       service already being provided by the Sheffield Occupational Health
       staff.   It. was stated that many psychologists, not all NHS staff, had
       been working hard since the incident to help in this regard.     Mr Costley
       reported that the Sheffield Social Services had set up a task group of
       some 180 psychologists from Nottingham, Liverpool and Sheffield to assist
       those involved in the tragedy, whether victims, relatives or carers.

Barnsley District General Hospital

44.   Mr Akroyd, District General Manager of Barnsley Health Authority,
      presented a report on the involvement of Barnsley District General
      Hospital (Appendix C), which although peripheral, had triggered their
      major disaster plan.

General

45. The question as to who should activate the major disaster plan was
     considered.   It appeared that on the day the police had done this and
     informed the ambulance service who accepted it.   It was agreed that it
     was open to any of the emergency services to "push the button" but
     everyone acknowledged that this was always an issue since there was a
     natural hesitancy to set in train elaborate cascade systems.   In this
     case the problem seemed to be that the incident unfolded too slowly and
     it took some time for the gravity of the situation to be realised.

46.   Dr Edgebrook asked whether, in the event of a similar incident recurring,
      it would be practical to send casualties to the two hospitals
      alternately.   Mr Page explained that the difficulty was in getting
      vehicles through the crowd and the decision as to which hospital to take
      casualties was largely governed by whichever route was quickest.

47.   Mr Wardrope reported that in a notice in the British Medical Journal, Dr
       Ashton was inviting evidence for the public inquiry.   Dr Alderslade
       informed the meeting that he had spoken to Dr Ashton soon after the press
       reports appeared.   It appeared that Dr Ashton had based his views on his
       limited observations on the day.

48.   In conclusion Dr Alderslade thanked everyone for attending and asked for
       sight of the fuller debriefings when they were complete.   In general the
       NHS response had been excellent and any issues requiring further
       discussion would be taken on board in due course and, if necessary,
       embodied in future emergency plans.
                                                                 APPENDIX A
Trent Regional Health Authority


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Report of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service


1.   Two Liaison Officers of Station Officer rank were based inside
     Hillsborough with radio communications well before the kick off.        It
     is our normal policy to have one or both Liaison Officers at every match,
     and both attend every major game.      The Liaison Officers were stationed
     at pitch level as for major matches the Club does not supply the tickets
     for the south stand which we normally receive.      In addition there was
     a fully equipped emergency ambulance with two crew members at the
     ground and another as back up at Middlewood Ambulance Station, a little
     under one mile away.      Both ambulances were specifically assigned to
     this match;   that is our usual procedure for major football matches
     at Hillsborough.


2.   The first notification received by SYMAS of any need for our
     involvement came at 1508 hours from Police Headquarters when a fleet
     of ambulances was requested to attend at the Leppings Lane entrance
     to the ground;     no notification of the nature of the incident was
     received.


3.   Within 15 minutes eleven SYMAS ambulances had reached Hillsborough.
     In total forty two ambulances attended, of which thirty one were
     SYMAS vehicles and eleven came from outside areas.      Most of these
     vehicles made several trips between the ground and the Sheffield
     hospitals.    In addition further vehicles were brought in from
     outside SYMAS and were put on stand by.


4.   A Divisional Superintendent arrived on the scene before 1515 hours,
     the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer and the Senior Duty
     Officer arrived at Hillsborough at 1523 hours and the Assistant Chief
     Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Operations) before 1600 hours.
5.    At 1519 hours SYMAS was informed by the Police that they had told the
      Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General Hospital of the incident
      at Hillsborough.   At 1520 hours, SYMAS informed Barnsley and Rotherham
      District General Hospitals that the incident had escalated and at
      1523 hours a Charge Nurse at the Northern General Hospital was verbally
      informed by a Leading Ambulanceman that a major incident had been

      declared.


6.    At 1536 hours the Royal Hallamshire were asked to supply a medical team.
      At 1538 hours the same request was made of the Northern General and at
      1540 hours of the Barnsley District General Hospital.    The medical
      teams from each of the Northern General and the Barnsley District
      General were taken to the ground by ambulance.


7.    The major incident vehicle arrived at the ground at 1540 hours.


8.    One hundred and seventy two casualties were taken to hospital by
      ambulance, initially to the Northern General and then to the Royal
      Hallamshire.   Two patients were taken to Barnsley District General

      Hospital.


9.    All casualties had been removed from Hillsborough by 1620 hours.


10.   Ninety four fatalities were   taken to the Medico Legal Centre in
      Sheffield, some after having been returned from the Northern General
      and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals.     The last of the fatalities left
      Hillsborough at 0528 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.


The incident was closed at 0530 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
                                                            APPENDIX B
MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE                                    ----------

                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                 H I L L S B O R O U G H    E M E R G E N C Y

        BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE TO THE
         HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989

 1   Activation of Maior Disaster Plan

     1.1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
         regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
         Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports.

     1.2 Northern General Hospital

        At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
        Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
        to ‘stand b y ’ as there was an incident with casualties at
        Hillsborough.     A further message was received at approximately 15.25
        hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the
        Northern General Hospital.     At approximately 15.27 hours the
        paediatric cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty
        from Hillsborough.     The ambulance driver stated that there, had been
        a major accident at the Football Ground.

     1.3 Charge Nurse Batty at the Northern General Accident and Emergency
         Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
         prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
         instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
         call-out cascade for a major disaster.

     1.4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
         approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
         to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

     1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs B Williams, Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
         and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
         implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to
         ‘stand b y ’ by the police.

     1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
         Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
         casualties.

     1.7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

        At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
        Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
        Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
        from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
        monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the
        receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
        Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
        Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
        anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At


                                      1
            approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room
            and, in response to a hospital staff enquiry, confirmed that a major
            alert was in being and the hospital duty Nursing officer notified
            switchboard which commenced cascade call out for staff in accordance
            with major disaster procedure.

    2   Accident and Emergency Department

        2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
            Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
            the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
            by approximately 17.30 hours.

        2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
            and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
            approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
            approximately 18.15 hours.

3       Site Medical Teams

        3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
            team to attend the site at approximately 15.45 hours.   The team,
            comprising two doctors, was collected by ambulance from the
            Northern General Hospital at approximately 15.55 hours (earlier
            response was not possible because of the volume of casualties in the
            Accident and Emergency Department).   The team was sent back on
            arrival at the Ground but the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was
            retained for use at the Ground.

        3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
            a request although it had put a team on stand by, ready to respond to
            any request to attend the site of the incident.   No ambulance
            reported to collect the team.

4       Patients Statistics

        4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
            Hospitals from the incident are as follows

                                              NGH           RHH             TOTAL

        Casualties brought
        to Accident & Emergency               88            71                  159

        Dead on arrival or died in
        the Accident & Emergency              11             1                   12

        Treated and discharged                21            45                  66

        Admitted                              56            25                  81

        Admitted to ITUs (included
        in total admissions above)            19             7                   26

        Subsequent transfers from ITU
        (for scans and neurological care)      7 to RHH      7 from NGH           7

        Subsequent deaths                      2             -                    2




                                        2
■5




         4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
             on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the
             Northern General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the
             Royal
             Hallamshire Hospital.

         4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
             District General Hospital.

     5   Hospital Responses

         5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
             proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
             the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
             District or in the inter-face with the other emergency services can
             be made for future planning.

         5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
             HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
             HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
             QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

         5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
             staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
             others involved in the disaster.

         5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles were:-

             5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
                   orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at
                   Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

             5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
                   transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
                   transfers were made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

             5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
                   for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
                   hospitals and to release staff for the district general
                   hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.

             5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
                   receive casualties if required.

             5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
                   Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
                   two district general hospitals.

             5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
                   with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
                   practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
                   Hospital to take medical emergencies.

             5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
                   Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
                   Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
                   ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
                   emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
                   hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until


                                         3
              9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
              confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
              Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.

6   Communications

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agencies

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
        social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.

8   Conclusion

    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        offers of help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the following:-

        Sunday. 16 April :

        Mr D Blunkett MP (to Northern General Hospital)

        Archbishop of Liverpool, the
        Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
        and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

        Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
        (accompanied by Mr I Patnick MP at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

        Chair of Liverpool Council          )
        Lord Mayor of Sheffield accompanied) Sunday RoyalHallamshire  Hospital
        by Councillor Clive Betts           )Monday Northern GeneralHospital
        Lord Mayor of Nottingham            )


        Monday. 17 April:

        Liverpool Football Team

        TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales




                                     4
          Tuesday. 18 April;

          HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital)

          The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

          Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party
          accompanied by Councillor Clive Betts


          Wednesday. 19 April:

          The Bishop of Hallam

          Nottingham Forrest Football Team


          Thursday. 20 April:

          Lord Justice Taylor

          Chief Constable Dear, West Midlands Police


          Tuesday. 25 April

          Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN




27 4 89




                                      5
                                                            APPENDIX C
                         BARNSLEY HEALTH AUTHORITY
                     BARNSLEY DISTRICT GENERAL HOSPITAL
                    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15TH APRIL 1969
             CALL OUT LOG AND CONTACT WITH EXTERNAL AGENCIES


APPROXIMATE TIME          DETAILS
Approx. 3.20 p.m.         Message taken by A & E Receptionist on the
                          Ambulance Control telephone to warn that casual­
                          ties were being taken to Sheffield Hospitals
                          as a result of a major accident that had occurred
                          and to warn Barnsley District General Hospital
                          that we may get the 'overflow'.   Sister Thistle-
                          wood in the A & E Department was notified.

Approx. 3.25 p.m.         Sister Thistlewood, A & E Department, telephoned
                          Sheffield Police Headquarters to confirm the
                          message.      Ulewere informed  we   were going on
                          standby for 'Operation Catastrophe' and to await
                          further instructions.     On receiving this infor­
                          mation Mr. Holmes, the Charge Nurse, informed
                          the Duty Nursing Manager and the Intensive Care
                          Unit.      He endeavoured to notify the Nurse
                          Manager for the A & E Department and the Senior
                          Sister who were both off duty and could not
                          be contacted.

                          Sister Thistlewood informed the  Consultant in
                          A & E Department at his home and the Hospital
                          Switchboard.

                          The Action Cards and telephone list of addition­
                          al staff were made ready in Sister's Office.

Approx. 3.^0 p.m.         Sister Thistlewood telephoned Ambulance Control
                          who were just about to inform us that 'Operation
                          Catastrophe'   was    in full swing.      Ide were
                          informed     that we would   receive overflow   of
                          patients     from Sheffield.    In the process of
                          the communications Sister Thistlewood informed
                          them of our Mobile Team if required.

Approx. 3.U5 p.m.          Sister  Thistlewood   informed  the   Switchboard
                           to put out full alert for the Hospital Major
                           Accident Plan and A & E Reception were notified.
                           The Nurse Manager, A & E Department, and Senior
                           Sister were telephoned again but were unobtain­
                           able and therefore the Charge Nurse on duty
                           assumed the role of the Nurse Manager and carried
                           out the duties as listed on the Hospital Major
                           Accident Plan Action Card.

                           Due to congestion the Telephonists were unable
                           to confirm the Catastrophe call with Sheffieldroltefc ’
continued

                    All staff who had been informed of standby were
                    informed of full alert during the process of
                    preparing the Department to receive casualties.

                    At this point extra Nursing Staff         (A & E Staff)
                    were contacted to come in.

                    In preparation of the A & E Department:

                    a)    Nursing Staff were allocated to take equip­
                         ment to Physiotherapy to prepare for minor
                         casualties.

                    b)    The A & E     Liard   patients   were   transferred
                         to Liard 29.

                    c) The A & E Waiting Area was cleared.

                    d) The Major Accident Equipment was           loaded onto
                       trollies ready for a call out.

Approx. ^.00 p.m.   Ambulance arrived to collect Mobile Team.   No
                    prior   warning  given but  this  was  quickly
                    assembled.

                    The Mobile Team consisted of Staff Nurse
                    Staff Nurse ______ and Dr. Qazi     (SHD          A   &   E
                    Department).

                    The   Mobile  Team   took  with   them  emergency
                    equipment to assist     on site with casualties
                    at the Hillsborough Football Stadium.  On arrival
                    at the Stadium the Mobile Team were directed
                    to the Gymnasium and on entering were informed
                    by a Co-ordinator that all the casualties had
                    been assessed and sent to local Hospitals.

                    They were advised to return to Barnsley District
                    General  Hospital   to  assist   there   with any
                    patients that would later be sent there.

                    □nee the Hospital Control Team had been set
                    up the Charge Nurse, Mr. Holmes, acted as Liaison
                    Officer and informed the Control Room of the
                    A & E roles.      Medical Staff began to arrive
                    in the A & E Department and were informed of
                    the situation with Mr. Ramnani, Consultant in
                    A & E, in control.    Senior Sister Idaite arrived
                    later and assumed the Nurse Manager role.

Approx. ^.00 p.m.   Duty General Manager arrived at the              Hospital
                    and established Control Room in the              Hospital
                    Committee Room in accordance with the            Hospital
                    Major Accident Plan.
                                    -   3   -




       Approx. i*.15 p.m.     Unit General Manager arrived at Hospital and
       onwards                together with Dr. Ghazi, Consultant Physician,
                              and Mrs. Jones, Senior Assistant Matron, formed
                              the Control Team.      The Unit General Manager
                              asked the Duty General Manager to act as Communi­
                              cation Officer and another Manager to act as
                              Press Officer in accordance with the Hospital
                              Major Accident Plan.

                              The Communication Officer contacted Police Head­
                              quarters in Sheffield to ascertain the number
                              of patients we might expect.     Informed by them
                              that we could expect 50+ walking injured.

                              Contact was made with the Police Officer on
                              the Hospital site, Sergeant           1, sited in
                              the Police Incident Room in the A & E Department.
                              He was asked to communicate with the Control
                              Team.

                              District  General Manager arrived    at     Hospital
                              and reported to Control Room.

       Approx.   it.5D p.m.   Three  patients   arrived   at   Hospital     (Minor
                 5.25 p.m.    Injuries).
                 5.27 p.m.
                              Control Room advised by Sergeant            that
                              we could expect 27 bodies and arrangements were
                              made for the Mortuary to receive them.     Later
                              told that no bodies were to be sent to us.

       Approx. 5.30 p.m.      Contact made by Unit General Manager with the
                              District  General Manager of Sheffield Health
                              Authority to ask whether Barnsley could offer
                              any assistance to Sheffield Hospitals.   District
                              General  Manager,  Sheffield  Health   Authority,
                              indicated that message received.    He would co­
                              ordinate any enquiries at Sheffield and would
                              personally communicate a message back as soon
                              as he was able to.

10 .   Approx. 6.30 p.m.      Stand down message received by the Nurse Manager,
                              A & E Department, from the Police.

11.    Approx. 6.^5 p.m.      Unit General Manager contacted District General
                              Manager,  Sheffield   Health  Authority,  to   be
                              advised that no assistance was required from
                              Barnsley but that it would be appreciated if
                              the Hospital would be prepared to be on standby
                              for normal emergency on take for North Sheffield
                              should assistance be required.     The Sheffield
                              Bed Bureau would be advised accordingly.     Unit
                              General Manager confirmed that Barnsley District
                              General Hospital would be prepared to help if
                              asked.
                                                                                        4




                                         -   U -


12.       Sunday 16th April 1909    Message received from Sheffield Bed Bureau that
          1D.DD a.m.               they were    'back to normal'   in Sheffield and
                                    that no further standby arrangement was required.
                                    Unit General Manager spoke personally to the
                                    Unit General Managers of the Northern General
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, and the Royal Hallamshire
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, to ask whether there was
                                    any assistance Barnsley District General Hospital
                                    could give.    Advice received was that no assis­
                                    tance was required and that they would let us
                                    know if this should be so.      An indication was
                                    however, given that the Intensive Care Department
                                    workload was heavy and it was conceivable that
                                    should there be further demand for Intensive
                                    Care facilities in Sheffield there may be a
                                    request for assistance from Barnsley. An indi­
                                    cation was given that all possible help would
                                    be given if requested.

                                   The  Duty  Consultant   Anaesthetist   Dr.  Gadgil
                                   was  contacted  who   confirmed  his   willingness
                                   to help if asked. The Consultant Anaesthetist
                                   in charge of the Intensive Care Unit, Dr. Lee,
                                   was contacted at home.     He confirmed he would
                                   give what ever help could be given if asked
                                   and subsequently visited the Hospital.

13.   Monday 17th April 1909        Senior   Assistant  Matron, B.D.G.H.,  contacted
      1D.DD a.m.                   the Senior Nurse at both the Northern General
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, and the Royal Hallamshire
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, to ask whether any Nursing
                                    assistance was required especially in specialist
                                    areas e.g. I.T.U. and/or Theatres.      Offer of
                                    help acknowledged but advised that they were
                                    coping well.




2U.U.B9
