ROGER MORLEY       born on 18th April 1947 states



1.     I am the Assistant Divisional Officer (Support Services) for

South    Y or k s h i r e   Metropolitan    Ambulance    Service,    whose

headquarters are situate at Heather Close of Moorgate Road,
Rotherham.



2.     I joined the West Riding County Ambulance Service at Maltby

on the 14th August 1967 and have completed 21 years service.              I
attended the West Riding Training Course in 1968 and attained the

standard Miller qualification.            Since 1968 I have attended many

supervisory training and Management courses including Block

release and Residential courses ,-fev-^the Trent Regional Health

Authority       First       Line   Su pervisors   Course which is held at
Markfield in Leicestershire.



3.     I have over 21 years experience of the Ambulance service and
for 8 years        I was an Ambulanceman and one year as            Leading

Ambulanceman at Maltby.              I then became aLiaison Officer and

transfered to Rother’              "rom 1976 to 1977 when I was appointed

Control Officer. In                 I was appointed Superintendent Officer

responsible for standards and efficiency and on 1st March 1988 I

was appointed Control Room Superintendent. On the 1st January

1989    I was appointed Assistant Divisional             Officer    Support

Services.


4.     I was a duty Officer during the weekend 14th to 17th April
1989 and my duty commenced at 1700 on the 14th.     From that time I

was on call should the Ambulance headquarters need to contact a
Senior Officer that weekend.       I was    not contacted on Friday

evening or early Saturday morning and X had arranged to attend

the H.Q. on Saturday morning to meet a British Telecommunication
Engineer, who was installing a telephone in my office.        I was

conscious of the Cup Semi-final and of the problems which the
movement of vehicles in the North Sheffield area might cause for

Ambulances caught up in any congestion as a result of the match

at Hillsborough.     I had   been in Headquarters dealt with the
British Telecommunication Engineer and I was leaving the office

at 1130 hours just as Alan Hopkins the Deputy Chief was arriving.

I had earlier arranged to meet Alan at a bridge which overlooked

the Ml motorway for the purpose of evaluating the amount of
traffic and any problems which may be caused by congestion in and

around the area of Hillsborough, and to assess potential problem
areas for the movement of Ambulances in that same area.     I spoke

to Alan Hopkins in the ontranoo^to the Ambulance Station and

arranged to meet him at about 1300.


5.   I returned to the Ambulance station at approximately 1320 and

Alan Hopkins was not there.    I went to the control room and asked

where he was.   I was told Alan had gone out and I had a good idea

where he would be.     I climbed into David Jones', Range Rover,

which I had permission to use on Saturday the 14th April.         I

drove the Range Rover to the Ml and saw that Alan Hopkins was

                                      i,u
    parked in his Escort on the bridge which overlooks the motorway

    at the junction of Rotherway and Parkway.    I drove to where Alan
    Hopkins was parked and I parked behind him, left the Range Rover

    and spoke to him.     The time was now about 1330 or 1345 and he

    commented to me that things were very quiet.    We remained on the
    bridge over the Ml for a short time I then told Alan Hopkins that

    I was going to drive into Sheffield.    He drove away and I drove

    onto the Ml, travelled North and left the Motorway at junction 35

^   following the A269 into Chapletown.    I drove into Sheffield via
    High Green and Ecclesfield calling at the Northern General

    Hospital to check on the casualty department where I saw one of

    our vehicles but otherwise the department was very quiet.   I left
                                                         V
    the hospital grounds and drove -down Herries Road Soutm^        As I
    approached the .and-^I saw two Police v e h ic l es   outside   the

    Devonshire Arms^Public house.      Fans were being directed down

    Herries Road Soutti^ towards the Sheffield Wednesday Hillsborough
    ground.   The time was now approximately 1400 or 1415 and I
    decided not to drive down Herries Road knowing that I might run

    into problems because of the numbers of people attending the

    football match.     I knew there would be two Station Officers,

    Eason and Higgins inside the Hillsborough ground and my presence

    at the ground was not absolutely necessary as they were capable
    of overseeing the Ambulance in attendance.     It was their job as

    Liaison Officers to co-ordinate any problems outside the ground

    with the Police inside it.   I was responsible as Duty Officer for

    the whole County and I had to remain mobile and available to
    react to any situation which may arise and require my presence

    and I drove into the City centre and noticed that a lot of Police
    were on duty.        I then drove down Sheffield Parkway and made my
    way home.



    6.   At 1445 or 1450 I told my wife that I would return David's
    Range Rover because I believed that at about that time in the
    afternoon the vast majori"            ~                       :he Hillsborough

^   ground.      I left home to                                      approximately
    1450.      The drive from hom<                                   takes about 10

    minutes.      I was in Moorgate Road when           Station Officer Eason a

    Station Officer Higgins, was radioed by control who were asking

    why the Police wanted a fleet of Ambulances at Leppings Lane.                  I
    could only hear control on the radio in the Range Rover. I could
    not hear the reply.         The time was about 1505         and I was only a

    few hundred yards away from the Ambulance -station-r              I pulled into

    the Headquarters drive and was about to alight from the vehicle

    when Alan Hopkins raced towards me and indicated he would drive

    and I should move into the passenger seat and at the same time

    saying to me        "We've got some trouble at Hillsborough,                I'll

    drive".      I do not remember exactly what Alan Hopkins said to me

    in   the    Range   Rover    whilst       driving   at   speed    towards   the

    Hillsborough Football ground,             although I distinctly remember

    operating the siren and two tone horn whilst Alan concentrated on

    driving at speed via Sheffield Parkway,                  the City Centre and
    Penistone Road to the football ground.              I operated the radio and


                                                  412
Alan told me to get onto control and tell control to clear all

available vehicles, In case there was a need to call Ambulances
to the scene.   He wanted all available Ambulances to be clear of

any existing commitments and to be ready to respond and those

vehicles were to tell control as soon as they should become
green.   Green Is the code used to stand all available Ambulances
ready to respond to a request for assistance.     I heard control

broadcast the message to all Symas ambulances    on the emergency
channel -3rr



7.   All the ambulances are controlled by radio from the ambulance
■station and^ the control station" telephoned the other ambulance

stations to call upon any ambulances parked up but available and
on call although not mobile.



8.   I was aware that Alan Hopkins had been in the control room

when telephone messages had been received although I cannot

remember him telling me specifically what had been said, he

obviously knew more about the situation we were approaching than

I did and I recall there may have been   mention that there was a

crowd control problem at Hillsborough ground.



9.   During the last few hundred yards of the journey as we

approached the ground at speed Alan Hopkins said to me ’Why are

the ambulances going to Leppings Lane, Leppings Lane is not the
collection point.   They should have been going to the First Aid


                                     414-
         room at the gymnasium".



         10.   We arrived at Hillsborough at 1523     and followed two fire

         service vehicles along Penistone Road, one was the Fire services
         incident control vehicle and the other a tender.         I remember

         commenting on the fact that the Fire service had their incident

         control vehicle on Penistone Road and that it did not turn into
         the ground but continued on and passed the entrance to the

         Gymnasium presumably to attend the Leppings Lane end.    However we

         turned into the ground and concertina gates were opened to allow

         us in.   I think the journey time was probably as little as 10
         minutes but may have been 12 minutes and on arrival I noticed a

         large number of Police Officers who were waiting in the area to

         the west of the north stand and at least six Police Officers were
         mounted on horse back waiting very close to the vehicular access

         point onto the pitch.     Alan and I alighted from the Range Rover.

         Alan left me by the Range Rover and he went to speak to a Senior

         Police Officer   and following a short exchange with that officer
■****\
V- j he ran down the vehicular access slope and onto the pitch.         Alan

         had told me to stay with the vehicle and as he had disappeared

         onto the pitch I radioed control to confirm we had arrived at the

         Hillsborough ground.    I spoke to Duty controller              and

         instructed him to pass on the message that I required as many

         vehicles as possible to be made available for Hillsborough. Alan

         Hopkins told me to get as many vehicles to the ground as quickly
         as possible and I made a further call to control requesting as


                                              4if?
many vehicles as were able to attend immediately.



11.   I recall that an ambulance was parked in the entrance to the

ground off Penistone Road with its rear doors wide open    with no

cots and no staff and no one in attendance for several minutes.

The whole area of the entrance off Penistone Road was bedlam at

the time and there was an announcement on the Range Rovers radio
that the Hillsborough incident was a major incident and all

vehicles were to change to channel 1.   As the message was drawing

to a close Alan Hopkins returned and told me to " get that

Majax vehicle here" and I immediately relayed that message by

radio ^bo               the Duty Control Officer at the Ambulance
O*
station^    I acknowledged the message from control of a major
incident and requested the Majax vehicle.     I was told that the

Majax vehicle was already on its way to the incident         as   a

previous request had been responded to.       I recall that I was
                                   'cV*. fifths.
■apeaking-to- Station O f f i c e r that time.                was
the duty officer for the late shift from 1530 to 2400.    I again

requested as many vehicles as could possibly be called upon to

assist at Hillsborough to be directed to the ground immediately.

I told control there were many casualties and many fatalities. I

could see the casualties being brought past me and in front of me

on hoardings and at this time I was trying to ascertain how many

vehicles might be needed to cope with the number of casualties at

the ground.   I saw one of our vehicles coming off the pitch

having great difficulty getting a clear exit through the narrow
    vehicular access way and the Ambulance managed with difficulty to
    clear the obstacles and leave the ground.



    12.   I was conscious of the fact that one ambulance had had

    difficulties leaving the ground via the Penistone Road entrance

    and I considered this could become a problem.        The area was in

    total chaos,   people were running off the pitch looking into
    ambulances which were arriving,   filling them up with casualties,

^   some of whom were seriously injured and needed to be cleared from

    the ground immediately and some who were not so seriously injured

    who could probably be dealt with at the ground or wait to be
    cleared. Priority was given to the more seriously and critically

    injured.   There were a lot of police in the area but no one

    appeared to be in control of coordinating the efforts of the
    police force, the fire service or the ambulance service and I

    decided I would organise my own priorities for clearing the

    seriously and critically injured. I also attempted to introduce a
    system for incoming and outgoing ambulances which would allow

    them to clear the area quickly without congesting the access/exit

    off and onto Penistone Road.



    13.   I left the Range Rover to visit the North stand area First

    Aid room which was the collection point for the casualties to try

    and evaluate the true extent of the incident.



    14.   The spectators,   some of whom were       d i s t r a ug h t   were
physically manhandling me and around me there was               fighting

between the supporters whilst vehicles were moving in and out of
the ground.      I could see a lot of people moving to the north

stand carrying injured and dead people.



15.   Although I cannot recall the time I remember meeting Station

Officer Paul Eason and Station Officer Higgins in the north

stand/ Penistone Road area and Paul Eason told me that there were

a lot of fatalities at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.


16.   I was still trying to establish a casualty holding point in

the north stand/Penistone area.       I was particularly concerned
about the vehicles arriving and leaving from the Penistone Road

access/exit.     I was also concerned about the distribution of
equipment and my job was made extremely difficult because I was

inundated with requests to help people,       give advice,      hand out
equipment, direct able qualified volunteers to those areas where
assistance was needed most, whilst trying to keep the ambulance

flow as even and unhindered as possible.



17.   Although    I cannot   recall   the    time    I r e m ember being

approached by two men who told me that they were qualified

doctors and volunteered their assistance.           I sent them to the
north stand gymnasium where I knew they could help casualties or

certify    the   dead.    I was   also      approached     by   several

Nottinghamshire Ambulance service men who asked if they could
offer assistance and I sent those people to the North Stand

sports hall too.      My priority with the volunteers was to direct

them to give assistance to the living casualties and whilst I was

doing this I was constantly pulled,     jostled and man-handled by
distraught people.



18.     I tried to establish a routine and assess the severity of
the injured in order so that when an ambulance arrived I could

give priority to loading the more serious injuries and evacuating

them first.     I recall a St. John's Ambulance lady Superintendent
asked me to get an Ambulance immediately for a man who she said

was dying.      I recall I was able to load that particular casualty

onto an ambulance and evacuate him quickly.


19.   I was constantly aware that I needed to establish my own
p riorit i es   for   dealing with the overwhelming requests    for

assistance whilst marshalling the evacuation of casualties and
the movements of the Ambulances in a very confined area populated

by the police, fire service, the injured the grief stricken and

unsympathetic opposing fans.      The police were working extremely

hard and if I had a problem a policeman in the area intervened

and allowed me to get on with the job in hand and the police

comforted and dealt sympathetically with the many distressed

people in my immediate area.


20.   I was always conscious that ambulances were being stripped

                                       10
of their equipment as soon as the crews had left to attend to the

injured.


21.   The ambulances which I assisted in loading often left the

Penistone Road area carrying as many as seven casualties at a
time and this was done to evacuate as many casualties as possible
in the shortest available time to get them to the hospital which

could provide the treatment needed without delay and in the

circumstances I had no option, I needed to get the many injured

specialist treatment and the only way to clear the large number
of casualties was to utilise every available square foot of

ambulance space.


22.   I r em ember   being   asked by distraught   fans to get an
ambulance onto the pitch because two doctors were resuscitating a

casualty.   The access for the ambulances onto the pitch was

pitifully inadequate.     The access was narrow and the angle of
approach difficult with obstructions on either side which,

compounded by the number of fans in the area, made access to the

pitch extremely difficult and hazardous.     The ambulances needed

to use their sirens and two tone horns simply to get from the

arrival area onto the pitch and it was not a safe area for fans

or the ambulances.      At this time I was also liaising with the

police and fire services men who were on the scenea     Although I

had little contact with the St. John's Ambulance Brigade, I gave
what advice I could in the circumstances to the police and fire

                                      11
services and I did not,     apart from contact with the one St.
John's Ambulance Officer, speak to members of their brigade;-
they were themselves very busy.



23.   I was probably engaged in marshalling the casualties and
Ambulances and organising the distribution of equipment and
evacuation of injured whilst liaising with all services and

giving advice as required for possibly one and a half hours.



24.   I went to find Alan Hopkins because although I cannot recall
who, someone had given me a message to go and assist him.          I

recall at this time I was unable to contact control on channel 1
and I remember that I made a comment to radio control shortly

after I had received the order to transfer to channel 1 that I
could not get that channel.    The only noise I could hear on the

channel   was   a faint crackling and the disjointed voice of

Superintendent Clarke whose voice is quite distinctive because he

is a "cockney".    I recall other Officers were making calls from

the Range Rover which was used as a mobile communication centre

to maintain radio contact with control and use was also made of

its mobile phone to make telephone contact.



25.   I met Alan Hopkins together we proceeded into the gymnasium,
which was being used as a temporary mortuary.        There   was   a

shortage of body bags.
26.   I was sent by Alan Hopkins to make a physical count of the

bodies which had been received by the Northern General Hospital
and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.



27.    I drove in an Escort motor car to the Norther General

Hospital and I remember arriving there at about 1700          because

there had been accident involving a Police motorcyle outside the
Hospital.    I met a Police woman inside the Hospital and was told

there had been 118 casualties,    11 of which were fatalities.        I
left the Northern General and drove to the Royal Hallamshire.         I

was told by staff that there had been 80 casualties and it was
thought there was one fatality although there was some confusion

and they told me there may in fact be two fatalities.         When I

arrived at the Royal Hallamshire I remember there were a lot of
people wa i t i n g   at the Hospital   to accept   casualt i es    and

fatalities.      This is the procedure as laid down in the major

incident plan and there was obviously confusion about the bodies
from the Hillsborough Football ground.



28.   Whilst    in the Hospital   I met a Police    Inspector      from

Sheffield and the General Manager of the Hospital David Baldwin
who told me how many casualties the Hospital had and said that

the Hospital was geared up and ready to accept the bodies.      David

Baldwin's assistant, who was also present, told him that all the

bodies were going to the Medico Legal Centre.       This confused me

because my understanding is that the Medico Legal Centre can only
     take 45 bodies and I left the hospital, returned to the car and

     attempted to speak to radio control using channel 2.   I could not
\\   speak to them, there was^a problem with the radio and although

     they could s peak to me I could not speak to them.
\


     29.   I used the Vodaphone and spoke to Superintendent- Smith.     I

     informed him that I had made the physical        body check      and
     requested him to relay the information to Alan Hopkins.       I also
     requested confirmation of the bodies which were going to the

     Royal Hallamshire Hospital.      I reported the problem with the
     radio to him and I made my return journey to Hillsborough.


     30.   At 18.00 I used the radio again in the Escort motor car and

     made contact with control without difficulty.    I spoke to
              and reported that I had had difficulties with the radio,

     which appeared to have abated.


     31.   I arrived at Hillsborough and I was informed by David Jones

     that Alan Hopkins did not want to move the Range Rover as it was

     still being used as a communication centre as it had been during

     the afternoon.


     32.  The operations from the Range Rover had been moved to the                *
                        Naxt*-.        \                                    NXwSMKfc-
     rear of the gymnasium behind the North Stand. ^ The Range Rover

     was being used to pass many messages and particularly for people

     wanting to let their families know they would not be returning

                                          14
home and they would be working or that they had been delayed due
to the incident at Hillsborough.



33.   David Jones then called a meeting of the staff and I recall
that all live casualties had been cleared from the ground before

17.00.    Most of them had gone when I left the ground to carry
out the physical body count at the Hospitals.



34.v I think I arrived back at Hillsborough at about 18.00—
18.30 .and, on my -arxirV-al— most— e£— the— equipment of— the— Ambulanoe-
■
gervice had -bean exhausted



35.   On my return     I went to the North Stand gymnasium and Alan

Hopkins briefed me about       the   si t ua t io n and   p r oc edure   for
transferring bodies to the Medico Legal Centre.



36.   Ambulances were to be sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

to collect the bodies which had been delivered there and they
were to be returned to the gymnasium for identification purposes.

The bodies which had been sent to the Northern General were also

to be collected and returned to the gymnasium.            The bodies were

to be cleaned up, laid out, photographed and each body was to be

accompanied by a Police Officer.     The bodies were laid out on one
side of the gymnasium and the photographs were to be erected on

the opposite side.     The relatives of the deceased were to be

shown the photographs and if they recognised the photograph they
    were    to   be    shown   the   body   for   the purposes     of   formally
    identifying the deceased.         For the purpose of bringing the bodies

    out from behind the screened off part of the gymnasium,                  the
    ambulance service provided cots.



    37.    All the ambulance vehicles were called into Penistone Road

    gymnasium area and David Jones briefed the ambulance crews on the
    procedure        for the removal of the bodies       following positive

    identification and those crews which he selected for the duty
^   remained on stand by.



    38.     I accompanied Alan Hopkins following the briefing of the
    ambulance crews and we went back to the temporary mortuary and I

    was appalled to see photographers in the gardens of the terraced
    houses fronting Penistone Road and backing on to the gymnasium

    trying to take photographs of the bodies being moved into the

    t em p or a ry   mortuary.       Police   intervened    an d    moved   the
    photographers on.      The photographers were causing distress to all
    present.



    39.    I recall that it was probably around 2000 and the light was
    beginning to fade.         The police had not yet rigged up temporary

    lighting for the area to the east of the North Stand and I ^


\   rfrl nn ..Hopkins'Was asked to move the Range Rover into a position to

    provide temporary lighting.             The Range Rover was moved and

    illuminated the area to the rear of the gym as requested by the


                                                  16
Police.     This was to assist and help the relatives who had to
enter the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium for the purpose of

identifying the dead.          The Range Rover stayed in that position

for probably three quarters of an hour before the Police arrived
with their temporary lighting system.



40.   At about 2045      Alan Hopkins briefed me with the Coroner and

X was instructed to stay and oversee the proceedings following

identification of the deceased.            X stayed there with two crews

whose names X cannot recall and one relief crew plus two Station

Officers.


41.    The p r oc e du r e    for m oving the bodies was:         following

identification, the body would be moved in a body bag to the back

door of the gymnasium,         loaded into an ambulance and when there

were three bodies in the ambulance that ambulance vnDuld leave to

deposit     the   dead   at    the    Medico   Legal   C e n t r e , — Royal
Hallamshi.ro or the Northorn Conoral HoapitaI%-



42.   X instructed                   to co-ordinate operations inside the

gymnasium and liaise with me outside the g y m n a s iu m           and   to

organise the Police to co-ordinate the movement of the bodies
from the gymnasium to the ambulances.             I gave instructions to

            to contact control centre on the hour and every half

hour to update control on progress.            X put Station Officer Eason

in charge of loading the bodies and each body was recorded on a
                                                       \    __________
list and a number was attached to    that body by Eason,—

       together with the deceased name and the number of the

Officer who accompanied the body and the number of the vehicle
which moved it.



43.   Two or three bodies were identified almost immediately
following the establishment of this procedure and the operation

continued throughout the night.   This was a traumatic experience

for the staff and I organised staff welfare as best as I could in
the circumstances.



44.   All the bodies had been identified and moved from the
gymnasium to the Medico legal centre by approximately 0525        on
16th April.   Following completion of that procedure the equipment

of the Ambulance service which was still present at the scene was

loaded into Ambulances and a radio message was sent to control
confirming the incident closed at 0530.



45.   I had worked for some fourteen and one quarter hours on the

major incident. Although I had been on call from 1700 on Friday

the 14th.     I was not called out during Friday night or early

Saturday morning and following the incident on Saturday afternoon

through to Sunday morning I returned home, slept for a short

while and returned to the station- to check equipment, liaise with

staff and deal with the press.



                                     18
     Actions of Station Officer Eason at Hillsborough Football Ground on
     Saturday 15th April 1989


     1410 hours        I arived at Hillsborough Football Ground.


      1415 hours       I liaised with Inspector Sewell of South Yorkshire
                       Police.


      1445 hours       I was positioned between the Spion Kop and North Stand
                       with Station Officer Higgins and Ambulancemen
                       and             |. The ambulance had previously been parked at
                       the top of the ramp by 'O' Gate.


      1459 hours       The match kicked off.


      1503 hours       From my position at the Spion Kop area I viewed what I
                       thought was a crowd disturbance at the Leppings Lane end,
                       south side of the terraces.                   I immediately left my
                       position to travel along the path which runs parallel to
                       the north stand heading towards pen area 6 with
                       Ambulanceman


      1504 hours       I reached Pen 6.             The crowd in the areas of Pen 5 and Pen
                       6 were viewing the game.                There appeared to be no
                       problems.      There were members of the crowd on the pitch
       0(>1 ✓
                       area behind the goals seated on the grass, watching the
                       game.       From my position at Pen 6, I could not see the
                       fences of Pen 3 or 4 because of the fans and Police
                       Officers.—


      1505 hours       Ambulanceman                            and myself were attacked by a
      50 seconds       football supporter as we approached the terraces by Gate
                                                    {JtovJ£>
                       '3'.    There was an .abundance of fans and police officers
                       hofrjoor,           t - hn    fftnnna    ar wl J «-   Was   j    ^    j   1°    fnlr ma   tO
&   Urt   0^0
                        ssess the situation at that                                    |,r a/WJ. [im
            (<*       4he Police appeared to have a crowd disorder problem.



           V nfot
1506 hours   Two Liverpool supporters made contact with me and
             informed me of an injured colleague Hjfring by the left
             hand side of the goal, viewing it from the Spion Kop.
             Ambulanceman                 and myself assessed this
             casualty to have a broken leg.      Because of the turmoil
             and noise I was not able to make visual contact with
             Station Officer Higgins or radio contact and for that
             reason we left to collect medical equipment and treat the
             casualty.


1506 hours   As far as I was concerned at that time I only had one
             casualty to deal with.      There appeared to be a pitch
             invasion taking place around me.      I did not see, nor was
             I made aware of any other casualties. V O                  t


1508 hours   I returned to the Spion Kop area where Station Officer
             Higgins was standing.       I collected the equipment, ie,
             trolley stretcher, frac straps, portable oxygen and bag
             and mask.    Ambulanceman                and myself then
             returned towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground to
             treat the one casualty, accompanied by Higgins and
             I     |.    I am aware that Station Officer Higgins called
             for the one ambulance on stand by at Middlewood to be
             brought into the ground in order to provide cover for the
             one ambulance I was going to use to transport the
             casualty leaving the area.


1511 hours   I arrived at the area along with Station Officer Higgins
             and Ambulancemen             and              fon-Strr-    rOTn
             journey to the Leppings Lane terrace it appea^etTto me
             that tfe«£e was a disturbance or there^krdcT been a mass
             pitch invasion ancT~fctia£^the pojitfe were dealing with a
             crowd control problem               ot obvious to me at that
             stage from mynofl'Tfion that there w           more
             casuaJJUrtfsr\ I can say that people ■                  the
             grass around the goal area and that my view was obsgttced
             by police officers and I could not see the fences. /
\

                                                                                                                  *>rt*r<D'To
                                  Ambulancemen I                               and                                 ag-gioAod with the
                                  casualty who had a broken leg while Station Officer
                                  Higgins and myself walked toward the centre of the pitch
                                  in order to assess the                                         situation. fo u r position was
                   IrT   hn&      necessary because of the density of the fans and police
                                  officers making it impossible for us to gain a true
        Qsm&ap       /            picture of the situation.                                 From our position we saw
                   w \            people being pulled Up into the stands and people gaining

to fUwwX^er* A      yj            access to the ground through Gate *3* of the Leppings
                                  Lane terrace.                  We also saw fans climbing from Pen 3
                                  through the side fences into Pen 2 and fans climbing over
                                  the fences from Pen 3 on to the pitch area.                                                         At this
\^6    \W)     ^                  stage we became aware that fans were being brought
                                  through the police line and being led onto the ground
                                  around the goal area~|and that we had a serious
                                  on our hands.


           1511 hours and         We jointly mado tho ■■d’
                                                         ftcjbs-ioa to prepare the gymnasium in
           23 seconds             line with our operational plan^in order to treat and.

      5|®                         ■#iltor eaouollrt’eg in preparation -for ambulance -feranopoirt
                                  to Hogpi^iol.[^Control were updated by Station Officer

       0 Xh*<b "V©                Higgins that we had betwe«p-5p and 100 casualties as a

                   Clyg^pv .      rough estimate at that                                           Ambulancemen                                       and
                                                            started to resuscitate people around the goal

 >— ^ A-     ^^10                 area.             I made it o1-oar that beeauao of the aggro&s4on
                                                 hft'*           D T p p r i B n r a H h v f-hnm cwr1i nc_ it wftS

^-OhtklS'X)\                      Tm
                                  H f tgg fni m
                                              m ii n
                                                   ngg         nhtri r m g aa gn .fcha
                                                                                 .th a . ff lf ii hf ui nn rr ii nn n
                                                                                                                    n   ri li n
                                                                                                                              n rvrnn ll nmpm*—
                                                                                                                                           p n it ~ l *Laf

                                  f-.H » y - h n H       f n r-otnin vi sual              i-nnta n t ,.j ii ± h — nnp. ann±lipr                       ia
_     \ ' W o Tiv&tO \ \          QB&et To^enfltfl'tji as much a.a-nossihl-n -thair__individual
                          <r-,
                                 .safo-fcy,.


                                  I returned to the ambulance position at the Spion Kop end
                                  of the ground to update Station Officer Higgins and
                                  control.                I saw Station Officer Higgins in the ambulance
                                  resuscitating a youth, whilst being watched by many other
                                  injured people both in and around the vehicle.
                           I then removed a female asthmatic patient from the rear
                           of the vehicle to the front seat to take her away from
                           the stressful situation the she had been placed in, ie
                           watching the resuscitation of a youth.          I tried to use
                           the radio in the ambulance, but no contact with control
                           was made.


 1514 hours                I returned to the pitch area where fans were now carrying
                           patients on hoardings to the ambulance and gymnasium
                           areas and 1 was seen 20 yards from the goal mouth at 1514
                           hours and 20 seconds as seen on the video.


  1515 hours               I assisted a Doctor on the pitch who was resuscitating a
                           young male of approximately 12 years old.


  1516 hours                I left the Doctor and ran for an ambulance in order to
Z \Wo                       remove the child, who at that time it was believed would
    -V ^ ,                  survive.     The ambulance crew involved were Leading
                            Ambulanceman Flack and Ambulanceman ______|. I returned
                            to the Doctor with Leading Ambulanceman Flack and a
                            trolley and the child was taken from the ground to the
                           Northern General Hospital.                               ^
         T I        'x                            Vn   cvl .'   ‘                                 _
                                                                           Wio&vr- \            o^\
*— 1020 ~houp&^ _        « » I returned to assess the Leppings^ane terraces.                '
                            "ctf 'T'te                                To    L^L H
  1521 hours                I am seen on video when full evacuation is in progress
                                                                          EP
                            towards the Spion Kop end. I twww-feeen directing fans
                            toward the gymnasium with the injured.

                                                                                        WT .
  1523 hours                I returned to the Spion Kop end of the ground^per'mg&t
                           Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer Hopkins on
                            his arrival.     I briefed Mr. Hopkins of the incident and
                            the aggression which had taken place.


  1526 hours                I am seen (on the video) in a group of ambulance
                            personnel at the right-hand         side of the goal.
1527 hours and    I radio for the Major Incident vehicle on behalf of
46 seconds        Mr. Hopkins.


1528 hours        I called for all available vehicles to be sent to
                  Penistone Road.


1529 hours        I took up the position at Penistone Road to marshal the
                  vehicles and for a short period of time became the
                  parking officer at the Spion Kop.


1537 hours        I returned to the pitch area and spoke to Ambulanceman
                  ______ at the centre of the goal mouth in his vehicle.


1543 hours        I was seen in front of the goal assessing the situation.
                  It is clear at this time that all casualties had been
                  cleared from the terrace and no further evacuation took
                  place.   I was met by Assistant Chief Metropolitan
                  Ambulance Officer Jones who was making his way to the
                  gymnasium area.    I was left to marshal the vehicles at
                  Penistone Road North and at some stage later took
                  responsibility for stand down of vehicles at Herries Road
                  Bus Depot.


1800 hours        I remember making contact with Mr. A. Page upon his
                  arrival at approximately 18®0 hours.    I was informed by
                  Mr. Page along with Assistant Divisional Officer Morley
                  and Station Officer            to remain at Hillsborough to
                  assist with the removal and identification of bodies.       I
                  remained on duty at the mortuary and temporary mortuary
                   areas until 0530 hours on the morning of Sunday 16th
                  April 1989.    At 0645 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989, I
                   left the station to go off duty and return home.




SIGNED:


          Paul Eason - Station Officer, SYMAS
Actions of Station Officer Eason at Hillsborough Football Ground on
Saturday 15th April 1989


1410 hours         I arived at Hillsborough Football Ground.


1415 hours         I liaised with Inspector Sewell of South Yorkshire
                   Police.


1445 hours         I was positioned between the Spion Kop and North Stand
                   with Station Officer Higgins and Ambulancemen
                   and             The ambulance had previously been parked at
                   the top of the ramp by 'O' Gate.


1459 hours         The match kicked off.


1503 hours         From my position at the Spion Kop area I viewed what I
                   thought was a crowd disturbance at the Leppings Lane end,
                   south side of the terraces.     I immediately left my
                   position to travel along the path which runs parallel to
                   the north stand heading towards pen area 6 with
                   Ambulanceman


1504 hours         I reached Pen 6.    The crowd in the areas of Pen 5 and Pen
                   6 were viewing the game.    There appeared to be no
                   problems.    There were members of the crowd on the pitch
                   area behind the goals seated on the grass, watching the
                   game.     From my position at Pen 6, I could not see the
                   fences of Pen 3 or 4 because of the fans and Police




1505 hours         Ambulanceman               and myself were attacked by a
50 seconds         football supporter as we approached the terraces by Gate
    v   \    V v   '3v'.) There was an abuaogace
                                       afeuasfiyice of fans and police ^officers
                                                                       officers
                           rii -mg,,and thc-€&noGb awd-S-t was-^SpDOT^^t^Eajs t
1506 hours    Two Liverpool supporters made contact with me and
              informed me of an injured colleague -i«jEing by the left
              hand side of the goal, viewing it from the Spion Kop.
              Ambulanceman                   and myself assessed this
              casualty to have a broken leg.          Because of the turmoil
              and noise I was not able to make visual contact with
              Station Officer Higgins or radio contact and for that
              reason we left to collect medical equipment and treat the
              casualty.


1506 hours    As far as I was concerned at that time I only had one
              casualty to deal with.        There appeared to be a pitch
              invasion taking place around me.          I did not see, nor was
              I made aware of any other casualties.
                                   N                                    CjU-'         o
1508 hours    I returned to the Spiori Kop area where Station Officer
              Higgins was standing.        I collected the equipment, ie,
              trolley stretcher, frac straps, portable oxygen and bag
              and mask.     Ambulanceman                     and myself then
              returned towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground to
              treat the one casualty, accompanied by Higgins and'
                          I am aware that Station Officer Higgins called
              for the one ambulance on stand by at Middlewood to be
              brought into the ground in order to provide cover for the
              one ambulance I was going to use to transport the
              casualty leaving the area.


1511 hours    I arrived at the\area along with Station Officer Higgins
              and Ambulancemen               and                    On our retttfn
              jmirnpy   fn f h p T.ftppings T. ane_tarjapp



              pif-rh i n v a s i o n and— Ehafr Mn» polif.e ■
                                                            wor-a—d^alin-g; with a-
              Trrewd control problem?-— f-tr^raa not obviotre— Lo ulfe" at Lliafc
             __s£age-£«iiriny-posTni»rT!ninrTfiere-werg~anyL-a®ee
              casualties.     I—can say that people we.ce—seated' on the—
              gjraas— around-^fcht; gua~r aiea and that my view -was obscurecL
              -by police officers and 1 could not ~gge the fences-*-'
                                Ambulancemen               and                                viy^ the
                                casualty who had a broken leg while Station Officer
                                Higgins and myself walked toward the centre of the pitch
                                in order to assess the                situdtion*
                                                          3S5I
                                               Hjj-fjf It impossible for us to gai
                                picture        the situation.       From our pogj^ion~weIi5w
                                people bein.                  into the^elfands and people gaining
                                access to the grounff"<hrjwrgti Gate '3' of the Leppings
                                Lane   »rrace                         ns climbing from Pen 3                  I
                                through                          into Pen "Sk^nd-fsnre                Ug oyer

" 'W                            ithe fencers from Pen 3 on to the pitch ar                            is
                                       we became aware~"TfRfE~~ffan8 wcre ~treing brougfrts^^
                                                   ice llner^HarElIn^zrtgd-Tjnto tftfl fli-a^uad-
                                 round the goal area and that we had 11 n T t m m                i iIh h j*4e*u
                                                                                                          *i    .
        Vojv,—JN^ W-            on our hands.


       1511 hours and           We jointlyTII5g^ 'Uiu^^tilg^Qa- to prepare the gymnasium in
       23 seconds       ^^^line with our operational plan^jffi'nrrfpr fn traat aad~
                                filter casualties ~Tn preparation for ambu±axnigrtg8asp«A:t
                                t£_Hoep±£al.      Control wer                      atio n
                                Higgins that we
                                m g h estimate-at thajtrTtffie. Ambulancemen-^
                                                             xegtrsoltaLt; people around—tfre~goal
                                argg^c-I made it clear that because of the aggression
                                which had been experienced by the            earliei
                    jpkv        becoming more oby*<afrg           fce— situation—dov&lopedthat
                                they had to retain visual cjau^taot--yirttT'one anottr&g—in
                            'Tfrflrr f n e n t i r e arc mi1i*h flfl irnHH         v i n r i i v i d1i a '1
                                safpfyL.   _
                           <r

                                I returned to the ambulance position -aft fehp, Sp-ion Kop end
                                of th-e ground to-update Station Officer Higgins and
                                control.   I saw Station Officer Higgins in the ambulance
                                resuscitating a youth, whilst being watched by many other
                                injured people both in and around the vehicle.
J
                 I then removed a female asthmatic patient from the rear
                 of the vehicle to the front seat to take her away from
                 the stressful situation the she had been placed in, ie
                 watching the resuscitation of a youth.    I tried to use
                 the radio in the ambulance, but no contact with control
                 was made.


    1514 hours   I returned to the pitch area where fans were now carrying
                 patients on hoardings to the ambulance and gymnasium
                 areas and I was seen 20 yards from the goal mouth at 1514
                 hours and 20 seconds as seen on the video.


    1515 hours   I assisted a Doctor on the pitch who was resuscitating a
                 young male of approximately 12 years old.


    1516 hours   I left the Doctor and ran for an ambulance in order to




                 Ambulanceman Flack and Ambulanceman          . I returned




                                                                    r r t

    1521 hours   I am seen on video when full evacuation is i n j r e s s
                 towards the Spion Kop end.    I           direcl     fans
                 toward the gymnasium with the injured.


    1523 hours   I returned to the Spion Kop end of the ground Cfcp. me>|t
                 Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer Hopkins on
                 his arrival.   I briefed Mr. Hopkins of the incident and
                 the aggression which had taken place.


    1526 hours   I am seen (on the video) in a group of ambulance
                 personnel at the right-hand    side of the goal.
1527 hours and    I radio for the Major Incident vehicle on behalf of
46 seconds        Mr. Hopkins.


1528 hours        I called for all available vehicles to be sent to
                  Penistone Road.


1529 hours        I took up the position at Penistone Road to marshal the
                  vehicles and for a short period of time became the
                  parking officer at the Spion Kop.


1537 hours        I returned to the pitch area and spoke to Ambulanceman
                           at the centre of the goal mouth in his vehicle.


1543 hours        I was seen in front of the goal assessing the situation.
                  It is clear at this time that all casualties had been
                  cleared from the terrace and no further evacuation took
                  place.    I was met by Assistant Chief Metropolitan
                  Ambulance Officer Jones who was making his way to the
                  gymnasium area.    I was left to marshal the vehicles at
                  Penistone Road North and at some stage later took
                  responsibility for stand down of vehicles at Herries Road
                  Bus Depot.


1800 hours        I remember making contact with Mr. A. Page upon his
                  arrival at approximately 18fl0 hours.   I was informed by
                  Mr. Page along with Assistant Divisional Officer Morley
                  and Station Officer            to remain at Hillsborough to
                  assist with the removal and identification of bodies.       I
                  remained on duty at the mortuary and temporary mortuary
                  areas until 0530 hours on the morning of Sunday 16th
                  April 1989.    At 0645 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989, I
                   left the station to go off duty and return home.




SIGNED:


          Paul Eason - Station Officer, SYMAS
*<•




  Actions of Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance     Officer   at Hillsborough
  Football Ground on Saturday 15th April 1989



  1130 hours       I attended Control on a brief visit and       spoke to   Mr
                   Morley who was Duty Officer for the day.

  1150             I positioned my car on the bridge over the Ml, Junction
                   33 in order to assess traffic flow to the football semi­
                   final.   I did this because in the previous year there
                   had been congestion.

  1350             I left Junction 33 of       the    Ml   and   returned   to
                   Headquarters for lunch.

  1355             I arrived at Headquarters/Control and I took several
                   general calls within the Control Room assisting the
                   staff on duty. I remained in the Control Room and at:

  1400             I heard Eason and Higgins informing Control that they
                   were leaving for the ground in order to take up their
                   stand-by positions.

  1410             I heard Eason and Higgins radio their arrival at         the
                   Football Ground.

  1508:13 secs     Superintendent Clarke appeared to me to be disturbed
                   whilst speaking on the direct line to South Yorkshire
                   Police Control.

  1508:14          Superintendent Clarke informed me that the call from the
                   Police said that they had a problem at Hillsborough and
                   they required "a fleet of Ambulances".    He added that
                   they did not know what had happened and were unable to
                   give further details.    I told Control to get on the
                   radio to the Ambulance Officers who were in the ground
                   acting as liaison officers, and to get a clearer picture
                   from them.

  1508:41          I spoke by telephone to the 2nd stand-by crew at
                   Middlewood Ambulance Station and told them to respond to
                   Leppings Lane and assess the situation.      I also told
                   them that Station Officer Higgins who w*sr already in the
                   ground as one of our liaison officers was going to check
                   and inform Control.

  1508:49          Control Officer         informed Station Officer Higgins
                   to check the Leppings Lane entrance as there appeared to
                   be confusion over the details from the Police.

  1508:51          I left my position in the Control Room to go mobile to
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground because of the un­
                   certainty of the situation and the reports we were
                   receiving. As I left the Control Unit, I saw Mr Morley
                   returning from operational duties and I told him that we
                   were both going to Hillsborough in the one vehicle.
1514 :20   We informed Control by radio that we were         leaving
            Headquarters and were mobile to Leppings Lane.

1514 :3    We were informed by Control that there was trouble
            getting into the Leppings Lane end of the ground and Mr
            Higgins had requested that all Ambulances attend the
            Gymnasium entrance on Penistone Road North.

1517 :51   We sent a radio message to Control asking for all
           vehicles, especially Sierra vehicles, to become clear of
            patients as soon as possible as they may be needed at
            Hillsborough.

1518 :09   Control sent a general message via the radio that all
            Ambulances were to become clear as soon as possible,
            informing them that there were problems at Sheffield
            Wednesday Football Ground.

1523 :39   Mr Morley and myself arrived on scene. We immediately
            saw that there were many casualties, and our initial
            message to Control upon our arrival included a request
            for as many vehicles as possible to be sent to
            Hillsborough and if necessary to ask the assistance of
            other authorities to back SYMAS up.

           Mr Morley also informed Control that we were changing
           our radio channel from the domestic emergency wave
           length channel to the emergency reserve channel.     We
           were informed by Control that there were 12 vehicles en
           route at that moment in time to assist us.

1524       I had left my vehicle and ran down the ramp on to the
           pitch.   Station Officer Eason met me and briefed me
           whilst we both ran towards the Leppings Lane end.     I
           passed through the Police line which was placed between
           the half way line and the penalty box on the Liverpool
           end of the ground. As soon as I passed through the line
           I saw for the first time that people were laid on the
           pitch and were receiving cardiac massage.   Many of the
           bodies were covered by coats, or jumpers put over their
           faces, indicating that these people were dead.    I was
           approached by fans asking for help and it was clear at
           this point that we needed more resources.

           I immediately began to return through the operational
           line to my Range Rover, to inform Control of the
           situation and to get more vehicles and man power to the
           scene. I did not see any Senior Police Officers at this
           stage.

1527 :42   I was running back towards the ramp when a Police
            Officer carrying a young girl stumbled and as he did
            this I took the girl in my arms and continued to run
            with her towards the ramp. As I arrived at the ramp the
            Police Officer was by my side and asked me if the girl
            was dead.   I confirmed this and asked him to take the
            child to the gymnasium which in line with our plan was
            the Casualty Clearing Post, and temporary mortuary.
1529:19   I had left the pitch and I made a .radio call to the
          Control Unit, asking for the Major Incident Vehicle, and
          telling them that I needed as many Ambulances as
          possible to attend as there were many.people dead.     I
          was not in a position at that time to give any clearer
          details.

1535      It was obvious to me that the crowd were unaware that
          there had been a disaster at the Leppings Lane terraces
          and I decided to send a South Yorkshire Ambulance on to
          the pitch to signify to the ^rouot that there had been a
          serious incident and that help was available and on its
          way.   That Ambulance was crewed by Ambulancemen
          and Edwards.

          As they attempted to drive down the ramp on to the
          pitch, they were stopped by a St John's Ambulance which
          was coming from the pitch and had got stuck against the
          railings, thus causing an obstruction.      After a few
          moanenbs the vehicle was freed from the fencing and left
          the pitch and ramp area and        and Edwards were able
          to gain access to the pitch.    I gave them instructions
          to put the blue lights on and to use their claxton horns
          to allow them into the ground and inform the crowd that
          help was available and on its way.

1536             and Edwards arrived at the Leppings Lane end of
          the pitch and are observed on the video.

1537:10   I made contact with Control asking them to contact the
          Chief Ambulance Officer and inform him of the situation.

1537:33   Control informed me that the Chief Ambulance Officer had
          already been informed and was en-route to the Control
          Unit.   They also gave me an update on the vehicles
          positions and availability.

1539:40          and Edwards left the pitch with casualties.

1540      I new I had no shortages of resources now. Ambulances
          and crews were lined up to remove the injured.

          I was standing at the top of the ramp at the Spion Cop
          end of the ground where many casualties were brought up
          after the Ambulance manned by        1 and Edwards left
          the pitch.

          It appeared to me that people had watched the Ambulance
          leaving and had been made aware that assistance was
          available at that end of the ground.       There were no
          Senior Police Officers present at the Gymnasium area. I
          could not leave this area myself because it was vital to
          the Ambulance plan that I remained in the area, and I
          could not spare Officers in wasting their time trying to
          locate a Senior Police Officer at that time.
            :*iP*




                    During this period I was with Mr Morley, Mr Dale, Mr
                    Eason and Mr Higgins at various stages and was
                    consistently being made aware of the situation at
                    various locations within the ground.

                    The Major Incident Vehicle driven by Station Officer
                            also arrived at this time.

1544                The Medical Team arrived     from   the   Northern   General
                    Hospital by Ambulance.

1546                I sent Ambulancemen            [in his vehicle on to the
                    pitch to assist the ambulance personnel on foot with the
                    removal of casualties.     After this action had been
                    performed I decided to cease with sending any more
                    vehicles on to the pitch as casualties were being moved
                    quickly up the ramp and ambulances were available to
                    take them to hospital.

Approx              Many offers of help were made to me from off-duty
1546                doctors, ambulance staff and fans.    As casualties were
                    brought up the ramp from the pitch they were loaded into
                    the ambulance and sent directly to hospital, or they
                    were    sent into the Gymnasium area for a medical
                    assessment by the Doctor in attendance.    At this stage
                    any casualty who appeared to be dead was sent for a
                    medical assessment and certification if necessary.     I
                    did not want to use the Ambulances for bodies when live
                    casualties where still being removed.

1550                I    entered   the   Gymnasium   and   spoke   to   Chief
                    Superintendent Addiss of the South Yorkshire Police. I
                    alsosaw and spoke to the Medical Team who had arrived
                    from    the Northern General and informedthemboth that I
                    was going to clear the injured from the pitch first and
                    then undertake to remove the injured from the Gymnasium.
                    However I informed the Medical Team that if it was
                    necessary and if they identified any              injured
                    patient in the Gymnasium, then I would remove them as a
                    priority if one of the Medical Team would contact me by
                    the ramp.

1558                I walked amongst the lines of bodies in the Gymnasium
                    and counted them to get an approximate number.

1600 (approx)       I left the Gymnasium and returned to the top of the ramp
                    to assist and update myself.      I saw Assistant Chief
                    Ambulance Officer Jones and told him to take charge of
                    the clearing area at the top of the ramp. I also asked
                    him to get the entire area surrounding the ramp and the
                    Gymnasium clear of the obstructions by vehicles which
                    had   been  parked   in   that  area.   This was    done
                    magnificently by Mr Jones and Mr Dale.

                    At this stage I told Ambulanceman             to go into
                    the Gymnasium and assist and help with the injured, this
                    was because                   is an extended trained
          paramedic and I thought he may be of assistance to the
          doctors.

1605      I returned to the Gymnasium and liaised for quite some
          time with Chief Superintendent Addiss who then briefed
          me as to the Police actions concerning the
          identification of the bodies, the certification and
          removal of the bodies and the recording of personal
          belongings. He asked if we would be prepared to assist
          with the removal of the bodies to various mortuarys and
          he identified the Northern General, the Royal
          Hallamshire and the Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield. I
          agreed that the Ambulance Service would assist with this
          matter and was informed that the Police now had to wait
          for the arrival of Mr Popper, the Coroner, before any
          action could be taken.

          I left the Gymnasium and told Mr Morley to get Mr Jones
          to locate spare body bags from the stand-by vehicles as
          all the body bags from the Major Incident Vehicle had
          now been used and there was a shortage.

          I also received from Mr Jones, Mr Morley and Mr Dale an
          update of the situation of the vehicles placed at stand­
          by locations.

          I sent Mr Jones to contact the Chief Ambulance Officer
          at Ambulance Control, on his car telephone.

1625 08   I spoke to the Chief Ambulance Officer and informed him
          that there were 53 confirmed deaths and that more were
          being certified. I was able to inform him that all live
          casualties had left the ground and the gymnasium and had
          arrived, or were mobile to hospitals.   11 bodies were
          brought from the Leppings Lane Service Road by Ambulance
          to the Gymnasium.

          I returned to the Gymnasium, saw Chief Superintendent
          Addiss who informed me that the original plan which we
          had jointly agreed with regard the removal of bodies,
          had been changed by the Coroner and that no-one was to
          be removed to the Mortuary until the Coroner arrived. I
          was aware at this stage of an Inspector Charles who now
          appeared to be co-ordinating the recording of personal
          belongings and the identification of bodies within the
          Gymnasium. I knew that I did not need all of the
          Ambulances I had available to me at that stage.

          I decided to keep six Ambulances for the removal of the
          dead. Mr Jones informed me that he had ten Ambulances
          on stand-by outside the ground on Penistone Road North
          and a further 20 Ambulances standing-by on at Herries
          Road Bus Depot, with Mr Eason in charge. Mr Jones was
          asked to organise six vehicles to be retained in the Car
          Park around the Gymnasium which had now been cleared and
          to inform the other authorities's vehicles in order for
          them to return to their bases.
       The vehicles retained were all South Yorkshire based. I
       then transferred operations from the *0' Gate area of
       the Ground to the Gymnasium Car Park which was now
       clear.

1730   I sent Mr Morley to the Northern General and the Royal
        Hallamshire to do a physical check with the Police
        Information Officer of the number of bodies which had
        been removed from the Ground during the early stages.
        This was done in order to assess the body deployment
        which I knew had been undertaken later.

1750   I spoke briefly to Chief Superintendent Nesbitt outside
        the Gymnasium.

1800   The Chief Ambulance Officer arrived to be briefed on the
        Ground operation, he visited the Gymnasium/temporary
        mortuary, spoke briefly to Chief Superintendent Addiss
        and Mole and then spoke to the crews who were in the
        vicinity of the Gymnasium area.
Actions of Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance    Officer at Hillsborough
Football Ground on Saturday 15th April 1989



1130 hours       I attended Control on a brief visit and spoke to Mr
                 Morley who was Duty Officer for the day,

1150             I positioned my car on the bridge over the Ml, Junction
                 33 in order to assess traffic flow to the football semi­
                 final.   I did this because in the previous year there
                 had been congestion.

1350             I   left Junction 33      of   the   Ml   and returned   to
                 Headquarters for lunch.

1355             Iarrived at Headquarters/Control and I    took several
                 general calls within the Control Room assisting the
                 staff on duty. I remained in the Control Room and at:

1400             I   heard Eason and Higgins informing Control that they
                  were leaving for the ground in order to take up their
                  stand-by positions.

1410             I   heard Eason and Higgins radio their arrival at       the
                  Football Ground.

1508:13 secs     Superintendent Clarke  appeared to me to be disturbed
                 whilst speaking on the direct line to South Yorkshire
                 Police Control.

1508:14          Superintendent Clarke informed me that the call from the
                  Police said that they had a problem at Hillsborough and
                  they required "a fleet of Ambulances”. He added that
                  they did not know what had happened and were unable to
                  give further details.    I told Control to get on the
                  radio to the Ambulance Officers who were in the ground
                  acting as liaison officers, and to get a clearer picture
                  from them.

1508:41          I    spokeby telephone to    the 2nd stand-by crew     at
                  Middlewood Ambulance Station and told them to respond to
                  Leppings Lane and assess the situation.     1 also told
                  them that Station Officer Higgins who war already in the
                  ground as one of our liaison officers was going to check
                  and inform Control.

1508:49          Control Officer         informed Station Officer Higgins
                 to check the Leppings Lane entrance as there appeared to
                 be confusion over the details from the.Police.

1508:51          I left my position in the Control Room to go mobile to
                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground because of the un­
                 certainty of the situation and the reports we were
                 receiving. As I left the Control Unit, I saw Mr Morley
                 returning from operational duties and I told him that we
                 were both going to Hillsborough in the one vehicle.
We informed Control by radio that we were         leaving
Headquarters and were mobile to Leppings Lane.

We were informed by Control that there was trouble
getting into the Leppings Lane end of the ground and Mr
Higgins had requested that all Ambulances attend the
G y m n a s iu m entrance on Penistone Road North.

We sent a radio message to Control asking for all
vehicles, especially Sierra vehicles, to become clear of
patients as soon as possible as they may be needed at
Hillsborough.

Control sent a general message via the radio that all
Ambulances were to become clear as soon as possible,
informing them that there were problems at Sheffield
Wednesday Football Ground.

Mr Morley and myself arrived on scene. We immediately
saw that there were many casualties, and our initial
message to Control upon our arrival included a request
for as many vehicles as possible to be sent to
Hillsborough and if necessary to ask the assistance of
other authorities to back SYMAS up.

Mr Morley also informed Control that we were changing
our radio channel from the domestic emergency wave
length channel to the emergency reserve channel.     We
were informed by Control that there were 12 vehicles en
route at that moment in time to assist us.

I had left my vehicle and ran down the ramp on to the
pitch.   Station Officer Eason met me and briefed me
whilst we both ran towards the Leppings Lane end.      I
passed through the Police line which was placed between
the half way line and the penalty box on the Liverpool
end of the ground. As soon as 1 passed through the line
I saw for the first time that people were laid on the
pitch and were receiving cardiac massage.    Many of the
bodies were covered by coats, orjumpers put over their
faces, indicating that    these people were dead.  I was
approached by fans asking for help and it was clear at
this point that we needed more resources.

I immediately began to return through the operational
line to my Range Rover, to inform Control of the
situation and to get more vehicles and man power to the
scene. I did not see any Senior Police Officers at this
stage.

1 was running back towards the ramp when a Police
Officer carrying a young girl stumbled and as he did
this I took the girl in my arms and continued to run
with her towards the ramp. As I arrived at the ramp the
Police Officer was by my side and asked me if the girl
was dead.   1 confirmed    this and asked him to take the
child to the gymnasium    which in line with our plan was
the Casualty Clearing Post, and temporary mortuary.
1529 :19   I had left the pitch and I made a radio call to the
           Control Unit, asking for the Major Incident Vehicle, and
           telling   them that I needed asmany Ambulances        as
           possible to attend as there were many people dead. I
           was not in a position at that time togive any clearer
           details.

1535       It was obvious to me that the crowd were unaware that
           there had been a disaster at the Leppings Lane terraces
           and I decided to send a South Yorkshire Ambulance on to
           the pitch to signify to the qroutcl that there had been a
           serious incident and that help was available and on its
           way.   That Ambulance was crewed by Ambulancemen
           and Edwards.

           As they attempted to drive down       the ramp on to the
           pitch, they were stopped by a St John’s Ambulance which
           was coming from the pitch and had got stuck against the
           railings, thus causing an obstruction.       After a few
           mosnenfcs the vehicle was freed from the fencing and left
           the pitch and ramp area and         and Edwards were able
           to gain access to the pitch.     I gave them instructions
           to put the blue lights on and to use their claxton horns
           to allow them into the ground and inform the crowd that
           help was available and on its way.

1536              and Edwards arrived at the Leppings Lane end of
           the pitch and are observed on the video.

1537 :10   I made contact with Control asking them to contact the
            Chief Ambulance Officer and inform him of the situation.

1537 :33   Control informed me that the Chief Ambulance Officer had
            already been informed and was en-route to the Control
            Unit.   They also gave me an update on the vehicles
            positions and availability.

1539 40           and Edwards left the pitch with casualties.

1540       I new I had no shortages of resources now. Ambulances
           and crews were lined up to remove the injured.

           I was standing at the top of the ramp at the Spion Cop
           end of the ground where many casualties were brought up
           after the Ambulance manned by          and Edwards left
           the pitch.

           It appeared to me that people had watched the Ambulance
           leaving and had been made aware that assistance was
           available at that end of the ground.       There were no
           Senior Police Officers present at the Gymnasium area. I
           could not leave this area myself because it was vital to
           the Ambulance plan that I remained in the area, and I
           could not spare Officers in wasting their time trying to
           locate a Senior Police Officer at that time.
                During this period I was with Mr Morley, Mr Dale, Mr
                Eason and Mr Higgins at various stages and was
                consistently being made aware of the situation at
                various locations within the ground.

                The Major Incident Vehicle driven by Station Officer
                        also arrived at this time.

1544            The Medical Team arrived    from   the   Northern   General
                Hospital by Ambulance.

1546            I sent Ambulancemen            in his vehicle on to the
                pitch to assist the ambulance personnel on foot with the
                removal of casualties.     After this action had been
                performed I decided to cease with sending any more
                vehicles on to the pitch as casualties were being moved
                quickly Up the ramp and ambulances were available to
                take them to hospital.

Approx          Many offers of help were made to me from off-duty
1546            doctors, ambulance staff and fans.    As casualties were
                brought up the ramp from the pitch they were loaded into
                the ambulance and sent directly to hospital, or they
                were sent into the Gymnasium area for a medical
                assessment by the Doctor in attendance.    At this stage
                any casualty who appeared to be dead was sent for a
                medical assessment and certification if necessary.     I
                did not want to use the Ambulances for bodies when live
                casualties where still being removed.

1550            I   entered   the   Gymnasium   and   spoke   to   Chief
                Superintendent Addiss of the South Yorkshire Police. I
                also saw and spoke to the Medical Team who had arrived
                from the Northern General and informed them both that I
                was going to clear the injured from the pitch first and
                then undertake to remove the injured from the Gymnasium.
                However I informed the Medical Team that if it was
                necessary and if they identified any c«floatIvj, injured
                patient in the Gymnasium, then I would remove them as a
                priority if one of the Medical Team would contact me by
                the ramp.

1558            I walked amongst the lines of bodies in the Gymnasium
                and counted them to get an approximate number.

1600 (approx)   I left the Gymnasium and returned to the top of the ramp
                to assist and update myself.      I saw Assistant Chief
                Ambulance Officer Jones and told him to take charge of
                the clearing area at the top of the ramp. I also asked
                him to get the entire area surrounding the ramp and the
                Gymnasium clear of the obstructions by vehicles which
                had   been  parked   in   that  area.   This  was   done
                magnificently by Mr Jones and Mr Dale.

                At this stage I told Ambulanceman 1        ) to go into
                the Gymnasium and assist and help with the injured, this
                was because                   is an extended trained
          paramedic and I thought he may be of assistance to the
          doctors.

1605      I returned to the Gymnasium and liaised for quite some
          time with Chief Superintendent Addiss who then briefed
          me as to the Police actions concerning the
          identification of the bodies, the certification and
          removal of the bodies and the recording of personal
          belongings* He asked if we would be prepared to assist
          with the removal of the bodies to various mortuarys and
          he identified the Northern General, the Royal
          Hallamshire and the Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield. I
          agreed that the Ambulance Service would assist with this
          matter and was informed that the Police now had to wait
          for the arrival of Mr Popper, the Coroner, before any
          action could be taken.

          I left the Gymnasium and told Mr Morley to get Mr Jones
          to locate spare body bags from the stand-by vehicles as
          all the body bags from the Major Incident Vehicle had
          now been used and there was a shortage.

          I also received from Mr Jones, Mr Morley and Mr Dale an
          update of the situation of the vehicles placed at stand­
          by locations.

          I sent Mr Jones to contact the Chief Ambulance Officer
          at Ambulance Control, on his car telephone.

1625 08   I spoke to the Chief Ambulance Officer and informed him
          that there were 53 confirmed deaths and that more were
          being certified. I was able to inform him that all live
          casualties had left the ground and the gymnasium and had
          arrived, or were mobile to hospitals.   11 bodies were
          brought from the Leppings Lane Service Road by Ambulance
          to the Gymnasium.

          I returned to the Gymnasium, saw Chief Superintendent
          Addiss who informed me that the original plan which we
          had jointly agreed with regard the removal of bodies,
          had been changed by the Coroner and that no-one was to
          be removed to the Mortuary until the Coroner arrived. I
          was aware at this stage of an Inspector Charles who now
          appeared to be co-ordinating the recording of personal
          belongings and the identification of bodies within the
          Gymnasium. I knew that I did not need all of the
          Ambulances I had available to me at that stage.

          I decided to keep six Ambulances for the removal of the
          dead. Mr Jones informed me that he had ten Ambulances
          on stand-by outside the ground on Penistone Road North
          and a further 20 Ambulances standing-by on at Herries
          Road Bus Depot, with Mr Eason in charge. Mr Jones was
          asked to organise six vehicles to be retained in the Car
          Park around the Gymnasium which had now been cleared and
          to inform the other authorities’s vehicles in order for
          them to return to their bases.
       The vehicles retained were all South Yorkshire based. I
       then transferred operations from the *0* Gate area of
       the Ground to the Gymnasium Car Park which was now
       clear.

1730   I sent Mr Morley to the Northern General and the Royal
        Hallamshire to do a physical check with the Police
        Information Officer of the number of bodies which had
        been removed from the Ground during the early stages.
        This was done in order to assess the body deployment
        which I knew had been undertaken later.

1750   I spoke briefly to Chief Superintendent Nesbitt outside
        the Gymnasium.

1800   The Chief Ambulance Officer arrived to be briefed on the
        Ground operation, he visited the Gymnasium/temporary
        mortuary, spoke briefly to Chief Superintendent Addiss
        and Mole and then spoke to the crews who were in the
        vicinity of the Gymnasium area.
Actions of Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance      Officer at Hillsborough
Football Ground on Saturday 15th April 1989



1130 hours       I attended Control on a brief visit and spoke to Mr
                  Morley who was Duty Officer for the day.

1150             I positioned my car on the bridge over the Ml, Junction
                  33 in order to assess traffic flow to the football semi­
                  final.   I did this because in the previous year there
                  had been congestion.

1350             I left Junction 33 of        the    Ml   and   returned   to
                  Headquarters for lunch.

1355             I arrived at Headquarters/Control and I took several
                  general calls within the Control Room assisting the
                  staff on duty. I remained in the Control Room and at:

1400             I heard Eason and Higgins informing Control that they
                  were leaving for the ground in order to take up their
                  stand-by positions.

1410             I heard Eason and Higgins radio their arrival at the
                  Football Ground.

1508:13 secs     Superintendent Clarke appeared to me to be disturbed
                  whilst speaking on the direct line to South Yorkshire
                  Police Control.

1508:14          Superintendent Clarke informed me that the call from the
                  Police said that they had a problem at Hillsborough and
                  they required "a fleet of Ambulances”. He added that
                  they did not know what had happened and were unable to
                  give further details.    I told Control to get on the
                  radio to the Ambulance Officers who were in the ground
                  acting as liaison officers, and to get a clearer picture
                  from them.

1508:41          I spoke by telephone to the 2nd stand-by crew at
                  Middlewood Ambulance Station and told them to respond to
                  Leppings Lane and assess the situation.     I also told
                  them that Station Officer Higgins who wt& already in the
                  ground as one of our liaison officers was going to check
                  and inform Control.

1508:49          Control Officer         informed Station Officer Higgins
                 to check the Leppings Lane entrance as there appeared to
                 be confusion over the details from the Police.

1508:51          I left my position in the Control Room to go mobile to
                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground because of the un­
                 certainty of the situation and the reports we were
                 receiving. As I left the Control Unit, I saw Mr Morley
                 returning from operational duties and I told him that we
                 were both going to Hillsborough in the one vehicle.
1514 :20   We informed Control by radio that we were         leaving
            Headquarters and were mobile to Leppings Lane.

1514 :3    We were informed by Control that there was trouble
            getting into the Leppings Lane end of the ground and Mr
            Higgins had requested that all Ambulances attend the
            Gymnasium entrance on Penistone Road North.

1517 :51   We sent a radio message to Control asking for all
            vehicles, especially Sierra vehicles, to become clear of
            patients as soon as possible as they may be needed at
            Hillsborough.

1518 :09   Control sent a general message via the radio that all
            Ambulances were to become clear as soon as possible,
            informing them that there were problems at Sheffield
            Wednesday Football Ground.

1523 :39   Mr Morley and myself arrived on scene. We immediately
            saw that there were many casualties, and our initial
            message to Control upon our arrival included a request
            for as many vehicles as possible to be sent to
            Hillsborough and if necessary to ask the assistance of
            other authorities to back SYMAS up.

           Mr Morley also informed Control that we were changing
           our radio channel from the domestic emergency wave
           length channel to the emergency reserve channel.     We
           were informed by Control that there were 12 vehicles en
           route at that moment in time to assist us.

1524       I had left my vehicle and ran down the ramp on to the
           pitch.   Station Officer Eason met me and briefed me
           whilst we both ran towards the Leppings Lane end.     I
           passed through the Police line which was placed between
           the half way line and the penalty box on the Liverpool
           end of the ground. As soon as I passed through the line
           I saw for the first time that people were laid on the
           pitch and were receiving cardiac massage. Many of the
           bodies were covered by coats, or jumpers put over their
           faces, indicating that these people were dead.    I was
           approached by fans asking for help and it was clear at
           this point that we needed more resources.

           I immediately began to return through the operational
           line to my Range Rover, to inform Control of the
           situation and to get more vehicles and man power to the
           scene. I did not see any Senior Police Officers at this
           stage.

1527: 42   I was running back towards the ramp when a Police
           Officer carrying a young girl stumbled and as he did
           this I took the girl in my arms and continued to run
           with her towards the ramp. As I arrived at the ramp the
           Police Officer was by my side and asked me if the girl
           was dead.   I confirmed this and asked him to take the
           child to the gymnasium which in line with our plan was
           the Casualty Clearing Post, and temporary mortuary.
1529:19   I had left the pitch and I made a radio call to the
          Control Unit, asking for the Major Incident Vehicle, and
          telling them that I needed as many Ambulances as
          possible to attend as there were many people dead.     I
          was not in a position at that time to give any clearer
          details.

1535      It was obvious to me that the crowd were unaware that
          there had been a disaster at the Leppings Lane terraces
          and I decided to send a South Yorkshire Ambulance on to
          the pitch to signify to the <?rouic| that there had been a
          serious incident and that help was available and on its
          way.   That Ambulance was crewed by Ambulancemen
          and Edwards.

          As they attempted to drive down the ramp on to the
          pitch, they were stopped by a St John’s Ambulance which
          was coming from the pitch and had got stuck against the
          railings, thus causing an obstruction.       After a few
          mosnenfcs the vehicle was freed from the fencing and left
          the pitch and ramp area and         and Edwards were able
          to gain access to the pitch.     I gave them instructions
          to put the blue lights on and to use their claxton horns
          to allow them into the ground and inform the crowd that
          help was available and on its way.

1536             and Edwards arrived at the Leppings Lane end of
          the pitch and are observed on the video.

1537:10   I made contact with Control asking them to contact the
          Chief Ambulance Officer and inform him of the situation.

1537:33   Control informed me that the Chief Ambulance Officer had
          already been informed and was en-route to the Control
          Unit.   They also gave me an update on the vehicles
          positions and availability.

1539:40          and Edwards left the pitch with casualties.

1540      I new I had no shortages of resources now. Ambulances
          and crews were lined up to remove the injured.

          I was standing at the top of the ramp at the Spion Cop
          end of the ground where many casualties were brought up
          after the Ambulance manned by          and Edwards left
          the pitch.

          It appeared to me that people had watched the Ambulance
          leaving and had been made aware that assistance was
          available at that end of the ground.       There were no
          Senior Police Officers present at the Gymnasium area. I
          could not leave this area myself because it was vital to
          the Ambulance plan that I remained in the area, and I
          could not spare Officers in wasting their time trying to
          locate a Senior Police Officer at that time.
                During this period I was with Mr Morley, Mr Dale, Mr
                Eason and Mr Higgins at various stages and was
                consistently being made aware of the situation at
                various locations within the ground.

                The Major Incident Vehicle driven by Station Officer
                        also arrived at this time.

1544            The Medical Team arrived     from   the   Northern   General
                Hospital by Ambulance.

1546            I sent Ambulancemen            in his vehicle on to the
                pitch to assist the ambulance personnel on foot with the
                removal of casualties.     After this action had been
                performed I decided to cease with sending any more
                vehicles on to the pitch as casualties were being moved
                quickly up the ramp and ambulances were available to
                take them to hospital.

Approx          Many offers of help were made to me from off-duty
1546            doctors, ambulance staff and fans.    As casualties were
                brought up the ramp from the pitch they were loaded into
                the ambulance and sent directly to hospital, or they
                were sent into the Gymnasium area for a medical
                assessment by the Doctor in attendance. At this stage
                any casualty who appeared to be dead was sent for a
                medical assessment and certification if necessary.     I
                did not want to use the Ambulances for bodies when live
                casualties where still being removed.

1550            I   entered   the   Gymnasium   and   spoke   to   Chief
                Superintendent Addiss of the South Yorkshire Police. I
                also saw and spoke to the Medical Team who had arrived
                from the Northern General and informed them both that I
                was going to clear the injured from the pitch first and
                then undertake to remove the injured from the Gymnasium.
                However I informed the Medical Team that if it was
                necessary and if they identified any             injured
                patient in the Gymnasium, then I would remove them as a
                priority if one of the Medical Team would contact me by
                the ramp.

1558            I walked amongst the lines of bodies in the Gymnasium
                and counted them to get an approximate number.

1600 (approx)   I left the Gymnasium and returned to the top of the ramp
                to assist and update myself.      I saw Assistant Chief
                Ambulance Officer Jones and told him to take charge of
                the clearing area at the top of the ramp. I also asked
                him to get the entire area surrounding the ramp and the
                Gymnasium clear of the obstructions by vehicles which
                had   been  parked   in   that area.    This was    done
                magnificently by Mr Jones and Mr Dale.

                At this stage I told Ambulanceman             to go into
                the Gymnasium and assist and help with the injured, this
                was because                   is an extended trained
           paramedic and I thought he may be of assistance to the
           doctors.

1605       I returned to the Gymnasium and liaised for quite some
           time with Chief Superintendent Addiss who then briefed
           me as to the Police actions concerning the
           identification of the bodies, the certification and
           removal of the bodies and the recording of personal
           belongings. He asked if we would be prepared to assist
           with the removal of the bodies to various mortuarys and
           he identified the Northern General, the Royal
           Hallamshire and the Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield. I
           agreed that the Ambulance Service would assist with this
           matter and was informed that the Police now had to wait
           for the arrival of Mr Popper, the Coroner, before any
           action could be taken.

           I left the Gymnasium and told Mr Morley to get Mr Jones
           to locate spare body bags from the stand-by vehicles as
           all the body bags from the Major Incident Vehicle had
           now been used and there was a shortage.

            I also received from Mr Jones, Mr Morley and Mr Dale an
          - update of the situation of the vehicles placed at stand­
            by locations.

           I sent Mr Jones to contact the Chief Ambulance Officer
           at Ambulance Control, on his car telephone.

1625 08    I spoke to the Chief Ambulance Officer and informed him
           that there were 53 confirmed deaths and that more were
           being certified. I was able to inform him that all live
           casualties had left the ground and the gymnasium and had
           arrived, or were mobile to hospitals.   11 bodies were
           brought from the Leppings Lane Service Road by Ambulance
           to the Gymnasium.

           I returned to the Gymnasium, saw Chief Superintendent
           Addiss who informed me that the original plan which we
           had jointly agreed with regard the removal of bodies,
           had been changed by the Coroner and that no-one was to
           be removed to the Mortuary until the Coroner arrived. I
           was aware at this stage of an Inspector Charles who now
           appeared to be co-ordinating the recording of personal
           belongings and the identification of bodies within the
           Gymnasium. I knew that I did not need all of the
           Ambulances I had available to me at that stage.

           I decided to keep six Ambulances for the removal of the
           dead. Mr Jones informed me that he had ten Ambulances
           on stand-by outside the ground on Penistone Road North
           and a further 20 Ambulances standing-by on at Herries
           Road Bus Depot, with Mr Eason in charge. Mr Jones was
           asked to organise six vehicles to be retained in the Car
           Park around the Gymnasium which had now been cleared and
           to inform the other authorities's vehicles in order for
           them to return to their bases.
       The vehicles retained were all South Yorkshire based. I
       then transferred operations from the 'O' Gate area of
       the Ground, to the Gymnasium Car Park which was now
       clear.

1730   I sent Mr Morley to the Northern General and the Royal
        Hallamshire to do a physical check with the Police
        Information Officer of the number of bodies which had
        been removed from the Ground during the early stages.
        This was done in order to assess the body deployment
        which I knew had been undertaken later.

1750   I spoke briefly to Chief Superintendent Nesbitt outside
        the Gymnasium.

1800   The Chief Ambulance Officer arrived to be briefed on the
        Ground operation, he visited the Gymnasium/temporary
        mortuary, spoke briefly to Chief Superintendent Addiss
        and Mole and then spoke to the crews who were in the
        vicinity of the Gymnasium area.
            \ !12 ~ '235 \ iH',i s , i3o ;zi                         ^

v,: .‘
     ~cw

                               u    *£.^:,,.e:^'i    -,     :    .       Ct: ;CAi^A.
J



                                                    i


           QV<i           -
                                       ^.■K         '^<y'

           <>~VV^                  f\j.•:■.


                               A                          JAi,
       M                        (^(^rH^vvU2vL<-<—          O'^^'

                           'A




\A




C. Xcc*Jbja..

    s/cW cujUL        0,           ^       fc)rG-&do . /o use-fcfeix^v.    Ckx.JW>^-
J

                                           <yL#-iJl    jjLy    /si^rSi     ? ^~v<\w<5- (^S^U)('




                                           Cl Le-zA    ^jar A&xzj^i .

                                    \ K]^^.5o          4 ajthJl.           cic^x

                                   .       lO-Cjaro^O . Je. oJ^^nQ_       CLsxjlSX~     ^

f^ir       hlc-^Jo-civ^

My          8

                                                               ~   \~-oV
                                                                                            '^(VjcvAiL-

                                           %


                                   lv/^\
                                    .  —                                               ^o\S>              .
                                                                                               C® <c^rfsvo«JJ


                                                           -


                \
         H . A -         CorK^vUc^               Z O ^


                   C>




      (El Ctocrrv.

     CL i-<4-vJbja-.


                             Kj-ajt^fXo         lii   c**£$-**-S^~   CbscJU'-K


                             cist-Jl            j2v      /o^w* ^                        *




                              C ^xJt           '^y'

-•     Lis-eJfe               ^J2£t*Jo           ,k Ctfb^S,

                                          ..   Jo O^^-oZ.- .... (ZjSjCjl^X-

 M r

 A r          P
                  '°U*

                                                                                 ~ ^V^N>N<Q^




                                                             V\\N^Vi
\^   v"> _
               \
     CTr* •v   ■
                         O f           tire- ^



                    t>            'i        I.


                    P.     YV
                               U A i

                                                 C~~^>




R.   c A o—r —<2.

                         "5 . ^ W \ t .
^   & - %                             \
                                                                 (GVc-             P.      £C^s                          \^-3X)
    c_- E&.


                                                                                                                          ^ S \ f }




        ~l )    £\<S\                        "" w V - , ia—      \M/vW^V‘l          ^%y-~     ^-VA^^
                                           csu                     V V - ^ ' V            C ^ W x -W            • x z P j- r s




    T.         Q. e .

                                                    X \\i\-s
                                                                             t
                                                                   \ V - \ tn cy^\ ^ C \ V sl
                                                                                                                Q^py-v-
                                                                                                                v^v35\> v-\ ^ 5 A
                                                                                                                                   ,




    c                                                                        v^^Nx^vy^             ^Sv—^                      Q=<^>
                                  N Y ^ N V \ s
                                                                              x^> v


                          \V k V           b




    iP \                                                                                )X^S(y ^ £ >      0            m \(a _
                                          \ S > ' x ^ o ' ^y \ _   t.                                             v "t_V>'-\-^'V'^w
                                                                                                                         ‘y

                Q.     Co.                       v,<i\\   k> -

                                                 JNt-^-'V- \"-*-            V«-jV^L_
                                                                                          V'v\ w
                                                                                             VnX j"
                                                                                                      ^   k.     \^p4s>(\ v'Xj
                                                                                                          '^^^'yV .C \V \S
                                                                                                                             *-1
                                                                                                                              -J
                C ^ — y"'N\r

                                  - N ao       V           XK




                                                                                               0 ‘v~'         0\XN Qx^-^VyyNv,
                                          •v ^ v
                   o                                                  V c ’^v''-        ^\^C_
                       '^ s

               QJ\^      a    \   v   X^           \x 9                   ^Vs>v^           \Jo ( ^ J ^ T V -
                                         ^                      ^            ^ IC^ '




                          %



      \Ovx5^\>      V^o                                             V   '^

Soi~V>A3*50*3    C X j X J \ F 3 \ --^       V




                                                                V       ^ V



                                                 _/^*0s>o v^-




                                                  c s< V U j


                                                                                       f Y
Sv?                                                        AX. f r U                   v


       /'">




                                                                                  fVvg:
r\
                 P-^.




    I UJLS                 C<3vvkvL                      ^




                         CLoJ^S-        S            7




^     L ^ o . a I ft




    \r M
P-^jwocjy^S     cvv     Xjks^j<q,.



                                      v ,V X - r .       (
yfkftck            S                 X               l                                       '     1         r
    is ■ o b       -                                                 eoJI          ^ c^          qL          < y m              ftrca., ( o e d x £ L
        5 ■ o2     -        ^                     o A xksvjc^         .                 ^ jq_                         .W        ^m w < ?d          5
                                                      v'         tQ^Q           bckCA^       \o                   ,
                                                ”332a0ij^                                                              .    .
                                                                                  v W l                c§        oAiAcwc&s
                                                                     t*xtov
                                                   CkivK^Jl               ^£_     vxiovil         Id A .




^T(\ac           10             x        8 lQ S


    l5 - \0 - b S                                 Ks ^   s a )u \^          ^11             rfw v.             ^C^SL . ^ o r fe £                 O^XUUXO)
    1 5 - \\ - OH-                                Cq       7                           .Sss^.ac*sG.           ' . Q ^ 55‘0 & n
    0                                             fru          ?^XQ£l            P<\OJC\^OW                 $sK\           Cxiy      0\3QT         ^KSJU
                                                                                   rovjksL                                           ov^ajh   ■




'f^fvuK            | (j              x    9.0%
<R^ck              °\            x        m.
        I5'i^> -                                   V. sWtaor\ ' f^cbdu^G ^oo                                               ^Ooa QWoj^ -
    is - m--

                       \0            X ^

    IS ' jV 54.                                     ^cSbvWva <Wx                            cj^qxoS (W>                    ^ocxCQoW H a W
    )^-                -at                                       0



<RPOC              \\                X &o7-

    \ S - \ *b - \ 5 -                                         cW kx^ ^ ^ x v jf\0 )              q d s is W l ' ^ s Y c \k d \a o $               quoen



'(WM             U
                 U              X
                                2$       Sol
                                         U ^U .                                    „                    "         r             ,    \                 Q   -
         s -     1          - U-l                                                   ftaCAc -'JOP                 (ps^            ws^ :   V V ^ ^ W *
         5'      ai -               &|.                  aataAa&csL,



^   qsm,           °1           x        S cfl.


        15-      \S         ■ S 3           .                  ^>doax\0                0.        Ottyri          (^tf\
        is -       It       _ .o ~ 7 .
y<egcK           ^0         SK

   IS -            IS-           S b                                a     q^xjo                                  S"\cA on
   IS        '     tlo - Q°{

<R.ac4c            10            x        9xT£

  )S> - it-                 80                   7? S"taW> - 'oat jx\<Ldis^             a
  IS    lio
         -
                        ~   ^4-      -




•'fracK          S          X            M.
  IS' l(o - a 4-                               V.
                                               ??    skfcor\                   o.   V>oilqV
 # S ' (u

xfracx           \&          x           &10
  IS- n - o a                                          ¥i^XskjoC^                                 a>QL      ia

  IV n '

/fcack                      X        910
  15 -       \% -                                &2eoA3iiJOOj   6>c*ck - VX^            '-E£lc\p ^ s W j^

  IS-        \°i      - ol
                   ''tov


           \Y\YY<m           -
                                     k \        \    W   *    i                    \         '     s   i

  />
           IS-C^lS-H             jit.fv.tk- S w ' k > V s ,                            \                    f)i


 fe                                                                                           ............ /K
                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                  S'



                                           JvyUAJ'Cs,

           \ S ^ V y             ^                   { ^ V\

              ^                             \y ^ 4 -                                                       ^V^UVA      \v. U)VKSLV^
                                                                                                                            p n

                                                Swr                                        l\\     -         CH^ \ v \ \ U v ^
                                                                                           Vv^3\   YNtKV^-




             W<k       vJv^kN

                                                                                                       £



                                                                                                                       Cci'A,^ ta f
 ~W ’
    1“
                       Vv\v~                -          \Oj2/<3.^vyl          0V)



\s - < S

                             i^ o          bovOj^                       ^




\s-\1       \\v^       ^Cb                          jf^L7\)       \rjy\iT/
QiLso   ^ \ vy ^ r
       O'Vv

x^>           \ s-

v< l          VS- V2-
               \s - V*
     cjv^Aw                         W          ^ * vJW.q>     -^ li^ L ,

      SV         -~^QiV\V\S^ YV\W^      V'tAr^V^O         V^/V ,\>)
      <5^T     ^AW I'TuX*- '<u^ Cr^cX sV'^ Vav^S, ^W^lV\%
      ^    - ^ . ^ V 5 LcA \ \ > C—       IV M^ >
         ,            ,---------,   ...           r\
     V       't ' ^                       A^    < s\ (jfob\
                                    V )             \ o 1




                                                              ' / r.




ti




                                                                           -




-
                    \ so


J -   v \ . ~ I A          o O'- l \         o



                           ^ % X ^          o'v\V'   (               vj \ ^ o




                                                                                       V     0
                    &      )       SvvA^
                                                                               0     ^A      i'u
                                                                                             A
                                                                l;
                           \ r-.
                               ^\fy      O-.      n QsrvX&>

%                              <^2a-va_-^v

                                \ \ ^ .   ~V
                                                          ^

                                                     ^y&w*v.
                                                              0 6


                                                                     v&.V^:. w
                                                                                     A
                                                                                    D !}\!
                               K—     ' n                                             iln
                                   VakSl-     '^v-v^k.         ^Q    ^ v w V        bW/

                                   v $                          ‘^~    ^*\ lX\VW>/\
                                                              ................. u




                                            \} ^X-   1

                                      VjVwVA Vv           3 ^ V, (JH           Gf


                                                         0'vvXNy\     \VvvQ,

%
                                                                                                                                 Q\                               J^lC^
V            S
                              ■ E A s^ V                                                                            %W ' " ‘

                               S«-»-         %*&*               VsaS                              <^<s^-_ .

                                          0^9           q^o,\>cm^                                         s    v     a                       M \ £            *

                                V_\<K\^                 VrS\$V,                                                -V              .
                                                                                                                               0 . „                     |
                                                                                                                                             U ^ 4yJ1A k \


                                                    V       a   V   vx                                                ^        .Q_ -         '

                                       \-^    V~NNaci\^>                                 *                V U 5VjKi'N<-v^K             \^V       WjoV'            &£a\cl.
                               --- v---------                                        \                          \                        x

                                oJbO'-JX^X'         -                                                                                            __




                                                                    <Sii-/> - A ^ rv 5        j

•           *
    ...

                             <' E r v » - * ^ .                           .    (?oVx,             y A - "'


'.^                   tv
                                                                         Ci\\iaWl(vOkao                               \ Qv-v


                                                                                                                                                 P\                  \       \
                               QaCi-v^Cx^K                      \^^X^s!V%\pO                          V^>                                        V   x   */        ^yo\^°\

                                      C^Ovvn^               '\^vs^vV^v                   Vx-,^-               C i S ^ ^ V *>           cvV                         \N.0 ^ \

                                     \Cj^-Sw            \{V'~v^\x) >✓ £           ^\y3            L-XJ\n^jJv.             <?s\           V^^vv-sVa/vXj^

                      r\

                             ' ^ w a .                  ^             ^                                       -v.         C j o J ^ x         # V ^0                      C L -
     %

                                                  ^V.\^0 0 >jy^l^XJ4—^               ^ i t o O v ^ ^ * * /-^


                          O' 1^,-^v /-•
                      %
                                                                          ^-AJCjo<»*«*wsr\                                \S_ —        V^r-vv'X-.         ^V^>*S^j9v^vv 1k

                                                                           ^        G     ^       W   \                    C o o ^ .     v ^ V

                                              X N^          vv A          V^yjJU                                                                                   # ..


                                                      0                              \
...................        (V J jrtsX~&.------- ------------- ---------------------------- :
                                                                                           ----------- ---------- -- -------

                               V ^ v ' ^ a . ’o             ■*&/



                                                                V^VVaoy^g                                             ^    ,     'CZ^V^vS-—
                                                                       2r



                                 I C G ^                <v ''^n >c K > > \       C-\_£:*V^
                             Ch^A/O



                                                                                     & J U

                                                               ^ v S ~
                                                     I               \~w        C^.v^\v»v    Vcv^v,^ \ 2 ^ j




                         \ UVU)



                                           r         ^Viix\



    m   ;
                                                 V- ~ 0    ,




                                   K^o



                                                 a        W v W ^                               k w \MMntov




                  ^V\
                                                                                  :\~i\

            Cv^         >Vsr^ S s ^ -      \ \                        •^\\Uk>     V\^CKN^_ \)^\8>v--o l ..



                            C-          \ \ l v ^jvvSi>        Vji




>
                          -



                                                                 \o\V
                                                      \r^




          So-O-O

Q        Q-.u^ ° ■              5 > l,      r   w            i
    (?    Sjv^?b
                 vt_rf   \


                                         <\^<Zjd\ A
                         VJ^>


                                                  .'vjticr
         (U                                ^          ov^o        OJ^-
                 ^ ^                                                      C
                                  o    (                 \
                           ^ \ x . N^ XV\\'<'^ 1
   \5-    L V               _ vjo^fej, .VjMAt. ,
  \s-1w                                 \ tJ^) ^7*Acx\v Vv«o\J^CV
          \               sN^q-\p ^ <       %*&J*St\n C^AfQ'^'VN^K^ \
 ■NT'S) Y eo>._                                                     J
  \SA°\                         LooV Qv> V, \?cL
    NS-^\         S     VvZ'W 3^SJi>>)Nw^ ^j^o''A.W^\
  AS-^'L V*0 Vvv55WO (IXJsJ^^WvVwN, V        7V?5nV^^vV/ (D\a\
     •      ^\^WvV
                 kMj^          — -—                                                   .
 \S-VL V'            —- \>~v V^^\i
                              \        qVV QyO^ A                XJ" '~                   rv^-\

. \S-«-        \Vvsb
                  Y            -             -
                                                 ,   --         —- -                      —. - -
...
      '



           -------------- -----.--............ :--- --.---.-~------ --—
                                                                      ------- -._._. ..._.




.-...--.-..--.---........-..—
                            ------- -----.--.-.:;-.-.'.-.- -... ....•- -------- ---7---- -------
                                                                                                   W L


 \S'^-           ^             ____________                             \ > J-\          (:^   ^   >___

     S- <3so         %     W       \        S < ^       & \J        o^\.

                                   VyKU^jV-^
ft
                                       YV^cfsA«o)— ^




\S ly l°                                                                                                  •jvAo    ^      ~
                                                            <?V-^   \^-yV   i^   ^


\s ^ n                                                                               Q b S v




                                            CW>

                                                                                     V ^ o V v ^ c X 5c^ V

 V<i ^                   l\ <*AA

 \£to

V. L'l.                                                                          N^-s                        S\

^•2-5                                                                                    a w A            Cv^ ) ^ l R
             3            tX-^         V^y^V)

                                                                                       G^o^x          V wovn^

     %
\ 5 * <2*\                                        \    jt    mva*                                                 Qx x OVk Aa/
 \<KV         ( jU
                     'n.




EXjA    Ws_
        vyv
        < W   -

                       ^VdoVx_



                                                   r\
         ;J                                  NAp                     Vv             K.    -

                      o v                     a                   \\(JL    V

       ^<sv^^s^o\ >         —   X/nJ^o^V-—




!...
       VN]>   V-^ .. ^ v    <       O W l x W      4              ~\\Mk        W         C | ^ v   L




                                                          *»a#*



                                                                      N^\V         \\




                                                              5           \fV V j\v




                                              o u u a ^                                       ©    W
           S '"/. P-                                                                     ,
             o^.            YL W.P-                    Sol l-s/!?/ & .                             ‘T^9-                   iSZq - /6o<=f

js l           C     a il       .

| op*        ,fcL^>.                    ‘%>                  •         H                                       ^ r&c^-~eP               ^2 avCfccoJ^.
                                                    ? y S •            H xCMo b<s>r'3t^ ^ 4v                       yCTC^-t-tS)         £2   Ovv^^r®-^-.
(^121 ^ ( ^ ( 4 ? . 11A~vt
                F /c        C ^k^U                   Y ^         ^ S         jh-C7V^V        M-<Xlobor53t-‘-»jA                   ^ rarcx-rQ              CctaJ<-*>JL
 S     n   . M. A- ' S. ( C - F \                                            °                                      ^
                                                    C rCs<-^r^)             <Lcr*J^reJ^            <^a>
V'oaO.                     &3*fc<>d=~                ^fOcA^cQ                                     <^P~>       oJ\&o-Q ■
           M A-'S,
d , t-
                                                   C>(5-W        (Jl<% x.        C^jA^-o>-e>fc-       0L4«»jili-vXo^vC3>.              •Oj 2/--\M-'C-*-    ^   ^M a_

                                                  JrStzz^J-Q -                          jC /v jlw -       /a ja ^ L ^ < » r          <5 ^ i x a - r                  acL birJL

                                                  Jlj>*.     CLexdOroJ^                 i^oOC         ct-t          X ^*-v3ya-t^<yri             J^cx^sl.^
                                                   bey^C         c*-^                                     L   cl^ji                        J^-


                                              /                   /              /            /               /                  /          /
     nJ        CLoJX.

 I d-pe         Jll^jL.                                                     XS>           \S              V-l^odojaorcrt^iv                     ^roou-X'         God&J-


                                                                            \-C2stm      M ^Xt^ fc2-e>ro^j^y^                    OttO-c><tO                             IT
                                                                                             ]T                                  -«2-2bv '-/C     ^                  ^6-,
                                                                            ^t^va-vr           tfL <3liivv-ccx~                CX/W/'Jo^-^suao,.          d?-3^c-<_3<'
                                                                            Qot-JL&l atZJtar-JL                   jti,            ytJta*        ^>o-^c_»-
                                                                           C.Ov\3troA_            fOCTKV            jfc.        Jj-a*L->-
                                                                            ,OOnM<>                   i’ A<2-.C            ,




                                                                           {2o*J^C        t ^JOL           ^>0^^0~S>~£)
                                                                                                       ■&*cn~-r-Xjd^s' t .yt^a*^                 Sco-^
                                                                         U±e^£L          ^-o-ciw^         y^,                         Se^-S        Oft-        ®vi




                       o    u       ^             <2.&£»<ci                       O ^          o.fes s^ c ^                       V s            0 \ ^ .
            /TELEPHONE                    MESSAGE                                     Date


From        l            C L <A ^ v>>-\                                          To                       fc V


                Ref.


                                                                                                L < 5 ^ _ ..
... —      — ------------ -                 --------   -------- -------------- 3 L - ^ ’   —

                          'c p      - \ t \ V

                              ^ 1 5 ^ Q V s o y v j,                          V^""”        (K (V W ^ i > ,

       v     \ \       fe V                                                                           ^           .




Seen                                  _ M essaae taken bv                                      Time

                                                                                                                 G 1281
                                  ^ \f\.
                              r\/~i '— )       I
                                                   ,
      '—' -—' — -         {
                    -—        ,. „— ->—




     Q & b          u ^ ^ V -              ^   A V * \




J ■<S(K>Jjr-i^ ^ V D r ^ C L ^ ^ n S \ 3 (^-V^_

b\N c_ey\JbcvcA
n A ^ S                                          I'A-’
^ vvu                                    -       (S- X'L
> v i                                            \'r- v 5
                   X,                             \5-3f
                                                  AS^
    VoV                                      '      u-13
    sp\ x
,M^.S x                                              \S~Jl
                              O
 ^’SOV-'                      *> \ S V _ -
 j-So.s   K                ', ? •>SN&-'Ss>
   'vS^V. x                                          VS'V-T
  yuvu                                               IV$^-
           *                                         \S \r
    ^       Qjb                                            'Q&v
>       >    3         X         T ;■                \SA^
            3^ 1                                         IV^O
    , ^ 2 •                                              \ M V
                   x                                     \S 'Z %
    -k»E                                                 \ S’-Sg’
    <5 0 1■        *                                     IS-
' ^O’S”')       \v^saJ^-. %-<L£vv                        (*S / £X
  ^ R f Y £'<*■   "                                             '
       r j V ' . '-        .
                                                                                  -"ITJo TS^LU


t
CL<yuJ-tbJ                     -eoc pXaX-*\       ko          }\                                    tLJz
tAst(Ji-     ^e>                               stv<     Q^lZ*\*a         C(jZ*Cjlsv^3        *C-r\J-£,
                                  j             .-^viu—a-      -C-n          O          a o&-+()    -jf^CV^
                                      adt^-n^

A jto o                               CL«'&-     £ovc,       C~&l£ X q        yty&~*£fL-         b<-A
    ^ "i ■ P             Jco                   A-S>      ^ C-eyzj»J-Q             .-^CreJL         C^Xa-eJi.
    ■^4~fnzrcjt-^A^      CTU-C      ^                                         ^          -^-r"     f3E^v°^}
     £tt£*Z-ru^Mz       £<>    ^UsvJtgu^J^.            OUv                         cm.
                   o<J?hz-v-£~.       JjIxl      poAjt-c_i^           !2_o^oC'




                                                  tOajJl
                                                                               —,   .




            ,Vx^                         ^ \—^)      V\>             ^J\ 'a.


                            v ■ —             —        „ (^ \          C:^ v-xEXXJU:.'-^ y K:C-

                     _ ^ ^ - V                         W V O                            Vy^vV-

                    v^>s.                -»                               ^
   •fx
             c                                                                           •Nc7
                                                                                                                                                \V\a^cn
                                             S'f-j          ^\SK       Ooo^a
                    .OS.                 .




                                        C^                             v£&. ''’•?■ ,S :V .. % Vv.V;                                                 ySi^
            \^>SNl)VSvj>—                                           N ^ vSi. \~^        C>Nx\

               (^ -              ^3K^ '                                                                   Q j ^ j M \p             y ^

              ,C
               ^N «                 V j^ V                                          CrO D , _             <5*3
                    ^              'V                                               ^
                                                                                         -       V

                                                                                    % ~\V<\^                         „

                            ^XS^-T                V W ^ S ^ ,           NePv^C^VxQ              ,. ^        C j w        c*,

  1
                                                     -^\jjcj-<os^                       " \ o V ^                -~-^, '
                                                                                                                       x\ ^ T t                <^-«aKV

                                                                                                                                                   < ^ ivoi tiX
\VnTa
                           \>45i              .\\vvO^         \5 ^ ^            <\ J \ >^ !N^r^xX                                 W ^ - .J ^ L |? C jK.V.

                                                                               'X
 W         s > c '- - —^            CZ3s ^ » -3 v ^ v \o            O -y S -    CSo-Wv^t^Lxj         'S          —        ^ --< \j vo \V Jfi

   ^\N£-                                                               ,6^y. V                              .->x^        .Vi         il|i^jSjAj^,          «o .



                                                           J v s o i v                                                                                     \V > .
             f\            X .
                                                           V v ^ v
                                                                                                       ^         J-^\w^           v-SU.    \    JKf0 V^U
                                                                               ;V^ v-Sjj
                                                                                                                            ^P oV
                                                                       \Ak>!            \>\vt^
                                                                                                                                                            v>
                                                                                                                               \ (k^- 0=^°^

                                                                                                                   ^\\3^Q§j \ ^QCU/V^^              -^\\)'

                                                                                                                                y^V     k    ^*^“V

                                   ^     y v V i^ r^ .      V >v3^V ^»               \ Z / vnjXX,Cwwxx             Vjnv- ^ \

                                                                                         \             x °                0

                   \ ^ O S -—              ^~3sv^>wRi                              V'.^C^\/kwv^-^
                      r>               ^r'V'.-Nr                                                                         ^ r 'w\pv*,o          SIst'u<)\ VJL.,
                       V>i 'v'“%
                                       V^nAq>a^ w - — •                  -                               ^0 —                          V W - « w ->

                       ,-^\                                 o ^ V             V     k             v>   A j^        V     W     x   o \ ^ v^ w > . b         \j u A .

                                   NiXltt^               VjO        Vv                                                   —




                      \ S > <0 ^              "~ \'v^^             \          '\JsCsJlj2J‘^--A^L.                      ^C"W>w-,          C

)                                          <>\              /Vs                                          Cov%
                                                                                             r~>
'sGVvM'i                                                                                      3        *=*




                                                                                                                                             'Q^Vs^A

                   ^ '''■-Isi'          A iv/"^^sS ■■«—■*         -'V ^L ..   _'        V ^V ^ vC ^ —                                             \i_ S -

                         V .             ’t -      c        .

                                                                                                                                            W u-^V^
 'C'fS^NfV'Vi—*1                                                                         IXk ^ ~              ~~        \\saV.              W ^      ^Avy V




                                                                              \3o                                  '?33^       _
                   Xj^rWXi           C^V^j        ^a\(/k.— -•   3     .^Y^W)                            AV C 4
                     ^      ' -Vk A        \.(U ^i«— •                                  -•>:>       o     <2*
                                         ! '   t              v.      ^
                                             5^  $L

 ^     rWjuW " ' O                       ■                                v££>     «\^’/!
                                                                                                J       T       ^

c;
     i;7?y — -4 ^
        V^js452/£_tX). ’^            v4j^         Uo       Sdk,           oo^-<     dbA                          16^oo

     WsvJ^/       :L^\)                                "24>     )

                                    -A              ’a .       ui:y       .uvuftj
                                                                           UVvxj 0)     -?A>fo_

                                                               W ^v               lx,



                    v a   >                                'Vju-<=i .'s^^y ^ am                     % .

                              6v^                          ^ \ w a j i

                    w v A^vV                      w l ^\P
                                                                                   as--             A A V            \ w,
     ___




                        Q         ^ }   g o o      -v       V,    V      <^ ~ V > W V \ X     -




                                         V>\\^          C ’U'             0 CCIP3            qx)

      v€-^»\v5 y             ^ V nV vaJxaV»v *X_        0




                                                            \ \
                   <o


     T^NX-

^    M ^ T v/ ‘                               -         Xjv -
                                                            :\ ^         \ ^ ^      p   :7        <so xw >


C£ ^ r ^ O ^ - _ < U ? C         - ( S ^ ^ V ^ y X ^              <5^1


                                                                                         : o t u x :




                    *5sNrN
                              VX-n S \

                             -.                       v-iu       V A w > ..
 pv
 V^w^AvukM.              iX ^       VrA       QvW^       Iv v k ^ X                                   ^CM^l




                                                                                 UV      iN> -Sm v v c s W
                                                                                        Cs                    )
                       r^^iXjAKrx      \7hJ                          \^&A.            S^V.. \,\     :v .
                                  ~ \^M C
                                    ^._&UJb

     kI   \ l\ ^                                 <X :t,~ y                         V^tSx£X_

                              'N^SLj                    —*

                                  wo-^-
                                                             '\?ufCv\ V.'j


C&JviN ^       w r V   \ x                                           jC«-/w \^ ^          <ly^Aoo^



     N^o



                   v x \5‘



               m                  s s S         s                                  Q - ^ )o       ^<kVV




                                                                             l   U, c



                                          V3\»£-Vu»           «j~a 3v ~
                                       ■%-,______________         \ \<L



                        Or^Kf*J>h\

                                                                           V)^o.''\\X^)




          C"
           ^-■Vj'\>rs^                                                    Dh(\^.vv>

              ~'w        vM y r s    v\J^ ^   \j

«n n ^ Ofl^    V.




                                                   V^ wi.




    XCv-^

              ^ w _ .         \—        ''\                 QtyiL'v       j y&j




                        / ^


       l HA ■/)
 \Ctvv-U                             A w

                                               &.

  K                         V    ,         C   dv-




                                                                                            I



               V ( \ iA V                                                                                                   (kvJAf^


           %
                                                                  1       W




                                                                       U2-      , O vv^V         Vj^v




M s K -

 \£a».                          f ^ K \ A \ o V *-''\                           W \r s v w ^ \     C nO i/o r x     \ - \




                                                                       1\ m \                       ^      ^    \i> <?'i^

                   S&       \vrsM          ' :. v       ..   _i        ____

             w .    <►                                       ....."^w                    W ,

 t f . U V i ^\v            Jen                "     \fW >             cV\A^\                                                 ol A




             v \                                        0\            C w ? V ^ 7\)V-            ^ yp^a \yA _ . ®      Q~^ ^0U—
                                                                                                        ,V w V ^ k v J l




                                                                                 V s k
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                    BBC TAPE



       1535          By gate 3 (P Higgins)

       1535:2        P Higgins walks back

       1536          Edwards and        by goal mouth in vehicle
                     (Did not stop - sweep gound)

       1537          P Eason centre of goal mouth

       1539                   on foot on pitch

       1539          SYMAS Ambulance leaving ground

       1542          No more casualties brought out
                     Terraces clear. Hoardings stacked.

       1543          P Eason in front of goal assessing situation.

       1552          Tape stopped




20/3
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                    BBC TAPE



       1535          By gate 3 (P Higgins)

       1535:2        P Higgins walks back

       1536          Edwards and        by goal mouth in vehicle
                     (Did not stop - sweep gound)

       1537          P Eason centre of goal mouth

       1539                   Ion foot on pitch

       1539          SYMAS Ambulance leaving ground

       1542          No more casualties brought out
                     Terraces clear. Hoardings stacked.

       1543          P Eason in front of goal assessing situation.

       1552          Tape stopped




20/3
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                            BBC TAPE



 \        1535               By gate 3 (P Higgins)

     x    1535:20   ,        P Higgins walks back

     \     1536              Edwards and        by goal mouth in vehicle
                             (Did not stop - sweep gound)

     ^ 1537                  P Eason centre of goal mouth

 \         1539                       on foot on pitch

     \     1539-^            SYMAS Ambulance leaving ground

     \. 1542
                             No more casualties brought out
                             Terraces clear. Hoardings stacked.

         \ 1543              P Eason in front of goal assessing situation.

           1552              Tape stopped




20/3
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                  Station Officer Eason


                                   MRE2/Q/Tapes 1 & 2



       1505/50 (PE)        Crew Assaulted - by Gate 3

       1506 (PE)           # leg side of goal

       1511 (PE)           Goal Mouth on radio

       1513 (PE)           Goal Mouth - Assessing patients

       1514                        and                 in goal mouth

       1514/20 (PE)        25 yards front of goal mouth looking into stand

       1515/43             St Johns vehicle on pitch

       1517                1      L and               in goal mouth

       1517/40             Empty cot in goal mouth

       1519                        an<f               - resuscitating

       1519                Evacuating casualties from Gate 3

       1520                SYMAS vehicle on pitch

       1522                               dealing with patient^ side of ambulance

       1525                St Johns holding each other and crying

       1526:23             Four Ambulances Officers to right-hand side of goal

       1528                               > right side of goal mouth

       1528                         and bag and mask

       1529                          and Police Officer resuscitating casualty

       1531                Video stopped




20/3
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                  Station Officer Eason


                                   MRE2/Q/Tapes 1 & 2



       1505/50 (PE)        Crew Assaulted - by Gate 3

       1506 (PE)           # leg side of goal

       1511 (PE)           Goal Mouth on radio

       1513 (PE)           Goal Mouth - Assessing patients

       1514                        and                in goal mouth

       1514/20 (PE)        25 yards front of goal mouth looking into stand

       1515/43             St Johns vehicle on pitch

       1517                        and               |in goal mouth

       1517/40             Empty cot in goal mouth

       1519                        an<f               -                             resuscitating

       1519                Evacuating casualties from Gate 3

       1520                SYMAS vehicle on pitch

       1522                               dealing with patient^ side of ambulance

       1525                St Johns holding each other and crying

       1526:23             Four Ambulances Officers to right-hand side of goal

       1528                              , right side of goal mouth

       1528                         and bag and mask

       1529                          and Police Officer resuscitating casualty

       1531                Video stopped




20/3
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                                  Station Officer Eason


                                   MRE2/Q/Tapes 1 & 2



       1505/50 (PE)        Crew Assaulted - by Gate 3

       1506 (PE)           # leg side of goal

       1511 (PE)           Goal Mouth on radio

       1513 (PE)           Goal Mouth - Assessing patients

       1514                        and                in goal mouth

       1514/20 (PE)        25 yards front of goal mouth looking into stand

       1515/43             St Johns vehicle on pitch

       1517                        and                in goal mouth

       1517/40             Empty cot in goal mouth

       1519                        an<f               -                             resuscitating

       1519                Evacuating casualties from Gate 3

       1520                SYMAS vehicle on pitch

       1522                               dealing with patient^ side of ambulance

       1525                St Johns holding each other and crying

       1526:23             Four Ambulances Officers to right-hand side of goal

       1528                              , right side of goal mouth

       1528                         and bag and mask

       1529                          and Police Officer resuscitating casualty

       1531                Video stopped




20/3
 \
     V
         *




                                           SUGGESTED SYMAS WITNESSES

                     [Names in square brackets in the main duplicate evidence of other
                     witnesses.]
         / r                                          O ■ M A- O .
                      l. PAGE                  T-RHA E m e r g e n c y P l a n n i n g Officer.
                 ^                             General policy. Desire of SYMAS to have
                                                same statutory powers as fire service,
             j                                 Present in control room throughout pm of
                                                15.4.89.


                      2. WILKINSON              Liaison with SWFC in 1988 - Hillsborough
                                                Plan


                                                Only repeats Wilkinson and Higgins.


                      3. HIGGINS (Alpha 3)      Liaison Officer with SWFC.         On duty at
                                                match on 15.4.89.

                      4. EASON (Alpha 4)        L i a i s o n o f f i c e r w i t h S W F C (in
                                                succession to Keyworth).            On duty at
                                                match on 15.4.89.


                      5.                        On Station at match S405. Go down to
                                                Leppings Lane. Render assistance to
  H©a                 6.                        first casualties.


                      7. YOXALL                 Off-duty spectator in Crowd.      Helped
                                                close outer perimeter gates.        Went
                                                through C gate when opened for first
                                                time.   Went at back of Leppings Lane
                                                Stand at 1512 and treated casualties.


                      8.                        S407. Arrived Leppings Lane 1513.
                                                Police not expecting them. Gate C
L aas)<Z.                                       opened and people brought out after
                                                they arrived. Returned to ground at
                                                Penistone Road end and directed onto
                                                pitch.


                                           )    S203 arrived 1518 Leppings Lane.
                                           )   Describe scenes outside and inside
                                           )   Gate C.
                                  R608 arrived 1535 Leppings Lane
La^(t        10.

                              )   S102. Back up vehicle from Middlewood.
                              )   Arrived 1514 directed by police to area
^       JjjjL 1 1 .           )   outside police room under North Stand.


                              )   S209. Arrived Penistone Road approx
                              )   1517. Directed onto pitch by SO Higgins
U o .00      12 • F L A C K
                              )   to pick up casualty with broken leg.


             13. HOPKINS      )   Arrived 1523 in      Range Rover. Task
                              )   control Hopkins      took over gymnasium.
             14. MORLEY       )   Morley organised     vehicles and casualties
                              )   on pitch and in      assembly area.


             15. JONES            Arrived Leppings Lane about 1600 then
                                  went to gymnasium and took charge of
                                  area outside gymnasium.


            kIH                   Arrived with Major Incident Vehicle.


              16. CLARKE          Superintendent on duty in control.
     ¥
              17.                 Emergency control: spoke to SO Higgins
                                  at 1505 and several times thereafter.


              18,                 Control Assistant: took first and second
                                  emergency calls from police HQ.


              19.                 Control assistant. Inter alia took call
                                  from press u s i n g 999 c al l to get
                                  through.


        V     20. WADE            Training Officer: Deals with use of
                                  d e f i b r i l l a t o r and r e s u s c i t a t i n g
                                  equipment in crowd situations.
Passted                         At Scene                                            Left Scene                                     Arr. t-tosp.




                EMERGENCY CALL RECEIPT                        S.Y.M.A.S.                                                             A.S.1.

                Tape Reference                                         „                          Serial No.

                Location of Emergency       f s J i t cJL          -
                                                                                              *                         Name
                                                                                                                        Name
                N ature of Incident                                                                                     (if know n)
                                           S & y i Ca t ,
                N um ber of Casualties J    Str             D/H               S/H                 A ny Trapped


Receivajt)
          rsr   Fire or o th er Hazards

          in    Callers Name                                                                      T elephone No.
                               T i c
          in     CALL                                                                                    AT          LEFT
                                                                                                                    SCENE
                                                                                                                                 ARR.
                                                                                                                                 HOSP.        GREEN
                 SIGN          LOCATION           P A S S E D BV       TO       TIME PASSED            SCENE
          or

          S4
          co




                Receiving Hosp.                                                                     2 nd Hospital

Received        Police                             Fire                                  Hospital                           Others
   By                                                                                                                       Time
                Time                               Time                                  Time

                By                Rec.             By                  Rec.              By                  Rec.           By                    Rec.
f/   *

                NOTES: See over
Passted                          A t Scene                                           Left Scene                                    M rt. n o i p .
                                                                                                                                                                 '■'■■-"I
                                                                                                                                                                    X:



                EMERGENCY CALL RECEIPT                           S.Y.M.A.S.                                                            A.S.1.

                Tape Reference ^ < 0 * ^                                                          Serial No.

                L ocation of Emergency        P JU          cA        tb c T ^          (j? J P P - ' ^ C j S '                 ....... - .............. ..... ......
                                                                                                                        Name
                N ature o f Incident                                                                                    (if know n)
                                             S& A . 10 \r c                 C
                                                                     (JU
                N um ber o f C asualties:     Str             D/ h             S/H                Any Trapped

          rsr   Fire or o th e r Hazards
Receivayh                                                                                                                    .............. —- ...................... I1--
                                                                                                                                                                        .

          tr>   Callers Name        j£                                                            T elephone No.

          ID     CALL                                                                                     AT         LEFT    1   ARR.
                 SIGN          LOCATION             P A S S E D BV     TO        TIME PASSED            SCENE       SCENE        HOSP.
          OC

          oo



                Receiving Hosp.                                                                      2nd Hospital

Received        Police                               Fire                                 Hospital                          Others
   By                                                                                                                       Time
                Time                                 Time                                 Time

                By                Rec.               By                 Rec.              By                 Rec.           By                           Rec.
n    *

                NOTES: See over

                                                                                                                       M M M a n




    S M    B




                                                                                                                                                .   . ........




                                                                                                                                                       :.r              .




                                                                                                                                              ....
 PasSfed                     At Scene                                        Left Scene                                      A rr. H o s p .




             EMERGENCY C A LL RECEIPT                     S.Y.M.A.S.                                                            A.S.I.

             Tape Reference                                     „                          Serial No.

             Location of Emergency      M U r J i              ScK              (op p ^ l c - ( J               /cL^e
                                                                                       '                          N am e
                                                                                                                  Name
             N ature of Incident
                                        $0\!(AT                     eass                                          (if known)

             N um ber of Casualties:    Str            D/h             S/H                 Any Trapped

       rsr   Fire or o th e r Hazards
Receivaeh
       in    Callers Name                                                                    Telephone No.
                            T / C
       LO     CALL                                                                                 AT          LEFT        ARR.
              SIGN          LOCATION          P A S S E D BY   TO        TIME PASSED             SCENE        SCENE        HOSP.         GREEN
       oc

       3*
       go



             Receiving Hosp.                                                                 2 n d Hospital

Received     Police                            Fire                               Hospital                            Others
   By
             Time                              Time                               Time                                Time

             By                Rec.            By               Rec.              By                   Rec.           By                       Rec.
ft
             NOTES: See over
                At Scene                                            Left Scene                                      A rr. H o sp .




EMERGENCY C ALL RECEIPT                          S.Y.M.A.S.                                                           A.S.1.

T ape Reference            _______________                                       Serial No. _________ ________

Location of Emergency          P J U r'ji                              (op p ^ l c ^ J               Io ^       q
                                                                                                       Name
N ature of Incident                                                                                    (if known)
                           S & Y I CAT
N um ber of C asualties!       Str             d/ h           S/H                Any Trapped

Fire or o th e r Hazards

Callers Name                                                                     Telephone No.
               T / c       .
 CALL                                                                                    AT         LEFT        ARR.
 SIGN          LOCATION              P A S S E D BY   TO        TIME PASSED            SCENE       SCENE        HOSP.          GREEN




Receiving Hosp.                                                                     2nd Hospital

Police                                Fire                               Hospital                          Others

Time                                  Time                               Time                              Time

8y                Rec.                By               Ret.              By                 Rec.           By                        Rec.


NOTES: See over
              CENTRE




                                                            THUR
              a




^     '               V ^ o o ^ e c r v .      v«Ci      V t ^ C ^ e s S



                  v     -




                               5L - C   a   ^ A Z aL £
     ^ . c



    ^ C L


      £ > ^


      S   k
                                                   ~>07 > ■ t-»o ->
C o A'c e.'ou                         &



                                M         §
(L              )               ff
                                r\
                                w
                                          0° i
                                          o  Z-
                                £         x> ^
                                          ^  o
                                I '       g   r>
                                              f
                                              7-
                                              <\
                                              s
                                              o
                                              t>

                    <V3\jQ.<J
▼




    CEN TR E             BT                                      CENT




                                                  0930


                                                  THUR




                         C    f       V ^ C VA> \5          v


        \ ^ C A ^ e c > i            v«Ci     V   t ^ C v\ b e s S




                 ^   .    C   a   ^ A i<JUL
    «,




r
        y
    v
            ~\0~? vt-\0-^
              CENTRE                                                 CEN T
                       \>(X




                                                      J\t                    -r
                                                      0930


                                                      THUR




^    ^                            c £        V ^ C - vX> \ i ^ ^

^    '             \ ^ c ^ > ^ c n         v«Ci    ^ l ^ C ^ e s S




                          \ V \ S \ < \ r i 't'O    MVS>VC




               =

                              _   C a o A. iLiL£
         c      ;



    'bCL


     s.*-


     ■S v v
c o « ; ^ C   ' c ^        )




                           If' y
                               v


                      rV




                                   ,. >4s
                                                                                                                                                                                  WG ■
                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9
                                                                    West Midlands Police
ILC
                                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29                                       (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s . 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25
        Name               .WltLIAM PURCELL ^
28
27      Age . . . ^ ? ............               (yrs)                  Date       of Birth . .^9 :?.*£P.
28
        Occupation . . GENERAL. MEDICAL _P ^ C T I T I C H E R ..............

22 29 Home or business address
23 30 and telephone number
24 31
25
26
27
28

        This statement, consisting of                                              page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29 and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
24 31
      have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
25
26
27    Dated the                      day o fp                                       19
28
                                                                                                        Signature witnessed by

                                                                                                        Officer's Name . .

                                                                                                        -Rdok* . . . . . . . . . . . . .              No .

                  I       am       a      G en eral              M ed ical                 P r a c titio n e r                    by       p ro fe s s io n                and        ha-

             w orked               in       th is           c a p a c ity               sin c e            1964.                  I     p r a c tis e              from         th e

             S ta n n in g to n                      H ea lth           C e n tre,                U ppergate                   Road,             S h e ffie ld .

                  I       have            p ro v id e d             a        G .P .        s e rv ic e             to       th e        S h e ffie ld               W ednesda;

             F o o tb a ll                C lub          sin c e             1976.                  The         p o s itio n               is      g e n e ra lly               re fe

             to       as        "C lub               D o cto r"              b u t      th is           is      m islead in g                    so       fa r       as     th e

             d u tie s             a re          co n cern ed                  and          i t     w o u ld          be       p ro p er            to          re g a rd       th e

             ta s k          as""T eam                   D o cto r".                       I      am      th e        G eneral                P r a c titio n e r                 t o _

             b o th          th e         P la y e rs            and           th e        O ffic e             S ta ff           and         a tte n d            a l l    F ir s t

             Team            m atch es                 to      ren d er              em ergency                    m ed ical               a s s is ta n c e               to     in j

             p la y e rs .                       I    e i th e r             a tte n d            o r     am       on       c a ll         fo r       Second               Team

             gam es             and         have            a tte n d e d               a t       FA      Cup         S em i-F in als                    h eld         in       prev

             y e a rs           a t       H illsb o ro u g h .                             I      h o l d _a          S p o rts            Inju ry _ C l in ic                    fo r

             p la y e rs               tw ice            w eek ly              and         am       n e a rly            alw ays             pn        c a l 1       when        Res-

             and          Y outh            gam es             are           h e l d . _ ............ .. ....................................................

                   I t        is       n o t         p a r t     o f         my      d u tie s            t o _b e          on        c a ll        g e n e ra lly              a t

             G round                as       a       D o cto r.                   S t.         J o h n 's          A m b u lan ce                B rig ad e            p ro v id e

             F i r s t          A id         f a c ilitie s ^                   to     _S u p p o rters                  a t . F i r s t _Team                     gam es.                   :

             w o u ld            n p t       n o rm ally                ex p e ct              to       le a rn          about_ S p e c t a t o r s                        b ein g _

             ta k e n            i l l     j)r         i n j u r e ^ ^ l e s s                       th is         happened                   w i t hin ^m y                             .


         Signed          I _ .............................................                              Jiature w itnessed by . .

         *    D e le te a s applicable.
                                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended
                                                                          W est M idlands Police
                                                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                              (C.J. A ct 1 9 6 7 , s .9; M.C. A ct 1980, s.1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

„         .                                          .                W ILLIA M                 PURCELL
Continuation of statement of ......................................................
T h ere                 have          been          a .sm al                  1     num ber              o f       o ccasiip n s              o v er           th e        y e a r s ^w h e n

p eo p le                    have         c o l la p se d                 .<?r       been            in ju re d               f a i r l y         n ea r        t    .9    w here            I      was

s e a te d                   and      I      have               c>f      ccpurse                .gone          to      .h e lp .th e se                p e o p le .                   . . . ..............

               I        do      n o t        have               any           w ritte n             C o n tra c t              w ith          th e         C lub, b u t               th e          du_t

th a t             I         d e s c rib e          above                     a re        th o se, w h ich , h av e                          been          c a rrie d , o u t                    jDy . t

 ’’ C l u b             D o cto r"            f o r             v e ry            many          y e a rs           a n d . t h e . way. t h a t                      I . have            d e a lt.

w ith              th e         m a tte r            is             in        no     way          d if f e r e n t              frpm          my p r e d e c e s s o r s                         ...........

               I        do      n o t        have               a     d ir e c t           r e la tio n s h ip                   w ith .th e                   S t.        J o h n ' s ..............

A m b ulan ce                        B rig a d e .                       .^h ey           have           t h e i r ; . <?wn M e d i c a l                      O ffic e rs ,                 one             c

whom               I         b e lie v e           is           D r.          S h o rtla n d .                         The     C lub          p ro v id e s                a    F i r s t          A id

Room               fo r         th e         use            o f       th e          S t.        J o h n 's .to b u la n c e                       B rig a d e..                 . . I. do. n o t

 have              a         key       to      th is                a re a          and         have           o n ly .b e e n               in     o n .one               o c c a sio n               th

 I      can             rem em ber.                         I       have            no     c o n tro l.w h a ts o e v e r                           o v er           th e       o p e ra tio n

 o f          th e           S t.      J o h n 's               A m b u lan ce                  B r i g a d e , p e r s o n n e l ..................................................■____

               A t           th e      C lub         th e re                  is      a    T reatm en t                     Room         w h ich           is        p rim a rily                   th e

    a re a         w here              th e        C lub              P h y s io th e ra p is t                         A lan        S m ithy / t r e a t s , i n j u r e d                              .

 p la y e rs .                         T h is        c o n ta in e d                      tw o       co u ch es,                th ree, p h y s io th e ra p y                              m achi

    and        sto c k s               o f     b an d ag es,                        d re ssin g s                  and        som e          d ru g s ._                  T h is      room              is

    o fte n              r e f e r r e d           to           as        th e        "M ed ical                   Room"          b u t       r e a lly              i t       sh o u ld            be

    c a lle d                th e      P h y s io th e ra p is t                           Room            a lth o u g h             I       do     use         i t        o c c a s io n a ll

    A     P la y e r             in ju re d                 on        th e          f ie ld          w ould             be      tak en            to       th is           room          and

    th en              i f     n e c e s sa ry                  to        h o s p ita l.                       T here           is       a    s tr e tc h e r                  k e p t       in        th

    c o r r id o r                  ju s t     o u ts id e                    th is         room .

               A bout                fo u r        o r          fiv e             y e a rs        ago          a       fo rm er          D ire c to r                o f       th e      F o o tb a

    C lub           M r.         G u n sto n e,                     c o lla p s e d               w ith            a    c a rd ia c           a r r e s t            n e a r       to       me         in

    R e ce p tio n                   Lounge                 a t       h a lf-tim e .                           I       w as     e v e n tu a lly                su c c e ssfu l                     in

     r e s u s c ita tin g                     M r.             G u n sto n e.                       I     w as         a s s is te d             by       a    D o cto r              from            th

    N o rw ich                 F o o tb a ll                C lub             who         had        an        A m bu-bag                and        airw ay                w ith         him .

     The           A m bu-bag                 is        a       s u b s titu te                    fo r        a p p ly in g             m outh            to        m outh           re s u s c i

     ta tio n '.                     The       p u rp o se                    o f     th e         airw ay              is      to       p ass         a       p ip e .o v e r               th e

     to n g u e               and         down           th e            m outh            to      c re a te            a     c le a r        p a s s a g e .

                   The         n e x t       m o rn in g                  I       w as      asked              to        speak           to       th e         C lub           C h airm an

     M r.          M cGee.                    By         chance                    th e re         w as        an       a r t i c l e          in      th e          c u rre n t             B r it i

     M ed ical                 Jo u rn a l               a b o u t            p o rta b le               d e f ib r ill a to r s                    and          I        to re        th is           ou

     to        tak e           w ith          m e.                  W hen            L m e t         M r.          M cGee         we         d is c u s sed                 th e       e v e n ts
                  ..........       '.'Jv"" ...................
                                        — If
     Signed .1_____________________________ Signature witnessed by . .,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WG A
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Amended 9.6
                                                                        W est M idlands Police
                                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                           IC.J. A ct 1 9 6 7 , s . 9: M.C. A ct 1980 , s.1 0 2 : M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of s.a.em en, of . . ...........W * ? * "                                                                                ....................................
 th e         n ig h t             b e fo re             and            I        to ld           him          th a t              I          f e l t         th e             C lub          needed                  a

 d e f i b r i l l a t o r                   and             show ed                   him           th e         a r t i c l e .                            However                     M r.           McGee

 to ld            me        to       o b ta in               an     A m bu-bag                         and             airw ay                       as      th e             N o rw ich                D o cto r

 had          u sed .                  T h is            I    d id               soon               a fte rw a rd s .                                 E ver              sin c e             I        have           alw a}

 c a r r ie d               an        airw ay                in     my               p o ck et              a t        ev e ry                m atch                  and          keep               th e       Am bu-1

  in        my       c a se .                My          norm al                     p r a c tis e                is        to               leav e           my              case            in        th e

 P h y sio th e ra p y                       R o o m . ............................................... ..................................                             .........................................................

              A      d e f i b r i l l a t o r                     can _ o n ly                      be       u sed               in             c e r ta in                  c irc u m sta n c e s._

  F o r       ex am p le               an.         a re a          m ust               be, c le a re d                      arpund                         the, c a s u a lty                           b e fo re              ,tl

  ch arg e               is, ,d e liv e re d                       to            en su re              th a t              a n y p n e , s t a n d i n g , n e a r b y , d o e s , ,n<

  re c e iv e                an       e l e c t r i c              s h o c k .,                      I t      w o u ld                  n o t         be          p o ssib le , fo r                           a ...........

  S t.         J o h n 's            ,A m b u l a n c e m a n                        o r        in d eed               a     q u a lif ie d                           N urse               to         use        .su ch

  a      p ie c e            o f      eq uipm ent                       as           in         g e n e ra l               o n ly                q u a lif ie d . D o cto rs                                   may             do

  so .                   S in ce           my       d is c u s s io n                          w ith             M r ., M cG ee                       th e re                 has         n o t         been              any

  o c c a sio n                w hen          a      d e f i b r i l l a t p r                         w o u ld               have                   been             re q u ire d .

               On        th e         1 5 th        A p ril,                     1989 m y w i f e , a n d                                        I    had             been             in v ite d                  by          t}-

  C lub            to        th e         F .A .         cup            S em i-F in al                           a t       H illsb o ro u g h .                                        My w i f e                 w as

  g iv en            a       s e a t       in        th e          S tan d                 b u t       !         had          been                   asked               p re v io u s ly                      by

  G raham                M a c k re ll,                  th e           C lub              S e c re ta ry ,,                      to             tak e            a       s e a t         b eh in d                th e            ■

  o u t        a t       th e         sid e          o f          th e           p itc h .                       T h is           was                because                    o f        an         in c id e n t

  a         F o o tb a ll             m atch             e lse w h e re                         in     w h ich                a         p la y e r                n e a rly                c h o k e d ..b y .

   sw allo w in g                     h is         tongue                       w hen           knocked                    o u t.                     The             F o o tb a ll                   A sso c ia t

   had         made              a    d ir e c tio n                        th a t         a        D o c t o r _s h o u l d                          be          n ea r            th e          p itc h .                    V

   I        w as       to        be       s e a te d              w as           a        much         m ore               co n v en ien t                             p la c e            fo r          g e ttin c

  o n to th e p itc h q u ic k ly                                                th an              b ein g             se a te d                    in      th e             S tan d .
 .......................                                                                                                                                                                                                          j
               My        w ife            and        I        a tte n d e d                     a     luncheon                           in          th e         E x ecu tiv e                       S u ite             b<(

      th e     m atch                and       I     a c tu a lly                         g o t       to          th e        a re a                 w here               I      was             to      be        sea

   a t        ab o u t             2 .4 0 p .m .                    I           d id       n o t        n o tic e                     an y th in g                     ab o u t            th e          crow d

      th a t        s ta g e .                  In d eed                    I    can n o t                 say          th a t               I       n o tic e d                 an y th in g                   unusl

      p r io r          to         th e     m atch                b ein g                 sto p p e d .                       I          had              n o t        p a r tic u la r ly                          loc

      a t     th e       L eppings                   Lane                   end           o f        th e         G round.

                  W hen            th e     m atch                w as            sto p p ed                 I     sim p ly                       th o u g h t                 th a t            th e        P o ll

      w ere          d e a lin g             w ith            a     crow d                  in v a sio n .                               I       had          seen                som ebody                     run

       a c ro ss            th e       p itc h               b ein g              chased                   by          tw o           p o licem en                         im m ed iately                           af

       th e        gam e           was       s to p p e d ^ ^                         I     co u ld               see         th a t                 people                   we r e                                1    i |

                                                                                                           •>
 Signed t                                                                                                  Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                            WG
                                                                                                                                                                                      (Amended 9
                                                                W est M idlands Police
                                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                        (C.J. A ct 1 9 6 7 . s .9 ; M.C. Act 1 9 80. s .1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)

                                                                         WILLIAM                  PURCELL
Continuation         of statement of              .............................................................................................................................................
  in to            th e       S tand            above              th e        L eppings                   Lane            e n c lo su re                     b u t      s t i l l

  th o u g h t               t h a t     i t     was           a     crowd             d is tu rb a n c e                      due          to        th e         number              of

  s p e c ta to r s                   and      P o lic e            m illin g                 around                 in        f r o n t          o f         th e       crowd

  b a r r i e r s             a t      t h a t        tim e.

               W ith in               ab o u t        th re e            o r     fo u r           m in u tes               of        th e         game             b ein g         stoppec

  I        saw       a       P olicem an                  l i f t i n g          somebody                      o u t       o f       th e         crowd                 o v er     the

   fence             and         r e a l i s e d              im m ed iately                      th a t,         th is           was          p e c u lia r                 and       th a t

   th e        s i t u a t i o n              re q u ir e d              f u r th e r             in v e s tig a tio n .                                  I     h u rrie d             to        th£

  end          o f       th e         G round             and        found             a      number                 of       p eo p le               ly in g            o r     s i t t i n g

  on        th e         edge          o f      th e          p itc h .                I      w ent            around                th e se              lo o k in g            fo r        anyc

  s e r io u s ly                in ju re d               b u t     w ith o u t               e x c e p tio n                  th e se            p eo p le              w ere         a l l

  co n sc io u s                 and          had         s u f f e r e d           only            m inor              i n j u r i e s .                       T his          w ould            ha\

   tak en            me        ab o u t         two           m in u te s.                    I      th e n          came            upon             a       c a s u a lty           who

  was          o b v io u sly                 a s p h y x ia te d                and          who          was          b ein g             r e s u s c ita te d                   by        two

  p eo p le              I    now        know             to       be      Dr.         G lynn              P h illi p s                  from             K ilb rid e              and

  Mr.          D avid            Evans            from             L iv e rp o o l.                        I      sto p p ed               to        a s s i s t             th e se         two

   and         we        w ere          jo in e d             by     a     fo u rth               p erso n              who          I     can n o t               id e n tif y .

  T h is           was, a             m ale, aged                  betw een                f o rty . and                   f i f t y . who. . w a s . o b v i o u s l y ,

   a. F i r s t              A id er          b u t           . can n o t           r e c a l l . w h e t h e r . h e .w as . in. .a. S t . . J o h n ' s

  A m bulance. B rig a d e                                u n ifo rm             or        n o t . ................................................... ................. ,            ........

               I     spoke              to      a. P o l i c e m a n               who            was          n e a r        to. u s .and, t o l d                            him .to ..

   b rin g           any         a s p h y x ia te d                p eo p le              t h a t .he               could               fin d            to. the. . a r e a ....

  w here             we       w ere.                  I       cou Id           n o t       i d e n t i f y .th is                        Policem an                      again, b u t

  w ith in               a     s h p r t        space              o f     tim e           th e re             w ere          a      number                   of. . p e o p l e          who

   w ere           a sp h y x ia te d                 .laid          on        the         ground                n e a r          to       u s ..             .The           fo u r      of.      ue

   s p l i t         in to            two       te a m s,            I    was          w orking                  w ith            M r.        Evans                frpm          L iyerpoc

   who         I     l a t e r          a s c e r ta in e d               was          a      N urse             M anager                  w orking                     pn     the. C a rd i

   U n it          a t       B road           G reen           H o s p i t a l .                                        ........... ..    ...........................

               I t       m ust          be      u n d ersto o d                  th a t           we       w ere           w orking                  in         th e .m id d le .o f

   a       la rg e           crow d.                  We       w ere           s l i g h t l y             to        the          l e f t         o f         th e       Goal         P o sts

   as       you           look          a t     them           on        th e      p itc h ,               ab o u t            two         o r       th re e             y ard s         onto

   th e        P itc h .                 T here               w ere        hundreds                     o f      p eople                 in       th a t           im m ediate

      a re a       and          i t     c e r ta i n ly              w a s n 't            p o s s ib le                to        see          through                   th e      crowd

      to    th e          fe n c in g .                   I     th e re fo r e                had          no        id ea           w hat           th e          s c a le        o f       the

      c a s u a ltie s                w ould          be        b u t      the         ev id en ce                   b efo re              me        a t        t h a t r, tj- me
                     y          /»/           ... ^                ........." ................... ]......
Signed t                                                                     lignature witnessed by . . . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     WG
                                                                                                                                                                                               (Amended 9.
                                                                         West Midlands Police
                                                           STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                             (C.J. Act 19 67, s.9 ; M.C. Act 1980, s.1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

„                ..          , * ,            . .                               WILLIAM
Continuation of statement of ......................................................................
                                                                                                            PURCELL

su g g e ste d                     t h a t        p eo p le              w ere          e i t h e r             going              to     be        a sp h y x ia te d                        or        onl^

c o m p a ra tiv e ly                         l i g h t l y              i n j u r e d .                    I t        was         p b v ip u sly                ap p rq p .riate_ to

tu rn            my         a t t e n t i o n              to     .the           asp h y x iated .f i r s t                                o f . a 11.. , , , T h i s . w a s , a.

q u e s tio n                 of         w orking               on        one           p e rs o n . u n t i l                     such          time,           as         i t       seem ed..

th a t           th e re            was           no       r e a l        p rp s p e c t               of. them                    b re a th in g                u n aid ed                   again,

and          th en            m oving              on        to          a n o th e r            v ic tim                to        tr y        and         a s s i s t I n ...........

doing                 th i s        one           w ould             p ic k .w h o e v e r,lq p k e d                                le a s t             cyanpsed                    a n d ..............

whose                 p u p ils            w ere           l e a s t          d il a te d .                       I      can11             say            hpw         lo n g ,M r ., Evans

 and         I        w orked               in     such              a     fa sh io n               o r _h o w            many             p eo p le             we, w o r k e d                    uppn

b u t        i t         was         q u ite           a      long            tim e . _                ,1       haye          tp, say               th a t            in       general,                     ,,

 th e        p eo p le                  t h a t    we        t r e a t e d              were           cyancpsed                     to        such, an                 e x t e n t , _a n d ,

 t h e i r            p u p ils            w ere           so        d il a te d ,                 th a t             i t _ s e e m e d _t o me                       th a t ,t h e y                   had

 p ro b ab ly                 n o t         been           b r e a th in g                 fo r         spme             m inutes                b e f o r e we                   w e re ,a b le

    to      tr y           and          h e lp      t h e m . .........................................................................................

             I        had          two        B rookes                   airw ays                in         my         p o ck et           w h i c h _w e r e                  used             b u t            _

 proved                    u s e le s s           as       th e y          became                choked                    w ith           vom it              v ery           q u ic k ly .,

             I         remember                   t h a t        d u rin g              th is           p e rio d              I     spoke                tp      a     Policew pm an,

    and      to ld             h e r        t h a t        th e re            was          a     s t r e t c h e r                 in      th e           p la y e rs              tu n n e l

 w hich                she         sh o u ld           go        and          f e tc h .                    I     n ev er            a c tu a lly                 saw          h e r          w ith

    th e     s t r e t c h e r                b u t        to        my        know ledge                         th e        s tr e t c h e r has                     gone^and                         has

    n o t    been              r e tu rn e d               to        th e          C lub.               ^         _ .....                                   ...................................... ..
             When              th e re            seem ed                to        be      no       more               th a t       we         co u ld            do        on         th e         pitch

    Mr.      Evans                 and        I     a s c e r ta in e d                    t h a t          th e re            were            c a s u a ltie s                    in         th e

    Gym nasium .                            We      made             our           way         o f f        th e         p la y in g              a re a          and           round               the

    back           o f       th e         N orth           S tan d            where              we         came           upon            a      number                 of        c a s u a ltie s

    la id             on     h o a rd in g s,                 m ost           of        whom            w ere            o b v io u sly                   dead           b u t         th e re              was

    one          lad         aged            ab o u t           tw elve              y ears             in         a     red         s h i r t            (p o ssib ly                    a

    L iv e rp o o l                F o o tb a ll                Club          Team             s tr ip )               who         d id        n o t        ap p ear               cyanosed.

    He      was            n o t        b r e a th in g              and           th e re           was           no      p u lse             so         Mr.         Evans               and           I

    s t a r t e d            work            upon          him .                   We      m a in ta in e d                    th a t          ta s k          u n t i l           an

    am bulance                      crew           to o k         o v er           and         moved               him         from            u s.               I      w ould               add           the

    th e re            was          a      lo r ry         p ark ed                betw een                 w here             th is           lad         was             la y in g             and

    th e         F i r s t         A id           Room          so        th a t         the         p eo ple                 in     the          F i r s t           A id         Room

     (which                 was          d e a lin g            w ith          a     number                 o f        m inor           c a s u a ltie s                    a t        the          tim e)

    w ould             n o t        have           been           ab le            to       see          him           ly in g            th e re .
                                           ........ v/? ....... ......................
    Signed                                                                                           Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                    (Amended 9
                                                               W est M idlands Police
                                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                         IC.J. A ct 1 9 6 7 , s.9 ; M.C. A ct 1 9 80, s.1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

                                                                      WILLIAM                     PURCELL
Continuation of statement of ...................................................................................................
            M r.       Evans             and        I        th e n        w ent          in to           th e         Gymnasium                        w hich           w a s .................

 d iv id e d            in to           two       h a l v e s .                . One          a re a          was          la id          o u t         w i t h .a            number               .

 o f     b o d ie s          and         in       th e        o th e r              a re a        th e re .w e re                   p ro b a b ly .h a lf                      a.d o zen

 o r     so        c a s u a l t i e s .                     T h ese .w e re                  a lre a d y .b e in g                       te n d e d .b y .a                  .number

 o f     D o cto rs               and      N u rses .                      I        was       made            aware, t h a t                    m o s t .o f ,t h e ,bodie

 had        a lre a d y            been           c e r t i f i e d                 dead          by, t h e            D qctors                 who          w ere            th e re .

            A t      t h i s        sta g e         I        was       approached                         by         an      O ffic e r,frq m                         th e         South,

 Y o rk sh ire               P o l i c e ,          P .C .         C heetham ,,w ho                            asked               me        to         c e r t i f y           one        of

 th e       v ic tim s              as      dead,              th e        O ff ic e r                in d ic a te d                th a t          I     h a d , b e e n .................

 a tte m p tin g                  r e s u s c i t a t i o n                on .th is                  p a r t i c u l a r              p e r s o n .                  B e c a u s e q f

 th e        number               o f    p eo p le             th a t           I    d e a lt          w ith           and          th e         c irc u m sta n ce s                      in,

 w hich            t h i s        w ork       was            c a r r ie d            .out         I    was           q u i t e ,u n a b l e                   to       reco g n ise,

 any        p a r t i c u l a r             v ic tim .                     As         f a r       as      I    am          aw are             a n o th e r             D o c t o r ____

  s u b se q u e n tly                  c e r t i f i e d          th is              p erso n            as         d e a d . ......................................................

             I t       ap p eared             t h a t          th e re              was       n o th in g               f u r th e r            we         could              do        and__

 m r.        Evans               was      an x io u s            to        leave, th e                    Ground                 to       m eet            up      w ith           h is

  b r o th e r            from          whom        he         had         become                 s e p a ra te d                in. th e               c r u s h .           , I ,en su r

  t h a t      Mr.         Evans            had          a p p r o p r ia te                  d ir e c tio n s                   and          then           m a d e _m y               way            t

  th e       P h y sio th e ra p y                  Room              in        th e       South              Stand              w here             I      found              t h a t ...........

  th e re          w ere          two       c a s u a l t i e s .                       T h is          s u rp ris e d                 me        b ecause                 I     th o ug h t

  t h a t      a l l         th e - in ju r e d                p eo p le              had         been         removed                     from            th e        Ground              by

  th a t       s ta g e .                 T hese             p eo p le              w ere         n o t       s e rio u s ly                  in ju re d               and         w ere               _

  b ein g           looked              a f t e r        by                                           th e     Club              P h y s i o t h e r a p i s t A t

  th e        same           tim e        t h a t        I     a r r iv e d             an        A m bulance                    crew            came            in       to        take               _

   them           away           and      th e re            was       n o th in g                th a t         I      needed                to        do.

              W h ilst             in      th e         Gym nasium                    I _h a d          s p o k e n _t o                a , P o l i c e _O f f i c e r , w h c

   to ld          me      th a t         th e re         w ere         known                 to       be, , a t           l e a s t , 7, 5           d e a d , a t , t h a t ...........

   s ta g e .                I    w ent        to        r e p o r t ,th i s                  c o n v e rsa tio n                       to      ,t h e        Club            C hairaai

   Mr.        McGee              who      was           in     th e            D i r e c t o r ' s            Box.                   A _s h o r t              tim e          l a t e r        I

   l e f t         th e      F o o tb a ll              C lub         w ith           my      w ife            and          re tu rn e d                 h o m e . ..............................




   Signed                                                                                         lignature witnessed by
.Incident                IOS        280539 OP 9636                                          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                                                                                STATEMENT              N UMBE R          S771

                                                                                                                                                                     S ta ti

 S t i r n-snvs?                        PHILLIPS

 F orenarnes                            G' LYN

 Age                                    34                                                          D ate     of      b ir th

 Address


 O ccu p atio n                     MEDICAL                 PRACTITIONER

 T ele phone

 IC                                  Height                                                         B uild

 Hair colour

 H air      type

 Eyes                                                                                               Com plexion

 f a c i a l       ha i r

 G lasses                                                                                           A ccent

 Number            of    Pages

 D ated                                 15Q5S9                                                                                                      G P h il 1i ps        Sig



                    I    am    Dr   G lyn             M ichael          PHILLIPS               of

                                                  a     f u lly        q u a lif ie d          m edical            p r a c titio n e r           having         q u a lif ie

                    from       Leeds          U n iv e rs ity               in        June     1980.           My      q u a lif ic a tio n s           are      M .S.     Ch

                    M .R .C .G .P.            D .R .C .O .G .               .




                    I    a r r iv e d        in       S h e f f ie ld           a t    about        2 .0 0        p m '<1400)         on     S aturday ,           15th

                    A p ril     *1989         (150489)                w ith           my    b ro th e r      and      two       f r ie n d s .        We    parked         a!

                    h a lf     to   th r e e - q u a r te r s                   a     m ile    from         th e    ground         and       then      w alked        to        '

                    L eppings           LN        end       of       th e       ground.              I    n o tic e d     th a t      th e    pubs         were     open

                    w ith      fa n s        re la x in g            o u ts id e           w ith     d rin k s .        The       pubs       a ll     seemed        to     h.

                    been       open          on       the    ro u te            from        the     m otorw ay          to      the    ground.              I

                    s p e c i f i c a l l y           remember              th in k in g           th a t    th i s     w ould        not     have         been     the

                    in    S c o tla n d           where          I    now           liv e     and        w ork.
                                                                                                                                                                  S77

At       about              2 .1 0       pm    (1410)             we     a rriv e d          at        the     ground.               Many        fans           were

lo o se ly              co n g reg ated                 and       m oving         f r e e ly           about.           The       t u r n s ti le s             were

q u ite        q u ie t            w ith       ap p ro k im ate ly                te n       to        f if t e e n     people             in    each           queue

fly      c a r r ie r            baq       was      search ed              by      a    Policem an.                   Ones        in sid e           the

t «i r        t ’   1   e     it     was       ag ain         easy         to     move           about         f r e e ly       and        my    young           brot

bought              a       program m e.                 My       c a r r ie r         bag       was         search ed          again           by    a    P o lic e

in sid e            th e         t u r n s t i l e .          I    v is i te d          the       G ents         and        then       we       made       our        wa

to       the        te r r a c in g            -    the       cen tre           s e c tio n .                W alking        through             the        tunnel

the       te r r a c in g                was       not    d i f f i c u l t ,           th e re         was      no     pushing             or       crow ding

th a t        s ta g e .              On      reach in g            the     te rr a c e            we        found      th a t       i t    was       alre ad y

q u ite         f u l l .            We       d ecid ed           to     move          to    the         rig h t       (looking             at       the        p itch

away          from            th e       tu n n e l.




Two       of        us        reached              the     p o in t        about            te n yards from                  the            p itc h fence               a

r e a lis e d               we      were       s e p a ra te d           from          the       o th er        two.         On      seeing           them        hig

up       we     made               our     way      up     to       the      crowd           to        jo in      them       about          f if t e e n         to

tw enty             y ard s           away         from       the        p erim eter               fence          and       fiv e      yards          from        the

fence           s e p a ra tin g               th e      ce n tre          and         sid e       se c tio n s         of      the        te rr a c in g .




Betw een                2 .2 0        pm      (1420)          and        3 .0 0        pm     (150Q)           we      g ra d u a lly           became           more

and       more              t i g h t l y      packed.                  Much       more           so     than         even      in     a    tig h t         crowd

          A n fie ld                Hop.           It    became            so      tig h t         th a t       o c c a s io n a lly            surges           of

pushing                 and          p re ssu re         d id       not      a c tu a lly              cause          any    movement                of     note.

O ccasio n al                    groans            of    pain          were        h eard .              I    s p e c i f i c a l l y       m entioned                tc

f r ie n d          “ I t ' s         so      tig h t      in          here th a t          we     are         not     evensu rg in g                     a t    a ll

ju s t        o s c i l l a t i n g            more       or           le s s on       the        s p o t."




I     n o tic e d             th a t       d e s p ite        th is        in c re a se            in        p ressu re         in     the       cen tre

s e c tio n ,               fans         on    the       o th e r        sid e         of    the         fence         ( ie .     in       the       sid e       sec

to       our        r ig h t)            were       moving              about          f r e e ly        and      th a t     s e c tio n         did        not
                                                                                                                                                                    S771

appear to be filling at all



I    looked          up          from         tim e            to     tim e     to        the     fro n t       of      the       stan d           above           and

behind         us        — th e re                was          a    P o lic e      S erg ean t            th ere       o b serv in g               the

te r r a c in g          but        not           r e a l l y         doing        much.




A    few      policem en                  on          the          p itc h    sid e         of    the       p erim eter               fence          d id        not        se

to    have         n o tic e d            (   1   )       how       tig h t     we        were        packed          and     (   2   )    th a t          the     side

s e c tio n        was           n o tic e a b ly                  mors      em pty.




Fans       began             to     ex p ress                  t h e i r     d isco m fo rt            by      c r i t i c i s i n g           the         ground,

brought            no        resp o n se                  in       term s     of      a c tio n        from       the        p o lic e .




I    vag u ely           remember                     a    tannoy            announcem ent                  asking           us       to       move         down        to

the      fro n t         -       th e re          were             iro n ic     je e rs          from       the       crowd           in       response             to

this



The      game        s ta r t e d .                   I    d i d n 't        fe e l       any      surge         in     term s            of    movement                -

ju s t     a n o th e r           n o tic e a b le                  in c re a se          in     the      by    now        abnorm al               le v e l        of       be

p re ssu re          a l l         round.                  P eople           stood          on    b a r r ie r s        in    fro n t           and         shouted

"Get       back,             get      b ack ."                      This      was         im p assib le,              we     were          a l l     pinned

s ta tio n a r y             by     the           p re ssu re              from       f ro n t,        sid e s        and     back




P olicem en              a t      the         p e rim e te r               fence          a t    la s t     seemed           to       n o tic e         the

problem .                The        gate              was          opened.            A     policem an            tr ie d         in       v ain           to    p u ll         .

fan      o u t.          I       could            not          see     the      game            w hich      had       s ta r t e d         never            mind        wh

was      happening                  on        the          te rr a c in g          below          us.          The      policem an                 looked           vsr

w o rrie d         and           seeded               to       shout         in to        h is    radio         as     he     looked               to       h is    le f

and      my       r ig h t.           I       got          the        im pression                he    was      saying            "Stop            i t ,        sto p       i

sto p      i t "     -       I    assum ed                 he       meant       the         m atch.
                                                                                                                                                                             PAG
                                                                                                                                                                             S77



Of       the           six        m inutes            of        the      m atch          (I     heard            la te r          it     '.-.‘a s     si;-:     m inutes)

remember                     le ss        than        tw enty            seconds.                  I       was       so       in te n t          and       occupied                  b

our          s a f e ty           th a t       •■.‘■ a t c h i n g      th e      m atch        was         im p o ssib le .                     I    t r i e d     to       kee

a n      py    9       on     my         young         b ro th e r           who        was     p ressed              firm ly            a g a in st            the         sid e

fence              a    few        yards            away.               He       seemed         okay            but       I     co u ld n ’t            get       near           hi

anyw ay.




Fans           seemed                to     s p i l l       over          the       f ro n t       p erim eter                  fences               but      they          were

w alking                and          running             alth o u g h             o b v io u sly            shaken.




The          m atch            sto p p ed           and         many         p o lice         a r r iv e d           at       the       p erim eter               fen c e.




Fans           next            to-       the      sid e         fence            had     begun             to    clim b           over           in     sm all          numbe

to       reach               the         sid e      s e c tio n           of      te r r a c in g .              A    very          d is tra u g h t              young              m

on       th e          o th e r          sid e      of      th e        fence           (he     had         p rev io u sly               been           in      the         cent

.s e c tio n ) . sh o u ted                       "Get          over         the        fence          -    th e y *re            g e ttin g            squashed                 a t

the          b o tto m ."




One          by        one        fans         clim bed               o v er.       I    fo llo w ed             my       b ro th e r            over         and       by       th

I       saw        the         f i r s t       of      th e       in ju re d            or    dead          being             l i f t e d        out       at     the
                                                                                                                                                                                         i


f r o n t.               I     im m ediately                    headed            fo r       the       p itc h        g a te .           At          the      gate          th e r

y   9   ka     two           or    'three           policem en                   in s id e      the         te rra c e           -an d       one        or      two         on       t

tr a c k s id e .                    I    sh o u ted            "I'm         a    d o c to r,          le t      me       on      the        p itc h ."             I       was

pushed                 away          as    a      body          w as'     passed             th ro u g h         (having                been          l i f t e d       over

sid e          fence              and       c a rrie d            to      the       gate        in         the       sid e        se c tio n            where           I    by

th en         was            s i t u a t e d ) .            I     put        my     fo o t      on         the       w all        and        a       policem an               ca!

me       as        I     le a p t         up.          My       head         stru c k         th e         cro ssb ar             of      the         g ate       w ith          a

heavy              blow .                A d ren alin             co u rsin g            th ro u g h            my    body             rendered               the       blow

v i r t u a l l y              p a in le s s           but        I     f e l t     u n stead y             fo r      a       few       seconds.
1    made           my       wav           on     to        th e           p itc h             and       reached                 a       body        near         the       goal           lin

Somebody                 was           crouched                   over               i t .          I    asked          is           he        b re a th in g ,           has      he          go

p u lse,            th e      -answers                     w ere           no.             I    saw          he    was           cysnosed                   and       was

p u ls e le s s .                  I       k n e lt         n ext              to      him          thum ped            and              thum ped            his       chest           hard

th re e            tim e s.                I    commenced                        mouth              to       mouth          r e s u s c ita tio n                     and    in s tru c

th e     man          n ex t           to       me         to     g ive              card iac                massage                 in        the         ra tio      5-1.            I       ma

a    co n scio u s                 d e c is io n                 "T his              man        was          one       of        the           f i r s t     out,         th e re fo re

give        him          a    d ecen t               chance                    a t     cardiopulm onary                                  r e s u s c i t a t i o n . “




As     we          c o n tin u ed               to         giv e           CPF.        1       shouted             to       nearby                  policem en              to     fin d

out       if        we       could              get         a     D e f ib r illa to r                           and    some               oxygen.                We      continued

w ith       CPF          and           I       d isc o v e re d                  my          a s s is ta n t           was           a     m ale         nurse.




We     were           by      now              su rro u n d ed                   by          m illin g            fig u re s               in       black         -     policem en

policew om en.                             A    d is tr a u g h t                    teenage                 fan       came              over        and         put      h is     face

to     t h a t        of      the              body         and            y e lle d            words             lik e          ‘‘C o m e          on      m ate,        d o n 't         die

you       c a n 't           d ie ,            y o u 're           a       L iv erp oo l                 fa n ."             I       was           to ld      th a t      th e re          was

D e f i b r i l l a t o r                  but         I    was            given               an       oxygen          c y lin d e r                and         inform ed             th a t

was       sw itc h ed                  on.             I        p u lle d            the        flim sy            ventim ask                       off       the       tube       and              f

the      open            tu b e            in     my        own            mouth               to       e n ric h       the              oxygen             in      the     a ir       I       w;

g iv in g           to       th e          p a t ie n t .                                                                                                                          !




We     co n tin u ed                   w ith         C P P ..              I     soon            r e a lis e d          n o th in g                 was       coming          out          of

tu b e .            The       v alv e             was            tu rn e d             on       and          I    looked                 a t       the      gauge         w hich

showed              an       em pty             ta n k .               I       d iscard ed                   the       tu b e.




P eople             kept           com ing                 up      and           shouting                    ad v ice            and           I    kept         inform ing                t

th a t         I    was        a       d o cto r            and            knew              what        I       was    doing.
A    gentlem an            w ith         a    b la z e r              and    ti e      in d ic a te d           he       was       a     d o cto r             and     ga>

encouragem ent*




Ten        m inutes        p assed .                The           p a tie n t         seemed          to    h a s 'e         lo s t      some          of       his

cy ano sis           but      he      was         s t i l l           p u ls e le s s .          At    ten       m inutes                I    sa id            "Five

m ore."            By    now         th e re        was           2     cacophony               of    sound          around              me       and          from       t;

t e r r a c in g .         However,                as         I       was    surrounded                by       people             m ainly             sta n d in g

I    could         not     see        an y th in g                th a t     was       happening                at       the       fro n t            of       the

c e n tre      s e c tio n .            A     d is tr a u g h t              young          fan       was       making             it        d i f f i c u l t         fot

me     to     c o n c e n tra te             and        I    asked           a    policem an               to    "Get             rid        of       him ."           He

g e n tly       e s c o rte d         the         fan        away.




At     about         f i f t e e n       m in u tes               I    was       about          to    say       to       a    policem an                   to    cove

the        body      when        h is        h e a rt         sprang             to    l i f e       and    he       developed                    a    good

p u lse .          He    was         s t i l l      not           b re a th in g           so    I    continued                   to     v e n tila te               him

A    policem an            ask ed            if     I       needed           a    s tr e tc h e r          and       I       sa id       y es.             One

a r r iv e d       and     we        l i f t e d        the           man    on       to    i t .      We       l i f t e d        and         s ta r t e d

tow ards           the     am bulance                   w hich           had      a r r iv e d        behind             the       g o al.




As     I    sto o d      up      I     saw        fo r        th e       f i r s t     tim e         some       su g g e stio n                of      the       seal

of     the      c a s u a l t i e s .             To        get        to    the       am bulance               we       had       to        s te p        over        ah

te n       b o d ie s.        They           m o stly             looked            lik e       young       men,             some        had          th e ir         he*

covered            w ith      P o lic e           r a in c o a ts .




We     had      to      s to p       every          few           paces          so    I    could          give          the        p a tie n t            a    bree

in to       h is     lu n g s.           As       we        l i f t e d      him       in to         the    am bulance                   I     saw         the       be

of     two      young         men        a lre a d y              in     th e re .          I       continued                to    v e n t ila te               him

mouth         to     m outh          r e s u s c i t a t i o n              and       he    began          to    make             h is       own       b re a th

e f f o r t s .
                                                                                                                                                                              PAGi
                                                                                                                                                                              S77

It      is      alm ost              im p o ssib le              to       express             my       thoughts              a t       th a t      tim e.                Mo

WQrds           w ill          do      but     i t      f e l t          lik e      a    ch ao tic            nightm are                overlo ad in g                        a ll

se n se s.




1     to ld         the        am bulance               man          and       a     p o lice          se rg e a n t         th a t         the        man          was

s e r io u s ly              i l l    and      needed                a    h o sp ita l          "Now."              The          am bulance               man             sa id

he      c o u ld n 't              get      o ut.           T his         added          to     the         f r u s t r a t i o n           -     not     helped

by     my       th o u g h ts            th a t        in       view          of    the       le n g th .o f            tim e          he       was     p u lse le ss

i t    w ould               pro b ab ly        be       k in d e r            if    he       d ied .          I    am    su re           he      must        have              bet

s e v e rly             b ra in       damaged               by       th a t        tim e.




I     l e f t       him        ly in g        on       h is      sid e         b rea th in g            on        his    own           and        asked             a

policem an                   to      tr y     to       get       him          to    h o s p ita l           as     soon          as      p o ss ib le .                   I    sa:

I     w ould            go     to      see     if       I       could          h elp         somebody              e ls e .            It       seemed              at        tha

tim e        th a t          th e      p erim ete r              fence             was       obscured              by    policem en                    and          some           f-:

tr y in g           to       g et      people           out          of       the       te rr a c e s .




I     se arch e d              fo r      somebody                nseding                h elp .         I    sto pp ed             a     group          of          fans

l i f t i n g           a    body        on    a       m ak esh ift                s tr e tc h e r ,          some       of        them           seemed                to      be

try in g            to       do      CPR.          I    saw          th a t        it    was       a    boy        aged          about            14.           I       sa id        t

them         th a t           if     they      w anted               to       give       him       a    chance,              they           should              sto p           an<;

d o t h e           r e s u s c ita tio n               p ro p e rly .




They         put            him      down      and          I    s ta r t e d           mouth          to    mouth           -     f i l l i n g        his             lungs

w ith        a i r .           A     g ir l    next             to       me    did       the       h ea rt         m assage.                    H is    face              was

covered                 w ith        vom it        and          he       was       obv io u sly             dead        so       we      stopped             w ith in

about           6   Q       seconds.




I     looked                d e s p e ra te ly          fo r         somebody                not       dead        but       s e rio u s ly             i l l           who      m

h e lp .            I       could        not       fin d         anybody                in    th at         ca te g o ry           in       the        goal             a re a .
                                                                                                                                                                           PAGE           li;
                                                                                                                                                                         S771             f-
                                                                                                                                                                                          r   .

                                                                                                                                                                       _      ,
T j- io y     <j<9   r   9    -all       e ith e r             dead       or       okay          w ith         nothing            in     betw een.                I    looke              f
                                                                                                                                                                                          I
up     and           saw          th re e         or         four        groups             of        people         at        the     o th e r       end      of      the            r

p itc h         g iv in g              CPR.              I     ran       to    the          o th er       end.




The         f i r s t         body           I    came          to       was       a       man       about         25       y ears       o ld .         A    dark          h a ir

young           woman               in       a    Celtic             f o o tb a ll           s h ir t       was         try in g         to give            him       CPR.            |

asked           "H as             he     a       p u ls e ,"         she       sa id         "I        d o n 't      th in k          s o ." I     s ta r te d                        f
                                                                                                                                                                                      I
g iv in g            him          m outh          to         m outh       as       she       d id       the        c a rd iac          m assage.               A fter         a       |

s h o rt        w hile              we       swapped                o v er.            O pposite            me      h is        f r ie n d        (or       b ro th e r? )            |

was         b esid e              h im self            w ith         overw helm ing                     g rie f         and       d i s t r e s s .          He       was

sh o u tin g                 words           lik e           "Come        on,          y o u 'r t       not        dead"          and      looking             at      me     an

sh o u tin g                 "Keep           going,             d o n ’t       sto p ,           don’t          s to p ."




I    s a id          to       th e       g ir l          q u ie tly           "H e's         g o n e."             She         r e p lie d        calm ly         but

o b v io u sly                very           sad ly           "I     know ."                His        f rie n d            ( b r o t h e r ) was       so     much          in

d e s p a ir .                A nother              young            d o cto r             took        my      place           doing         h e a rt       m assage,

was         h o p e le s s .




I    went            to       the        o th er             two     or       th re e        b o d ies.             P eople            were        doing          very        go

card io p u lm o n ary                           r e s u s c ita tio n                 but       it    was         o b v io u sly         too       la te         fo r      the




I    s a id          to       a     p h o tog rap h er                   th a t        I    hoped        th a t         the       papers          were         going          to

"Hammer                  th is         ground                fo r    what          happened              to d a y ."              I    to ld      them         my      name

about           the           absence               of        equipm ent.                    They         took          a     photograph                d e s p ite         me

t e l l i n g            them          not        to .




I    went            to       the        sid e         of       the       p itc h           (o p p o site           the         p lay ers         tu n n e l)          and        s

q u ite        a         few        people             propped                up       a g a in s t      the        hoarding              'with         somebody

h e lp in g              them          a l l .           I    sh o u ted           th a t        I    was      a    d o cto r          and       d id    anybody              ne

any         h e lp .              A ll       I    h eard            in    rep ly           was        th a t       they        were       a l l     okay.             The
                                                                                                                                                                                         PAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                         S77

only           oeople               I    had        seen           c a r rie d            up        the         f ie l d         were        dead               so        I   headed

back           to    th e           L eppings                LN     end.             I        passed              through              the           lin e            of       policeim

a c ro ss           th e           e n tra n c e         ('.•.‘h a t     were             they        doing,                 I    thought               -        not          m uch!).

As     I       went            th ro u g h          I    asked           four             or        fiv e         of      them         if        they            could              t e l l        r

w h e re .th e re                   m ight          be       in ju re d          people                I        could            help .              The         g en eral               rep]

was        th a t         th ey           c o u ld n 't            and       th a t           they         were           so rry .




I     am       f a i r l y          su re       th a t         I    went         back               in to         the        goal         a re a        at            the       L eppim

LN     end.               I        have        to       adm it          th a t       by        now         I      was        angry,              confused                      s lig h tly

and        f e e lin g               q u ite        h e lp le s s .              I        did        d e f in i te l y                ask        a     policew om an                       "I

a     d o c to r,              can       you        t e l l        me    where                the         in ju re d             may      have           been                 taken        so

m ight           h elp ?"                Mo     she          could           n o t.




T here           didr          not        seem          to     be       much          I       could             do     a t       th a t      end.                Some            people

ly in g          down              w ith       people              h elp in g             s a id          they         were           okay.                 I        could          not        f:

a n yb o d y          s e r io u s ly               i l l      needing               help .                J u s t         dead         or       seem ingly                      m inor

i n j u r ie s            and            shaken           p eo p le.




I     headed               tow ards             the          o th e r        end          ag ain .                Q uite          a     few          people                   asked           me

how        I     was           -     I    rem embered                   my     head            and         my        face         was        now            covered                 in

b lo o d .            I        kept          say in g          " I ’m okay"                    but          I     re a lly            d id n 't             fee l             okay.




I     aksed           th e           p o lic e          a g a in        where             I    should                go.          They           did            not           know.




By      now         th e           com b in atio n                 of     having               been             in     the         crush,              try in g                to     do

r e s u s c i t a t i o n                 on    h o p eless               cases,               try in g              to      fin d        o th ers                   to       h e lp ,' the

a b s o lu te              cacophony                    and        co n fu sio n ,                  the         lack         of       in fo rm atio n                         from       the

p o lic e           and            the       bang         on       my     head            became                too        much.             I       f e l t          very          angry

a t     the         way            we     had       been           tr e a te d .                I     knew           who         was        to       blame                -    the

P o lic e .                I       f e l t     com pelled                 to     t e l l            some          se n io r           L iverpool                      f o o tb a ll
                                                                                                                                                                          PAGE
                                                                                                                                                                          S77 '1

club       o f f i c i a l          not       to      le t      them           blam e              the       fans           fo r      th is .




I    went       up     the          p la y e rs '          tu n n el           saying                  "I'm        a    d o c to r.              I    need          to    see

somebody             in     a u th o rity                 from       LFC."                These              words           opened              the        p o lice

line*           O u tsid e           the          changing                rooms           it           was     very           confused.                     Lots         of    vm

in    s u i t s ,      b la z e rs            and         tie s * .




I    saw      Jimmy         HILL          (BBC)            and        fo rced             him           to     li s te n            to      my       account             of    wf

happened*                 He        looked            pale          and        very         concerned*                            Then       a       man       sa id      "Wii

you      come        and        say       th a t          on    the        a ir? "                 I    sa id          “Why?"            but         agreed          to.          h

took       me    a     few          y ard s         to      the       lau n d ry .                     He    put        headphones                    on       and       wrote

down       my    name.               He       sh o u ted            in to       a    m icrophone                        "T ell           P e te r         to       hand       ovt

to    me      now!"




Next       he    was         ta lk in g             and        in tro d u c in g                   me,       and        then           shoved             the       big

m icrophone               up        to    my        fa c e .          I    f e l t        aw ful,              angry              and       upset           but      I    jus*

s t a r t e d    ta lk in g -                 The         l a s t     words           I     sa id            were           " I t 's        an       a b so lu te

d isg ra c e * "            I       meant           the        way        we    were               allow ed             to        get       so       tig h tly           pack

and      on     th e      p itc h         the         to t a l        lack          or      o rg a n is a tio n                      and     equipm ent                  a fte

d is a s te r        s tru c k -              I     s a id      on        the       a i r          th a t      I       had         seen      eig h t           to    ten

dead.           In     r e tr o s p e c t             I     had       probably                     seen        about               f i f t e e n       so      I    thougt-
                                                                                                                                                                                  I
p ro b ab ly         tw enty             to       t h i r t y       were        dead               o v e r a ll.             The         rad io           men       sa id

thank         you      in       a     very          sombre            v o ice.                 I       sa id       "Was            th a t    going             out       liv<

He    s a id     thank              you       a g a in         and        shook           my . h a n d .




I    went       out       and         saw         Kenny         DALGLISH.                          I    to ld          him        what       had          happened

th a t     he    must           not       le t        the       fans           get        the           blam e.               I      to ld       him        th a t       the

ground          (H illsb o ro u g h )                     was       " S h it."              He          to ld          me     th a t        LFC       were          not       M

about         th e     ground             being             used          but       th e se             th in g s           were         out         of     th e ir

c o n tro l.           He       was       very            shaken.
                                                                                                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                                                                                                             S77'



A    1i   nesman          or     the       re fe re e        showed             me          in to          th e ir           room          to        get          cleaned

up.        I    d id       th is       and       in sp e c te d         the         s p l i t             in    my       sc a lp           -       i t       needed             twc

or    th re e        s t i t c h e s       but      th a t       could          ‘. ' . ' a i t    I       tho u g h t.                I    remember

a p o lo g isin g           fo r       g e ttin g       blood           on      a       tow el             -    how          rid ic u lo u s !




I    went       back        on       the       p itc h .         A ll      the          bodies                 had       gone.                 I     clim bed                bad-

on    the       te r r a c e         up    to     my    b ro th e r            and          frie n d s .                 I       saw        policem en                     in       th

now       alm ost         em pty          c e n tre     s e c tio n            c o lle c tin g                  b elo n g in g s.                        I    to ld          the

lad s      what        had       happened              on    the        p itc h .                 All          of    a       sudden                fo r        the         f i r s t

tim e      I    f e l t     a    se a rin g         pain         in     my      head              and          sa id         "God,             my        head             h u rts.




At    no       tim e      a t    H illsb o ro u g h              did       I     r e a lis e               people                had       d ie d            in    the

tu n n e l.          At     no       tim e      d id    I    see        an y th in g                  to       s u b s ta n tia te                   claim s               th a t

policem en             were          a s s a u lte d        or     bodies               were              lo o ted .              I       saw        brave                young

fans       tr y in g        to       save       liv e s      h o p e le ssly .                        I    saw       brave                lads           o rg an ise

th em selv es             to     make          m a k e sh ift         s tr e tc h e r s                   to    c a rry -th e                  dead.                  I    saw

some       p o lic e        d e s p e r a te ly         tr y in g          to       save              liv e s .              I    a ls o           saw        some           pal:

sta n d in g         id ly       -     not      know ing          what          was              happening                   or       m aking                any          attem j

to    fin d       o u t.




I    did       not     see       at       any     tim e      any        fan          (w hether                  b efore               or       a f t e r          the        brie

game)          m isbehave             d e l i b e r a t e l y         in       any         way.




A fter         the     game          had       been     abandoned                   we           le f t        the       ground                v ia          the          centr<

s e c tio n      on       th e       tu n n e l.        Rem em bering                       the           fan       we       had          r e s u s c ita te d                  I

g a v e .a      policem an                my    name        and       a d d re ss.                    I    f e l t       i t      very             u n lik e ly              tha

he    w ould         have        su rv iv e d          and       re c o n c ile d                 m yself            by          the       fa c t            th a t        if       h

had       he    w ould          have       been        b ra in        damaged.
                                                G Phillips SIGMl


 gT.A i"EMENT TAKEN
              PLACE:

                  TIME:                 DATE:

 W I T N E S S TO S I G N A T U R E :

 O F F I C E R S SIGN ATURE:

EN D OF R E P O R T
STATEMENT OF D R . GLYN P H I L L I P S WITH REGARD TO EVENTS AT S H E F FIE L D WEDNESDAY

FOOTBALL CLU B, HILLSBOROUGH, S H E F F IE L D , ON SATURDAY, 1 5 t h A P R IL 1 9 8 9 .



I am D r . G l y n M i c h a e l P h i l l i p s                             o f ______________________________________________________________

a        fu lly      q u a lifie d          m e d ic a l p r a c t i t i o n e r h a v in g q u a l i f i e d                fro m L e e d s U n iv e r s it y

in        June       1980.             My q u a l i f i c a t i o n s              a r e M .B . C h . B . M . R . C . G . P . D . R . C . O . G .



I        a rriv e d       in     S h e ffie ld             at     a b o u t 2 . 0 0 p .m .        on S a tu rd a y ,       1 5 th A p r il    1 9 8 9 w i t h my

b r o th e r and               tw o      frie n d s .              We p a r k e d a b o u t h a l f t o             th re e -q u a rte rs         a m ile fro m

th e        g ro u n d and             t h e n w a lk e d             to    th e L e p p in g s L ane end o f th e g ro u n d .                     I n o tic e d

th a t        th e    pubs w ere open w ith                                fan s     re la x in g      o u ts id e w ith d r in k s .        The pu b s a l l

seem ed t o               have been open on th e                                ro u te      f r o m t h e motorway t o           th o g ro u n d .          I

s p e c ific a lly               rem em ber t h i n k i n g                   th a t th is        w o u ld n o t h a v e b e e n t h e        case      in       S c o tla n d

w h ere           I now l i v e            an d w o rk .



A t a b o u t 2 .1 0 p .m .                   we a r r i v e d             a t th e g ro u n d .          M any f a n s w e r e l o o s e l y c o n g r e g a t e d

a n d m o v in g f r e e l y                  a b o u t.          The t u r n s t i l e s         w ere q u it e q u ie t w ith a p p ro x im a te ly te n

    to     fifte e n          p e o p le       in     each queue.                    My c a r r i e r b a g w a s s e a r c h e d b y a p o l i c e m a n .

    O nce i n s i d e           th e      tu rn s tile             i t w as a g a in           easy to        m ove a b o u t f r e e l y     a n d my y o u n g

    b r o t h e r b o u g h t a p ro g ra m m e .                          My c a r r i e r b a g w a s s e a r c h e d a g a i n b y a p o l i c e m a n

    in s id e      th e        tu rn s tile .              I v is ite d             t h e G e n ts a n d t h e n we m ade o u t w ay t o                  th e

    te rra c in g         -     th e      c e n tre        s e c tio n .           W a lk in g th r o u g h t h e t u n n e l t o          th e    t e r r a c i n g w as

    not difficult,                      th e re       w as n o p u s h in g o r c ro w d in g a t t h a t s t a g e .                        On r e a c h i n g       th e

    te rra c e        we fo u n d           th a t     it        w as a lr e a d y q u i t e           full.       We d e c i d e d   to     m ove t o       th e      rig h t

    (lo o k in g       a t th e           p itc h )        aw ay fro m th e                 tu n n e l.



    Tw o o f u s r e a c h e d                 th e    p o in t ab o u t te n y a rd s                    fro m th e p i t c h     fe n c e and r e a lis e d             we

    w ere s e p a r a te d              fro m th e              o t h e r tw o .         On s e e i n g t h e m h i g h e r u p w e m a d e o u r w a y u p

    to     th e      cro w d t o          jo in       th e m a b o u t f i f t e e n              to   tw e n ty y a r d s aw ay fro m            th e p e rim e te r

    fe n c e and           fiv e        y ard s       fro m        th e      fen c e se p a ra tin g          th e c e n tr e and s id e            s e c tio n s o f

    th e     te rra c in g .



    B e tw e e n 2 . 2 0 p . m .              a n d 3 .0 0 p .m . we g r a d u a l l y b ec am e m o re a n d m o re t i g h t l y                               packed;

    M uch m o re s o              th a n            even         in    a t i g h t cro w d             on th e A n fie ld K op.              It     becam es o t i g h t

     th a t o c c a s io n a lly                    su rg es          o f p u s h in g an d            p r e s s u r e d id n o t a c t u a l l y     cau seany

    m ovem ent o f n o t e .                        O c c a s io n a l g ro a n s o f p a in w ere h e a r d .                     I s p e c ific a lly

     m e n tio n e d t o          my f r i e n d            "It's           so tig h t        i n h e r e t h a t we a r e n o t e v e n s u r g in g a t a l l

     ju s t o s c illa tin g                  m o re o r          le ss       on th e s p o t."



     I     n o tic e d        th a t     d e s p ite        th is           in c re a s e    in        p ressu re      in th e c e n tre          s e c ti o n ,fa n s on

     th e     o th e r s id e            of         th e    fen ce ( i . e .            in th e s id e        se c tio n     to   our rig h t)        w e r e m o v in g

     about fre e ly               and         t h a t s e c tio n d id                not appear to be f illin g                   at all.
                                                                              Page 2


I     lo o k e d u p fro m                  tim e t o        tim e t o        th e   f r o n t o f th e s ta n d ab o v e and b e h in d                            us -

th e re       w as a p o l i c e                se rg e a n t th e re           o b s e rv in g th e te r r a c in g               but not re a lly                 d o in g

m uch.



A few         p o lic e m a n           on th e           p itc h    s id e     o f th e      p e rim e te r fe n c e d id                n o t seem t o            have

n o tic e d         (1 )     how t i g h t we w e re p a c k e d a n d                          (2 )        th a t th e s id e       s e c tio n       w as n o tic e a b ly

m o re e m p ty •



Fans began to                        ex p ress           th e ir    d is c o m fo rt by c r i t i c i s i n g             th e g ro u n d .             It     b ro u g h t

no resp o n se                  in     te rm s      o f a c tio n        fro m th e        p o lic e .



I v a g u e ly rem em b er a ta n n o y an n o u n c em en t a s k in g                                         us to        m ove dow n t o                th e    fro n t-

th e re           w ere     iro n ic           je e rs      fro m t h e        cro w d   in      resp o n se to           th is .



T h e gam e s t a r t e d .                     I    didn't          feel      any su rg e             in    te rm s o f m ovem ent -                 j u s t a n o th e r

n o tic e a b le            in c re a s e           in    t h e b y now a b n o rm a l l e v e l o f b o d y p r e s s u r e                          a ll      ro u n d .

P e o p le s to o d              on b a r r i e r s           in     f r o n t and s h o u te d               "G et b a c k , g e t b a c k " .               T h is w as

    im p o s s ib le ,          we w e re a l l             p in n e d s t a t i o n a r y        b y th e p r e s s u r e fro m              fro n t,          s id e s and

back.



    P o lic e m e n a t          th e        p e rim e te r         fen ce a t       l a s t seem ed to n o tic e                   th e p ro b le m . The g a te

    w as o p en e d .            A p o lic e m a n            trie d      in v a in        to     p u ll       a fan o u t.           I    c o u ld     not see             th e

    gam e w h ic h h a d                s ta rte d         n e v e r m in d w h a t w a s h a p p e n in g o n t h e                      te rra c in g         b e lo w u s .

    T he p o lic e m a n              lo o k e d      v e r y w o rr ie d and seem ed t o                        shout           in to h is       ra d io       as he        lo o k e d

    to     h is     le ft       a n d my r i g h t .                I g o t th e      im p r e s s io n h e w as s a y in g                  " S to p        i t , s to p      it,

    s to p    it"      -    I        a ssu m e d h e m e a n t t h e m a tc h .



    Of th e         s ix    m i n u te s o f t h e m a tc h                   (I h ea rd        la te r         i t w as s i x m in u te s )            I     rem em ber l e s s

    th a n    tw e n ty s e c o n d s .                   I w as s o      i n t e n t and o c c u p ie d by o u r s a f e t y                      t h a t w a tc h in g           th e

    m a tc h w as i m p o s s i b l e .                    I trie d       to     k e e p a n e y e o n my y o u n g b r o t h e r w h o w a s p r e s s e d

    firm ly         a g a in s t        th e     s id e      f e n c e a few y a r d s aw ay .                    He seem ed o k a y b u t I c o u l d n 't

    g e t n e a r h im a n y w a y .



    F an s seem ed t o                  s p ill       o v er th e       f r o n t p e r im e te r f e n c e s b u t th e y w e re w a lk in g and
    ru n n in g a lth o u g h                o b v io u s ly        shaken.



    T he m a tc h s to p p e d                 an d m any p o l i c e            a rriv e d       at         th e p e rim e te r fe n c e .



    Fans n ex t to                   th e    s id e       fen c e had begun to                  c lim b o v e r in           s m a ll n u m b e rs t o              reach

    th e     s id e       s e c tio n        o f te rra c in g .               A v ery      d i s t r a u g h t y o u n g m an o n t h e                     o th e r s id e       of

    th e     fen ce         (h e h ad p r e v io u s ly b e e n                  in th e        c e n tre        s e c tio n )     s h o u te d     "G et o v e r th e
    fen ce -          t h e y 'r e          g e ttin g       squashed          at    th e b o tto m " .
O ne b y o n e f a n s                c lim b e d         o v er.       I     f o llo w e d my b r o t h e r o v e r a n d b y t h e n                         I     saw

th e   firs t       o f th e              in ju re d          o r dead b e in g            lifte d       o u t a t th e            fro n t.          I    im m e d ia te ly

headed       fo r        th e     p itc h        g a te .         A t th e        g a te      t h e r e w e r e tw o o r t h r e e               p o lic e m e n       in sid e

th e   te rra c e         and         o n e o r tw o o n t h e                   tra c k s id e .        I    s h o u te d        "I'm a d o c to r,               l e t me o n

th e   p itc h ."           I w as p u sh ed aw ay a s a body w as p a s s e d                                           th ro u g h      (h a v in g b ee n l i f t e d

o v er th e        s id e        fen c e       and c a r r ie d             to    th e     g a te   in       th e    s id e       s e c tio n    w h ere I           by th e n

w as s i t u a t e d ) .              I    p u t my f o o t o n t h e w a l l a n d a p o l i c e m a n p t f l l e d m e a s I                                       le a p t

up.     My h e a d          s tru c k          th e       c ro ssb a r o f th e               g a t e w ith a h e a v y b lo w .                     A d re n a lin c o u rs in c

t h r o u g h my b o d y r e n d e r e d                      t h e b lo w v i r t u a l l y        p a in le s s b u t I              fe lt     u n s te a d y f o r a few

seconds.           —



I m a d e my w a y o n t o                     th e       p itc h     and reach ed               a body n e a r th e g o a l l i n e .                         Som ebody

w as c r o u c h e d        over           it.        I       asked     is       he b re a th in g ,          h as he g o t a p u ls e ,                    th e an sw e rs

w ere n o .          I     saw h e w as c y a n o s e d                     and w as p u l s e l e s s .                 I k n e l t n e x t t o h im                                anc

th u m p e d h i s        c h e s t h ard             th re e        tim e s .           I com m enced m o u th t o                    m o u th r e s u s c i t a t i o n         and

in s tru c te d          th e     m an n e x t t o               me t o       g iv e     c a r d ia c m assage              in     th e     r a t i o .5 - 1 .       • I m ade

a c o n s c io u s         d e c is io n         " T h is m an w as o n e o f t h e                      firs t          o u t,     th e re fo re ,         g i v e h im a

d ecent chance a t                        c a rd io p u lm o n a ry r e s u s c i t a t i o n . "



As we c o n t i n u e d               to     g iv e       CPR I s h o u t e d            to     n e a r b y p o lic e m e n t o             fin d        out if       we c o u ld

g e t a D e f i b r i l l a t o r a n d som e o x y g e n .                              We c o n t i n u e d w i t h CPR a n d I                        d i s c o v e r e d my

a s s i s t a n t w as a m a le n u r s e .



We w e r e b y n o w s u r r o u n d e d                        by m illin g           fig u re s     in b la c k           -     p o lic e m e n an d p o lic e w o m e n .

A d is tra u g h t           te e n a g e        f a n cam e o v e r a n d p u t h i s                       fac e       up to       th a t     of       th e body and

 y e lle d   w o rd s           like        "C om e o n m a t e ,             don't die,             you c a n 't d ie ,               y o u 'r e        a L iv e rp o o l fa n " .

 I w as t o l d          th a t       th e re      w a s n o D e f i b r i l l a t o r b u t I w a s g i v e n a n o-xygpn r v i i n ^ p r a n d

 in fo rm e d t h a t            it       w as s w itc h e d           oriT        r p u lle d       th e      f lim s y v e n tim a s k o f f                th e    tu b e and

p u t th e open                 tu b e      i n my own m o u th t o                    e n ric h     th e oxygen in                  th e     a ir       I w as g iv i n g        to
                                                                                                                    ft
th e    p a tie n t.



We c o n t i n u e d        w i t h CPR.                  I     soon r e a lis e d            n o t h i n g w a s c o m in g o u t o f t h e                   tu b e .        The

v a lv e w as tu r n e d                  on and          I     lo o k e d a t       t h e g a u g e w h ic h sh o w ed a n e m p ty t a n k .                             I

 d is c a rd e d     t h e ‘tu b e .



 P e o p le k e p t c o m in g u p a n d s h o u t i n g a d v i c e                             a n d I k e p t i n f o r m i n g th e m t h a t                     I w as a

 d o c to r an d knew w h at I w as d o in g .



 A g e n tle m a n w ith                  a b la z e r and t i e                 in d i c a t e d h e w as a d o c to r an d g a v e e n c o u ra g e m e n t.
                                                                                    Page 4



T en m in u te s p a s s e d .                           The p a t i e n t seem ed t o h a v e l o s t s a n e o f h i s                                 c y a n o s is b u t

h e w as s t i l l                   p u ls e le s s .                A t te n m in u te s           I s a id       " F iv e m o re " .          B y now t h e r e w as

a        cacophony                 of     s o u n d a r o u n d me a n d f r o m                    th e    te rra c in g .        H o w ev er,          as     I w as
su rro u n d e d               b y p e o p le m a in ly                   s ta n d in g ,        I c o u ld n o t s e e a n y t h in g t h a t w as
h a p p e n in g              at     th e      fro n t of              th e    c e n tre     s e c tio n .        A d i s t r a u g h t y o u n g f a n w a s m a k in g

it           difficult               for       me t o c o n c e n t r a t e               and     I a s k e d a p o lic m a n t o               "G et r i d           o f h im " .

He g e n t l y                e s c o rte d         th e        fan     aw ay.



At about fifte e n                             m in u te s           I w as a b o u t t o s a y t o a p o lic e m a n t o c o v e r th e body
w hen h i s                 h eart           sp ran g         to     life      and h e d e v e lo p e d a good p u l s e .                       He w as s t i l l             not

b re a th in g                so     I c o n tin u e d t o v e n t i l a t e h im .                         A p o lic e m a n a s k e d           if      I needed a
s tre tc h e r                and       I sa id y es.                    O ne a r r i v e d       and we l i f t e d           t h e m an o n t o               it.        We l i f t e d

and            s ta rte d          to w a rd s           th e      a m b u la n c e w h ic h h a d a r r i v e d b e h in d                 th e g o a l.



As I               s to o d     up       I    saw f o r th e                 firs t      tim e     sem e s u g g e s t i o n       o f th e          s c a le    o f th e

 c a s u a ltie s .                  To g e t            to     th e     a m b u la n c e we h a d           to   s te p     o v er a b o u t te n b o d ie s .                  T hey

 m o s tly            lo o k e d         lik e       young m en,               som e h a d         t h e i r h e a d s co v e red w ith p o lic e r a in c o a ts .



    We h a d           to     s to p         ev ery        few p a c e s s o             I c o u ld g iv e th e p a t ie n t a b r e a th in to h is lu n g s .
    As we l i f t e d                 h im      in to         th e      a m b u l a n c e I s a w t h e b o d i e s o f tw o y o u n g m en a l r e a d y                              in

    th e re .           I c o n tin u e d                to v e n tila te               h im w i t h m o u th t o           m o u th r e s u s c i t a t i o n             and h e

    began to                m ake h i s             ow n b r e a t h i n g          e ffo rts.



    It        is     a lm o st          im p o s s ib le           to    e x p r e s s my           th o u g h ts     at     th a t tim e .             No w o rd sw i l l do

    but        it      felt         lik e       a c h a o tic            n ig h tm a re o v e r lo a d in g            a l l my s e n s e s .



    I        to ld     th e        a m b u la n c e m an a n d a p o l i c e                      s e r g e a n t t h a t t h e m an w a s s e r i o u s l y                   ill     and

    needed a h o s p ita l                          "N ow ".            T h e a m b u la n c e m an s a i d h e c o u l d n ’ t                  g e t o u t.              T h is added

    to        th e     fru s tra tio n                - n o t h e l p e d b y my t h o u g h t s t h a t i n v i e w                            of     th e     le n g t h o f tim e

    h e w as p u l s e l e s s ,                    it     w o u ld p r o b a b l y b e k i n d e r i f                h e d ie d .         I    am s u r e h e m u s t h a v e

    been s e v e re ly                    b ra in        dam aged b y t h a t                tim e .



    I        left      him ly in g               on h is            s id e    b re a th in g       on h is        own a n d a s k e d a p o l i c e m a n t o                    try    to

    g e t h im              to h o s p ita l a s soon a s p o s s ib le .                                  I s a id    I w o u ld g o t o              see      if     I    c o u ld h e lp

     som ebody e l s e .                       It     seem ed a t              t h a t tim e        th a t th e       p e r im e te r f e n c e w as o b sc u re d by

    p o lic e m e n a n d som e f a n s                             try in g       to     g e t p e o p le o u t o f th e            te rra c e .



     I       se arch ed            fo r       som ebody n e e d in g h e l p .                         I   s to p p e d a g ro u p o f            fa n s l i f t i n g a body

     on a m a k e sh ift s tr e t c h e r ,                             s a n e o f th e m se e m e d t o              be try in g          to       d o CPR.              I saw t h a t

        it     w as a bo y a g e d                  about 14.                  I   s a id    to     th e m t h a t     if     th e y w a n te d          to     g i v e h im a

        chance,             th e y      s h o u ld        s to p       and do th e r e s u s c ita tio n                   p ro p e rly .
                                                                        P ag e 5


T h e y p u t h im                   dow n a n d I            s ta rte d      m o u th t o       m o u th -       fillin g       h is      lu n g s w ith        air.

A g irl next                     to    me d id           th e h e a r t m assag e.                   H is f a c e w as c o v e re d w i th v o m it an d

h e w as o b v io u s ly                     d e a d so we s to p p e d w ith in                      a b o u t 60 se c o n d s.



I        lo o k e d        d e s p e ra te ly          fo r    som ebody n o t d e a d b u t s e r i o u s l y                   ill       who n e e d e d h e l p .

I        c o u ld n o t f in d                anybody in             th a t c a te g o ry            in     th e g o a l a r e a .      T hey w ere a l l            e ith e r

dead o r okay w ith                            n o th in g       in b e tw e e n .          I     lo o k e d u p an d saw t h r e e                 o r fo u r g ro u p s

o f p e o p le              at       th e     o th e r end o f th e               p i t c h g i v i n g CPR.                I ran     to     th e    o t h e r e n d ..



The f i r s t               body        I     cam e t o         w a s a m an a b o u t 25 y e a r s o l d .                     A d a rk -h a ire d           young        '

w o m an i n               a C e ltic           f o o t b a l l s h i r t w as t r y i n g                 to   g i v e h im CPR.            I   asked         "H as h e

a p u ls e " ,               she      s a id        "I d o n 't       th in k      so".           I s ta rte d        g i v i n g h im m o u th t o             m o u th a s

sh e d id              th e      c a rd ia c         m a s s a g e . A f t e r a s h o r t w h ile we sw ap p ed o v e r .                                O p p o s i t e me

h is         frie n d          (o r b ro th e r? )              w as b e s id e h im s e lf w ith                  o v e rw h e lm in g g r i e f a n d d i s t r e s s .

He w as s h o u tin g                       w o rd s l i k e         "C o m e o n ,     y o u 'r e         n o t d e a d " a n d lo o k i n g a t me a n d

 sh o u tin g               "K eep g o in g ,            don't        s to p ,     d o n 't s to p " .



    I s a id          to     th e      g irl        q u ie tly       " H e 's g o n e " .            She re p lie d         c a lm ly b u t o b v io u s ly v e r y

    sa d ly        " I know ".                  H is      frie n d      (o r b ro th e r)             w a s s o m uch i n         d e s p a ir.           A n o th e r young

    d o c t o r t o o k my p l a c e                    d o in g h e a r t m a ssa g e .                  I t w as h o p e le s s .



    I w ent to               th e      o th e r        tw o o r t h r e e b o d i e s .               P e o p le w ere d o in g v e r y goo d c a r d i o ­

    p u lm o n a ry r e s u s c i t a t i o n                  but     it     w as o b v io u s ly to o             la te    f o r th e m .



    I     s a id      to     a p h o to g ra p h e r t h a t                I hoped th a t                th e p a p e rs w ere g o in g             to     "H a m m e r t h i s

    g ro u n d        f o r w h at h ap p en ed to d a y " .                       I to ld           th e m my nam e a n d a b o u t t h e a b s e n c e o f

    e q u i p m e n t . T h e y t o o k a p h o t o g r a p h d e s p i t e me t e l l i n g                                th e m n o t t o .
                                                                                                                                                                                   I

    I w ent to                th e     s id e       o f th e      p itc h        (o p p o s ite       th e p la y e rs        tu n n e l)     and saw q u i t e            a f

    p e o p le p r o p p e d u p a g a i n s t t h e h o a r d in g w i t h som eb o d y h e l p i n g                                      th e m a l l .           I sh o u

    th a t      I w as a d o c t o r an d d id                         anybody need any h e lp .                        A ll I h e a rd             in    r e p l y w as th

    th e y w ere a l l                 okay.            The o n ly p e o p le I h ad s e e n                      c a rrie d     up th e         fie ld      w ere dead

    so I headed back                           to      th e L e p p in g s L ane e n d .                    I p a s se d th ro u g h th e            lin e     o f p o lic e

    ac ro ss th e                c e n t r e (w h at w e re th e y d o in g ,                    I    th o u g h t -    n o t m u c h !).            A s I w e n t th rc

    I     asked fo u r o r                   fiv e       o f th e m      if      th e y c o u ld          t e l l me w h e re t h e r e m ig h t b e               in ju re *

     p e o p le I           c o u ld        h e lp .      T he g e n e r a l r e p l y w as t h a t th e y c o u l d n 't a n d t h a t th e y w

     so rry .



        I am f a i r l y             su re     th a t I w ent b ack in to                       t h e g o a l a r e a a t th e L e p p in g s L an e e n d .

        I have to             a d m it t h a t b y now I w as a n g r y ,                            co n fu sed s lig h tly            and f e e lin g          q u ite

     h e lp le s s .             I    d id     d e fin ite ly          a s k a p o lic e w o m a n              " I am a d o c t o r ,        can you t e l l           me
     w h ere th e             in ju re d         m ay h a v e b e e n t a k e n s o                  I m ig h t h e lp ? ” .         No s h e c o u l d n o t .
                                                                                 P age 6


 T h ere d id            n o t seem t o                 b e m uch I c o u ld           do a t th a t en d .               Som e p e o p l e         ly in g     dow n

w ith p e o p le h e lp in g                      s a id      th e y w ere o k a y .               I c o u ld n o t f in d            anybody s e r io u s ly             ill

 n e e d in g h e l p .              J u s t d ea d o r s e e m in g ly m in o r i n j u r e s                       and sh ak en p e o p le .



 I headed               to w a rd s        th e     o th e r       end a g a in .            Q u i t e a f e w p e o p l e a s k e d me h o w I w a s -

 I        re m e m b e re d my h e a d                 a n d my f a c e w a s now c o v e r e d              in b lo o d .                 I k e p t s a y in g     "I'm

 okay" b u t I                 re a lly        didn't             fe e l okay.



 I asked               th e    p o lic e       a g a in w h ere I               s h o u ld g o .      T hey d id n o t know .



 By now t h e                 c o m b in a tio n o f h a v in g b e e n                 in     th e c ru s h ,       try in g      to       do r e s u s c ita tio n

 on h o p e le ss              cases,          try in g           to   fin d     o th e rs     to h e lp ,        th e a b s o lu te cacophony and

  c o n fu s io n ,           th e    la c k       of      in fo rm a tio n        fro m      t h e p o l i c e a n d t h e b a n g o n my h e a d b e c a m e

  to o m uch.                   I    fe lt     v ery        an g ry a t           t h e w ay we h a d b e e n t r e a t e d .                      I knew w ho w as

     to     b la m e -        th e    p o lic e .             I    fe lt   c o m p e lle d     to    te ll       som e s e n i o r L i v e r p o o l f o o t b a l l

  c lu b o f f i c i a l s            not         to     let       th e m b la m e t h e       fan s fo r th is .



     I w ent up th e                 p la y e rs '         tu n n e l s a y in g       "I"m a d o c t o r .           I need          to     see    som eb o d y i n

. a u th o rity           fro m       L F C ".           T h e s e w o rd s o p en e d t h e p o l i c e              lin e .      O u ts id e th e           c h a n g in g

     ro o m s    i t w as v e r y             co n fu sed .             L o ts    o f m en i n       s u its ,      b la z e rs       and t i e s .



     I     s a w J im m y H i l l            (B B C ) a n d          f o r c e d h im t o      lis te n      t o my a c c o u n t o f w h a t h a p p e n e d .

     He lo o k e d p a l e            and v ery co n cern ed .                       T h e n a m an s a i d           " W i l l y o u com e a n d s a y              th a t

     th e     air?".            I    said         "W hy?" b u t a g r e e d            to .      H e t o o k me a fe w y a r d s t o                   th e     la u n d ry .

     H e p u t h e a d p h o n e s o n a n d w r o t e d o w n my n a m e .                               He sh o u te d         in to       a m ic ro p h o n e      " T e ll

     P e te r     to     hand        o v er to           me n o w ! " .


                                                                                                                                                                                 i

     N ext he             w as t a l k i n g            and       i n t r o d u c i n g m e , a n d t h e n s h o v e d t h e b i g m i c r o p h o n e u p tc

     my f a c e .               I f e l t a w fu l,               an g ry and u p s e t b u t I j u s t s ta r te d                   ta lk in g .       The l a s t

     w o rd s I s a i d             w ere      "It's          an a b s o lu te        d is g ra c e ” .      I m e a n t t h e w ay w e w e r e a l lo w e d

     to      g e t so         tig h tly        packed and on th e p itc h                          th e   to ta l     la c k o f o rg a n is a tio n              and

     e q u ip m e n t a f t e r            d is a s te r          s tru c k .      I s a id     on th e a i r          th a t    I had seen e ig h t to                   te

     dead.             In r e t r o s p e c t I h ad p ro b a b ly s e e n a b o u t f i f t e e n                          so    I     th o u g h t p ro b a b ly

     tw e n ty to             th irty        w ere d ea d o v e r a l l .               T h e r a d i o m an s a i d            th a n k you in a v e ry
                                                                                                             n
     so m b re v o i c e .             I     s a id       "W as t h a t g o i n g o u t l i v e " .                He s a i d     th a n k you a g a in             and

     s h o o k my h a n d .



         I w e n t o u t a n d sa w K enny D a l g l i s h .                          I to ld       h i m w h a t h a d h a p p e n e d a n d t h a t h e mi

         not le t          th e fa n s         g e t t h e b la m e .              I t o l d h im t h a t t h e g r o u n d                ( H ills b o r o u g h ) w as

         " S h it" .          He t o l d          m e t h a t L FC w e r e n o t h a p p y                       a b o u t t h e g r o u n d b e i n g u s e d b u t th

         th in g s w ere o u t o f                 t h e i r c o n t r o l . He w as v e r y sh a k e n .
A lin e s m e n o r                th e        referee          sh o w e d me i n t o            th e ir       ro o m t o        g e t c le a n e d     up.       I d id

th is         and        in s p e c te d         th e       s p lit       i n my s c a l p       -   it    n e e d e d tw o . o r t h r e e            s titc h e s    but

t h a t c o u ld w a it                   I    th o u g h t.          I    rem em b er a p o l o g i s i n g          fo r g e ttin g              b lo o d on a to w e l -

how r i d i c u l o u s !



I        w ent back on th e                      p itc h .          A ll th e b o d ie s h ad g o n e.                      I    c lim b e d b a c k on th e

te rra c e              up to       my b r o t h e r           and f r ie n d s .            I saw p o lic e m e n               in th e      now a l m o s t e m p ty

c e n tre          s e c tio n       c o lle c tin g               b e lo n g in g s .       I    to ld        th e la d s w h a t h a d h a p p e n e d o n 't h e

p itc h .               A ll o f     a        sudden f o r             th e       firs t    tim e I        fe lt     a se a rin g         p a in      i n my h e a d    and

said             " G o d , my h e a d h u r t s " .



A t no tim e a t H ills b o ro u g h d id                                     I    re a lis e     p e o p le had d ie d              in     th e    tu n n e l.    A t no

tim e            d id     I   see        a n y th in g        to     s u b s ta n tia te         c la im s t h a t p o lic e m e n w e re a s s a u l t e d                or

 b o d ie s w ere lo o te d .                           I saw b r a v e young f a n s                     try in g     to       sav e liv e s h o p e le ssly .

    I     saw b r a v e         la d s         o rg a n is e        th e m s e lv e s      t o m ake m a k e s h if t s t r e t c h e r s               to    ca rry   th e

    dead.           I saw som e p o l i c e                     d e s p e ra te ly         try in g       to     save liv e s .             I a lso      saw som e

    p o lic e       s ta n d in g             id ly     -    n o t k n o w in g w h a t w as h a p p e n in g o r m a k in g a n y a t t e m p t t o

    fin d        o u t.



    I     d id     not see           at        an y tim e a n y f a n                (w h e th e r b e f o r e o r a f t e r              t h e b r i e f gam e) m is ­

    behave d e lib e ra te ly                         in     any w ay.



    A fte r        th e       gam e h a d b e e n a b a n d o n e d we l e f t                       th e g ro u n d v ia            th e     c e n tre s e c tio n        on

    th e      tu n n e l.         R e m e m b e rin g t h e                f a n we h ad r e s u s c i ta t e d                 I g a v e a p o li c e m a n my nam e

    and a d d re s s .               I        fe lt     it     v e ry u n lik e ly           t h a t h e w o u ld h a v e s u r v i v e d               and re c o n c ile d

    m y se ]f by th e                fact          th a t      if     h e h a d h e w o u ld h a v e b e e n b r a i n d a m a g e d .




    S ig n e d



        G ly n M ic h a e l P h i l l i p s
                                                                                                                                                                            P Auc
                                                                                                                                                                            3 SC'9

After           at t em pt i ng           ( C r R ) & orneone                        came          with         a stretcher                       and       I said              that

he    wa s       daad,           and     after                  ass is t i n g           to         place          hi m        in an             ambulance,                 I

approached                  a Police                Officer                  ana       asked             ? or      something                     useful         tc     do           as

this           time     I could                see             that         ail      todies              were          b e ing        treated w \ X h                   (CPR).

I was           taken         to      t he         g y m n a s i urn and was                            shown          to      the        point            where       the

injured were.                         There             was            absolutely                   no       equipment                available                 and

therefore              my        treatment                      and         diagnosis                   of    in j u r i e s          was         extremely                 limit

I directed                  a number                 of         seriously                    injured             pe op l e          to      be        taken       to

hospital              and        assisted                      the      less         seriously                   injured.

'£• was         then        approached                         by      a senior               Police            Officer,                  and a s k e d           to        start

certifying                  th e      dead           people                 as t h e r e           may        be some                still            alive       and           also

to        cle a r      space.

There           was     a Police                   Of f i ce r si lo c a t e d                          to    each             body       ane. t h e y we re

instructed                  to     out         the             time         of     ueath            being              certified                 on    oacs r s l a ngsi

the        name        of     the       us c e a sed.

T    £»         2 f     Vi 1 ~ O      i H d:   '!• ?' L i •»    £ d.    %Q       V: O U s?    T. I".1         ff: *d    'J f    t         Ci ~                     1    ^       9    {.V 7.


a number               of     doctors                i n the                gymnas i u m .

Tne        bocies           were        laid            out            as    test            as         possible               in thr e e             or    f ou r      rows,

v.ia s a c c o m p a n i e d            by         a Senior                  Police               Office/'             and          I carried               out        a forms

examination                   of      each           body.

I o        0   n0 unoed          life          emt i nct                           the        senior             Police              Cf f ice .• i ns t r u e ted

Officer               with       each          body             as      to       the         n u m b s r and I i.os.

I have            been        shown            a      list             of    n a mes          an d        body          numbers             and        to       the     best

i'ry k n o w l e d g e           and      recollection                             the        following                     names         and         uouy       numbers

the        bodies            I examined                        and      pronounced                       life          extinct.

"i’ n a v e       used        ths       tern-! CPR                     during           this            statement                   and     this           is    an

abbrsviation                     of     Cardio                  Pulmanary Resuscitat                                    1   on.

    36           Ian    David            l‘;HE£:..A:\..

    r7           j ernes       Robert              HENNESSY.

    3 H          Roy        H A M 1 L- !OM
                                                                                                                                                                                               m c:i
                                                                                                                                                                                                   iu y-
                                                                                                                                                                                         ?A
                                                                                                                                                                                         BB

           B'2               Colin               -:AF -R

           B22               Peter               BURKETT

           334               Jonathan                    OWENS

           344               Carl           Darren HEWITT

           345               Mi cho las                  JQYNE3

           346               Carl           5ROWM

           B47               David               William                      BIRTLE

           355               Michasi                    Nicholas                    HE*ITT

           339               Gordon                 Rodney                    HORN

               A r*          0                   t ij   :r> m           J £ *'fs c. •£ ~f pt **-. V !\ j Q p



           36?               Gerald                 Martin                    BARON

           «7G               Alan           McG'-OME

           B7S               Michael                    David                 KELLY




                             c o :Tio 1 s t i V:y the                           examination                         I noticed              that    a 1 arcs         nu;r
                                                                                                                                                                       :T i      ui v    .-i   •
                                                                                                                                                                                               .

           •iectors                    ha-ia r r i v e d w i t h a cui osTipnt .                                            1s d o k <* to             a £ a n i o r Polls;*

           Of: 1 stir                  a n d a - t s rl e a v i n g                          my       •:-*rsonal                 s a t ai i s ,• v.'a-s all -.••.ved to                 lr?ava.

           v        V1       V'1       f ' :.±   ;■n " : r-ia       A L T OF T           j. T        t h i        - v        ~ i u      a n d               a V O n t ‘j . a l                  I'V        'i'v0 l f r


               ;■     o -■   T im n     r;- •?           n   ij _   z* ;- t   \ r   K    r   I.-;    a ?      t    a    r a -■


           u;a t o n                r s t u r r •ed hor-:s- .

           1 hava                  I i s a si a n u :r;o e                                          n i nci         that         I -Tael        very    s t r e n*~ I y abo u t                    in

                                                                •ie-it                   = ira               t nat      - -have also              c o y . p 1 5 1 s o., and             f“ ^l

           thoc^             should                be        brought                    to          t -)& a t t e n t i o n           of    Lord       Justice        T A Y i.0 ? ..


                                                                                                                                                           A   j    Bv-n?

STATEMENT           TAKE:'-:


                    T I'Mi.;                                            DATE:                       12G G 3 ?

WITNESS' TO           S I G N A T JR E :                            ..EE POi_ P C 4 E 4 S

OFFICERS       SIGNATURE:

[ND OF   REPORT
By now Mr. Wilkinson had left South Yorkshire Ambulance Service and
transferred to Hampshire on a promotion basis, and Mr. D. Jones, the
operational Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, had taken over the co­
ordinating role.   Because of our concern, despite all of the previous
difficult situations we have had to overcome with the Club, we decided that
ambulance involvement was still totally necessary, and therefore, in
conjunction with the South Yorkshire Police, we arranged to be part of
their contingent and gained entrance to the Sheffield Wednesday Football
Ground.   This was done with the full knowledge of the Club, along with a
clear understanding that no bill would be sent and that any action taken to
gain entrance by the Ambulance Service was off our own bat.   Because we had
a plan which had been structured with the full knowledge of the South
Yorkshire Police and Fire Services our ambulance attendance was to be
within the gymnasium area and the rear of the Spion Kop.   This was in order
to ensure that in the event of ambulance resources being needed we could
immediately, with little delay, take over the gymnasium as the designated
casualty clearing area and for a vehicle positioned at the top of the ramp
that provides the only vehicular access to and egress from the pitch.     As
far as South Yorkshire Ambulance Service is concerned we retain operational
plans for any serious incident within any Football Ground within South
Yorkshire in our Control Room.   We have designated Liaison Officers, all of
whom act on a voluntary basis in attending matches in line with information
available to them in terms of crowd size or possible problems.   The
Ambulance Service in South Yorkshire have never charged any Club for its
attendance because our priority has always been to ensure that wherever
possible the Ambulance Service is in a position to respond to disasters as
they arise.   We do not have statutory powers similar to the Police and Fire
Services.
