            states:-

                               CCT o 3£(\
1.   My date of birth is 17th SgaBS.1 1952.


2.   My occupation is an Ambulanceman with SYMAS.


3.   I have been with SYMAS for about three and a half years. I
      joined as D.D.T. (part time) for about 18 months.     After
     that I was promoted to Ambulanceman.   I attended an initial
     two week course at SYMAS.      This covered ambulance aid
     including emergency procedures and use of equipment.      On
     promotion to Ambulanceman I attended a further weeks course
     at SYMAS H.Q. which covered more detail of emergency
     procedure and equipment.   The next stage will be for me to
     obtain the Miller qualification.


4.   I specifically work on out-patient duty on day shift.    In
     addition to this I may be required to do emergency work for
     example if I am at the scene of an accident or if all other
     vehicles are on call.   I am stationed at Parkway Ambulance
     Station and I either work single handed or with assistance.
     The work includes both driving and attending.


5.   On Saturday the 15th I arrived at Parkway for duty and
     booked in on the rota. My shift was 0900 to 1630 hours. My
     crew member was ambulanceman           L We were allocated
     vehicle Sierra 203. We did the usual vehicle check, both on
     equipment and the ambulance itself.

6.   On weekdays the out-patient work is usually booked in
     advance and we receive a print out of the work schedule for
     the day.   On Saturdays work is issued direct from Control.
     On Saturday the 15th we waited for our call from Control.
     Our vehicle was on out-patient channel 4. In the morning I
     was driving and in the afternoon           drove and I was
     attendant.    As far as I can recall we had a couple of
admissions in the morning.      We returned to Parkway Station
for lunch at about midday.


We had an admission to the Northern General and then radioed
clear to Control. Control gave us a discharge from casualty
at Northern General to Ward 16 of Middlewood Hospital in
Sheffield. The transfer from Northern General to Middlewood
brought us along Herries Road to the roundabout and then
down Leppings Lane.  The traffic was fairly light near to
the Ground.


From the start of Leppings Lane it was very busy with
pedestrian supporters making their way to the Ground. At
the top of Leppings Lane the Police had cordoned it off to
vehicles.


Because of the number of people we had to make our way quite
slowly waiting   for the crowd to pass. Just by the Leppings
Lane, entrance   .gates there was. a Police Land Rover with a
    JPve™                 + W 9 T '?'^ 4                by.
Senior Officer    on the bonnet.^ We passed slowly by and I
noticed he was   speaking to the crowd through a load speaker
on the top of    the vehicle.        He was asking them to "Remain
calm and stop    pushing as they (Police) were trying to get
the game delayed" or words to that effect. This would have
been at about 2 .50 -gu>m.  I mentioned to            that
because of the crowds it looked as though it would be a late
start for the game.   I did not see any casualties at that
time, there was just a mass of people arriving from both
directions towards the Leppings Lane entrance.


We arrived at the junction with Catch Bar Lane to turn right
towards Middlewood Hospital.   Police were on duty at that
end of Leppings Lane. As we turned right the Police allowed
a South Yorkshire passenger transport double decker bus up
Leppings Lane.
                 ^e > ir> r^f^jX /tv            o j r C^ovy H L a ^ cyo ^ js, L-O+~0^4^dL otf




11 . We dropped the patient at Middlewood Hospital.      I then
     filled in the patient sheet, putting the time down - "Clear
 - 2 5 ^ 1 ^ 5 ^ There was a vehicle on channel talking to
         Con%ro±so I waited for it to get off.      The gist of the
         message was for them to proceed to Police Control, at
         Leppings Lane as there had been crowd trouble^ a n ^ somebod
         had been crushed.  I then radioed into—Control^*ao clear and
                                       tr n l
                                                                     erred-^ fea- Lite Ldiiid
               which

12   .              was driving and we proceeded at speed to the
         ground.   On route I was preparing my medical bag.      The
         traffic was fairly clear and we arrived within a minute. A
         Police car blocked the other road to enable us to go
         straight into Leppings Lane.      Leppings Lane was still
         heavily congested with supporters on foot going towards the
         football ground. As we approached the entrance I could see
         an ambulance parked just inside the blue gate.       At that
         point we were on the bridge on the opposite side of Leppings
         Lane to the ground.   I told         | to stop on the bridge
         with the vehicle.    I did this because I did not want to
         commit the vehicle to the ground until I was aware of the
         situation. In particular I wanted to assess
         Exits and access;
         whether the other vehicle had an emergency and needed to
         reverse out quickly;
         whether the crowd was hostile.


13.      I made my way on foot straight to the ambulance already on
         site.   I was not aware of the Police Land Rover at that
         time.   I had my fluorescent ambulance jacket on and pushed
         my way through the crowd.


14.      Inside the gate was a massive crowd of people.        As I
         approached the ambulance already on site I saw two or three
             people already in the back together with an ambulanceman.
             It was Qualified Ambulanceman          ].

    15 . As      I approached      a casualty was brought by two police
             officers and laid on the ground at the back of the
             ambulance.   The ambulance officer who came to attend that
             casualty was             |.

    16.      She was joined by              and I left them to deal with
             that casualty.   I immediately went to see to those in the
             back of his vehicle which was next to him but they had gone.

    17.      I was then asked to give assistance to a person having an
             asthma attack accompanied by his colleague and a Police
             officer.

    18.      At this point a doctor identified himself to me. I told him
             to treat the asthmatic.   At the same time a Police officer
             asked me to follov^jiim^tc^syryey a further scene.   He took
             me into an area (~AG on thc^jj^air) at the rear of the West
             stand.   This area was packed with people and there was
             screaming and shouting and total chaos.


             I counted six people being resuscitated by police.             I sent
#   19'      the police officer with me to get my mate and the vehicle
             from the bridge.

    20   .   I then returned to, the first vehicle.
                                o-H5itf
                                                              I radioed Control
             from that vehicle       I told them tnat 203 was on scene inside
             the ground but there was a major incident and at least
             people being resuscitated.               I waited for Control to
             acl^no^/ledg^e and then returned to the nearest casualty
             pglTrfc AG on -the^p^an). These events I have just mentioned
             took place very quickly, within a minute.          I assisted a WPC
             resuscitating a casualty and at the same time kept watch for
             my vehicle which arrived very quickly. I ivc^o
                                         f&LdjcLsL-            -fo 4\gov€_
                                      ( OoUXjjL / w t             A j Co   Ko j j l



                                                 tMh r>
                                                      •
                                                   X
         parked to the rear of the first ambulance.    I got
the Police officer to assist in loading the casualty into
our vehicle.    As I arrived at my vehicle a casualty had
already been loaded on. As far as I can recall inside the
rear was a Policeman, a Fireman and Ambulancewoman Moffatt.

Ambulancewoman         said that they were going.      As I was
prep^ringj jt^^a^e^I informed an arriving crew (            and
      where the casualties were and then we left. There was
the patient in our vehicle and I got into the back to start
working on him to revive him.              was not with the
vehicle.   I sent a police officer to get        who had the
keys.   The policeman returned with the keys and I told him
to drive to the Northern General (the nearest hospital). We
proceeded to Northern General at speed via Penistone Road.


At Northern General casualty there were two ambulances
already there.  We offloaded the patient.   I informed the
staff that the patient had arrested.    Somebody asked how
many others there were and I replied to the effect that
there were six following me. I got back to the vehicle and
told the police officer to return straight back to the
scene.   I heard Control call another vehicle to return
straight back to the scene and as far as I can recall
informed them to save details until later. We made our way
back to Leppings Lane via Herries Road.    We did not have
problems with the traffic which was controlled by Police.
At some stage on route we had a Police bike escort. At this
point listening to messages on the radio it was clear that
Leppings Lane was not the only point of incidents. Vehicles
were also being requested at the gymnasium entrance.

Leppings Lane was still very busy with supporters on foot
but they now appeared to be moving away from the ground. We
were able to drive straight into the ground.       We parked
      roughly where we had before because I now knew where the
      casualties were. I was not aware of other ambulances at
      that time. As soon as we arrived two police officers opened
      the back.  I went round to the rear.   They already had two
      casualties on stretchers and were proceeding to load them.
      I said "Don't load them until I check other casualties for
      priority".


25.   I specifically asked if there were any being resuscitated
      having regard to the numbers left on our last visit.      He
      said there were none and I therefore checked the two
      patients and considered them in need of emergency treatment.
      I unloaded our two empty stretchers and put the patients on
      board. As they were loaded            reappeared. He joined
      me in the back and we each attended a patient while the same
      police officer drove.     Again we went straight to the
      Northern General via Herries Road South.


26.   We had a police bike escort the passage was clear and quick.
      We had another ambulance to the rear of us.


27.   At Northern General casualty we were met by a team of
      porters and medical staff.  There were a lot of ambulances
      in the casualty area and a lot of casualties from the
      football ground.  We off loaded and .then returned to the
      vehicle.A I asked the police officer to continue driving
      while we tidied the rear and prepared for the next
      casualties.


28.   We heard Control request all vehicles to the gym entrance of
      the ground. We knew that Herries Road South is a "no right
      turn" and that oncoming casualties were coming up that
      route.   We therefore went the same route as before via
      Leppings Lane. It was still busy and there were Police vans
      parked near the entrance.     We proceeded straight down
      Leppings Lane and left on Catch Bar Lane and onto Penistone
Road.


On Penistone Road we were met by an officer, who I believe
was Station Officer        |. He asked us to stand by and
directed us into position in queue.   We were on the ground
side of Penistone Road near Herries Road South.   Ambulances
were reversing in to the ground by the gym entrance to load
casualties and then departing via the roundabout and Herries
Road South. At this point I thanked the police officer and
told him he could return to his duty.    I took the key from
him and got into the driving seat.            went up to the
ground entrance. After a few minutes I was told to bring my
vehicle up to the gate and reverse in for loading.      I was
directed where to park by Superintendent Dale.         Other
ambulances were loading and departing at the same time.


I parked and opened the doors at the back.           The two
stretchers were taken out.    I stood by the vehicle and two
casualties were loaded on.      One of them was attended by
Qualified Ambulanceman      I. I told him to get in the back
and told Dale we would make up a team and were leaving.

We received information to go to the Royal Hallamshire.   We
had a police escort and set off turning right down Penistone
Road.   The traffic was fairly congested.      We caught up
another two ambulances, one of which did not have lights and
was for visiting patients.


On arrival there was a doctor assessing casualties and
directing them to different points.   We off loaded.  _____
contacted Control regarding his car.     He had come in off
duty and left it near Leppings Lane entrance.


Control said it was alright for him to return to it and we
returned to Leppings Lane entrance.       went to check his
car.   I returned a firebrigade resuscitator unit to a
      fireman nearby.     We contacted Control to tell them of our
      location. They requested we attend Hallamshire to assist in
      transfers of patients from F ward to King Edwards Hospital.
      Boyce followed me in his car to the Hallamshire. On route I
      was flagged down by a car.     There was a policeman with a
      doctor and they requested we take the doctor to the
      Hallamshire.    I dropped the doctor at casualty and then
      proceeded to B road for the transfer.   There were a lot of
      ambulances there and I noticed it was about 1755 hours
      and I went up to the ward to transfer the patients to King
      Edwards. We took them to King Edwards and radioed clear.


34.   Control told us to return to base and call in before leaving
      duty.  I dropped        at Hallamshire for his car and then
      returned to Parkway Station.     I radioed into Control and
      they told us to sign off.     We refuelled and tidied the
      vehicle and then signed off at 1915 hours.

35.   We did not use the radio unless we had to because of the
      heavy air traffic which would only delay urgent messages.

Signed
Dated this       day of             1989
