                        States:-

1.   My date of birth is the 21st April 1969.


2.   I have attended the compulsory training course and obtained
     the Miller Certificate qualifying me as an Ambulanceman,
     although my job title remains as an unqualified Ambulanceman
     for the time being.


3.   I joined the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
     as a cadet and completed my training at Headquarters in
     Rotherham.  Upon completion of my training I transferred to
     Hoyland Station, Pletts Common, Barnsley, where I have
     gained one and a half years experience as an Ambulanceman.

4.   On Saturday the 15th April, I was on the 0900 to 1630 hours
     day shift.   The vehicle I was driving was number "-36§v- call
     sign Bravo B1206. I was returning from the Doncaster Royal
     Infirmary via Wombwell near Barnsley to the station.         I
     cleared the Doncaster Royal Infirmary at 1435 hours and had
     radioed control. I was driving on the return journey to the
     station and my crew member was              .         was the
     attendant on the vehicle and he remained so throughout the
     day.


5.   At 1510 hours I received a call from control and was told to
     stand by at Five Arches in Herries Road because there was an
     incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground.   I was only a
     short distance away from Barnsley-Station, when I received aL
     further message from control to take the vehicle to the
     Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Football Ground.


6.   There was a further message and all vehicles were instructed
     to report to the Hillsborough Football Ground Penistone Road
     Gymnasium entrance.           was taking the messages from
     control at this time on channel 3 and I could hear them
quite clearly.


I approached Penistone Road and had collected a Police
escort on the way there. This helped because the traffic
was very heavy and there was queuing in places, along
Penistone Road.


The Leppings Lane roundabout was congested and the Police
could not make the traffic move away to allow access.    I
went onto the right hand side of the road in order to make
 progress to Leppings Lane and report. —A— Polioe— Qffieer
-(Hrroctod mo into -the Leppings Lane -entrance where there was
-a nrnwd -of people?- I drove past the gates at Leppings Lane
 end and along the oar— park •at the rear of the south stand
 and into Penistone Road where I drove north to the Gymnasium
 entrance.


At this time the radio was tuned in to channel 3 and we were
not receiving messages from control.


I pulled the vehicle up in the area marked green on the plan
attached to this statement and I was told by Station Officer
Paul Eason to reverse into the ground.   I reversed in and I
was told by Station Officer Eason to go as far back as a I
possibly could.   I did this and       and I were met by Mr
Hopkins who told us to get a cot and take it to the North
stand area. I recall one Ambulance was already in the North
stand area and at the same time Mr Hopkins told us to make
our way to the First Aid point and ignore all those people
coming towards us under the North stand.         and I made
our way under the North stand as far as we could. We saw a
lot of people under blankets in the First Aid area.     The
scene as I recall it was some 40 people laid on blankets
under the North Stand. On our way to that point I had seen
fans carrying injured spectators off the field to the area
             marked red on the plan attached to this statement.   There
             was a lot of noise. People were shouting and the situation
             appeared chaotic.       and I responded to the orders of Mr
             Hopkins who was the Senior Officer on the ground and in
             control of operations.

    11 . When I first arrived at the ground the only way I could get
         to the North stand was to walk under the necks of the
         mounted Police horses. The mounted Officers remained in the
         area controlling the crowd for quite a long time.

£   12   .         and I arrived at the First Aid point; I tried to find
             the more serious injuries by checking those casualties at
             this point. Whilst I was doing this I recall seeing a young
             St.Johns Ambulance nurse, probably 15 years old, attempting
             to resuscitate a man who was obviously dead and I recall a
             Police Officer shouting at the nurse that she was wasting
             her time as he had been there 5 or 10 minutes.      I began
             checking the casualties which all looked much the same.   I
             looked for the unconscious casualties. All the fans looked
             to me to be teenagers. I saw a nurse giving cardiac massage
             to one casualty.    I got to one fan against the wall, who
             when moved responded to pain. He did not talk and       and
             I lifted his shirt and I could see that there were crush
             injuries to his ribs and chest.      and I put him on our
             cot and weaved our way back to our vehicle.   It was very
             difficult to get back to the vehicle.    The Police had
             stopped fans from returning to the North stand area but
             there were still many requests for help and even though
             there were many serious injuries and many people needing
             attention,       and I concentrated on returning to our
             Ambulance with the seriously injured casualty.   When we
             arrived at our vehicle we put the cot into the rear and at
             this time many other injured people were put into the
             vehicle. Mr Jones may have told me to go, I cannot be sure,
but I was told to leave the ground as the vehicle was fully
loaded. I left the ground, drove into Penistone Road, I was
directed left north up Penistone Road to the roundabout and
via one other road back onto Herries Road South.   A Police
motorcycle outrider escorted the Ambulance as traffic was
now at a stand-still. The journey to the Hospital was swift
as there were Police on all junctions and roundabouts,
keeping the traffic at bay and making sure the Ambulances
had a clear run to the hospital.     I was aware that there
were difficulties with the radio and we were now tuned into
channel 1 and we did not use the radio again because Mr
Hopkins had told us to return to the ground as soon as we
could.


We arrived at the Northern General Hospital and there were
already three Ambulances reversed up to the Casualty
department entrance doors.      We were met by staff with
trolleys and transferred our casualties onto their trolleys.
We ushered all the walking wounded into the casualty
department and spoke to a nurse who was there out of uniform
but wearing a Porters coat. The patients were handed over
and        and I returned to our vehicle and I drove to
Hillsborough.    At the junction of Herries Road South and
Penistone Road the Police directed us towards the Penistone
Road Gymnasium entrance to the Hillsborough football ground.


I drove to the same entrance I had used on my previous
visit.  This time there were already two Ambulances in the
area and when they had cleared the ground.  I reversed the
vehicle into the green area marked on the map accompanying
this statement.    The doors were opened and immediately
Policemen brought casualties to the vehicle.  A man who I
believe to be a doctor told us to keep one particular
casualty on his front and transport him to hospital that
way.   We did not load the Ambulance with any other
casualties and to the best of my memory the time was around
1545 hours.  I believe we were directed to reverse into the
ground by Station Officer Paul Eason.     However, when the
casualty had been loaded we were told to leave the ground
immediately.


I left the ground with a Police escort and had a swift
journey to the Hospital. On arrival at the Northern General
Hospital casualty department there were at least six or
perhaps even seven vehicles unloading casualties.   I could
not get our vehicle near the door and        and I unloaded
our casualty and took him to the casualty doors where we
were met by a doctor, who gave him a quick check and we
wheeled the casualty into the Hospital.       There were no
resuscitation rooms or cubicles available and we waited with
the casualty in the corridor whilst a cubicle was cleared.
An auxiliary nurse arrived and a staff nurse too.        The
patient was handed over and we returned to our vehicle.    I
drove back to the Hillsborough football ground with a Police
escort. On my return I queued with four or five Ambulances
waiting to get in to the ground. Whilst waiting        and I
were asked if we had any body bags by an Ambulance man. We
were also told to hand over any blankets which we had.


At this time I was also made aware that most of the
casualties had been cleared from the ground.  and I
Waited in Penistone Road for quite a few minutes and saw one
Ambulance take away a man who was described as an epileptic
and at this stage I realised that all the serious casualties
had been cleared from the ground.


Mr Hopkins then requested the cots from our vehicle to be
taken to the Gymnasium.  We took our cots off the vehicle
and made our way to the Gymnasium.  There were four other
cots at the Gymnasium.   I left        with the cots and
returned to the vehicle.    On my return I found a Police
Officer sat on the vehicle, he was very distressed and I
gave him oxygen and sat with him and his colleague for
fifteen minutes or so until he felt able to leave the
vehicle and walk away.


On one occasion whilst inside the ground in the area marked
green on the plan annexed to this statement, I saw an
Ambulance man being treated after he had been kicked by a
spectator.  I remember that Mr Hopkins was speaking to him.
I personally had no trouble with fans.


I ought to say that the casualties which               and I
transported to the Hospital all smelt strongly of alcohol.


Whilst waiting in Penistone Road, Police and St. Johns
Ambulance vehicles arrived and drove into the ground and
parked at the rear of the Gymnasium.   Bodies were unloaded
from these vehicles and taken into the temporary mortuary.
       and I helped move three bodies into the Gymnasium.
These bodies were not covered by blankets nor were they
inside body bags.  A few were covered with sheets and some
had a shirt draped over their faces. All the Ambulance men
who were there were working a system to transfer the bodies
from the Police and St. Johns Ambulance vehicles into the
Gymnasium.


Mr Jones then instructed       and I to move our vehicle to
the rear of the Gymnasium where three or more vehicles were
parked. More Ambulances then arrived and at one stage there
may have been 15 Ambulances all stood by.             and I
waited probably half of an hour during which time we had
some refreshment and Mr Jones gathered all the crews
together to brief us regarding dealing with the bodies. He
split us up into shifts and sent away those people who had
       to report for duty and those who were working the next day.
       Those who were off duty were also told to go and he then
       asked for volunteers to move the bodies.              and I
       volunteered.

22 .          and I were told by an Officer, whose name I cannot
       remember, that there were bodies at the Sheffield Northern
       General Hospital to collect.     He wanted four vehicles to
       attend; we volunteered and I drove our vehicle. We arrived
       at casualty and liaised with Ambulance Officer
       The bodies were loaded onto the vehicle and      |, I and one
       mortuary attendant returned with the three bodies to the
       temporary mortuary at the ground.    We were met by Station
       Officer          on our return. There were no Police on the
       vehicle and I informed Station Officer          of this. He
       ordered   that the doors of the Ambulance should remain
       closed.    Station Officer            then dealt with
       formalities and although I do not know what was said, we
       were instructed to remove the bodies from the vehicle and
       place them in the temporary mortuary.    This we did.  We
       parked our vehicle, when empty, to the rear of the
       Gymnasium.

23.    We were called together by Station Officer Eason. He wanted
       three crews and as there were four crews, one crew was to
       stand down.   We agreed to stand by and he found two other
       crews who were also willing to stand by. We carried out the
       removal of bodies from the temporary mortuary as soon as
       they were identified to the Medico Legal Centre.      Three
       bodies, together with three Policemen were transferred each
       trip. I made four trips to the Medico Legal Centre. On our
       fourth trip we carried some Police Officers from the Medico
       Legal Centre back to the football ground.   The system for
       delivering the bodies was very efficient and each trip took
       approximately 15 minutes.    We were stood down by Roger




                                    505
     Morley at about 0215 hours on 16th April.   We returned to
     our Station at 0230 hours, cleaned the vehicle, signed off
     and left at 0300 hours.



Dated this   O   day of April 1989




Signed...




                                     8



                                         f*      fi,
                                              I) ti
                                                                                                    ain Police Access

Sheffield Wednesday                 f     n                                                Police
                                                                                           Room
       Hillsborough Ground                                                       Room



                                                                      Gymnmakm

                                                                                                                        77-88
                                                                                                                          73-76

                                                                 NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                                  “t 0 t\* » ^      cS




                                                                                                                                          4 9 -5 4
                                                                                                                                          4 3 -4 8

                                                                                                                                   \\ \\         \\\C '


                                                                Player's
'ay Fans Entrance                                               Tunnel

and Enclosures


         Police Control         19-22                         SOUTH STAND
                                                       RUB
<LTl                                                                                       BLJD
C£>                                     Official                                        2 9 -3 2 33 -

       KEY

       TURNSTILES   F77 / / I                      D irector * Entrance
