I ____________________   was born on 2.12.45.    I am a Leading
Ambulance man, and am employed by SYMAS.     I have worked form
them for 13 years.



On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was off duty and since I am a
keen   football   supporter    I had   the   chance   to   go   to

Hillsborough Sheffield to see the cup semi-final between
Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.


I went to the turnstiles at the Spion Kop end of the ground,

that would be at about 1445.    At the time I went in without

difficulty;   there were no queues where I was,        although

further along towards Sheffield people were waiting to go
in.



I entered by the turnstile 77/88, and inside was orderly.        I

went into the kop and having been told that there was plenty
of room at the front, I made my way down to a part, slightly

off centre and about a third of the way back from the front.



The match began on time and as far as I could see there was
no sign of trouble anywhere.



The match had not been in progress long, when play stopped.

Soon after that the players began to leave the field.       From

where I was I could see at the opposite end of the pitch
people were beginning to congregate on the playing field.
A lot of police were attending and then I saw an ambulance

just on the pitch; I saw it go towards the other end.         On

seeing the ambulance on the pitch I felt that there might be

some trouble and, because of my training that I might be

able to help.   I therefore went to one of the gates and told
a policeman there who I was.



He said I might be some use at the other end because people

had been injured.     I went through the gate and trotted
across the pitch.



About one third of the way down the pitch I came across a

casualty lying on the ground, being tended to by some one.
The patient had stopped breathing and I gave him the kiss of

life.   A doctor came and looked at the man.    The doctor said
he was dead.



I then went to the crowd and for the next hour or so I gave

first aid treatment to numerous patients.      I helped to treat
injuries such as shoulder and chest injuries, also several
that had hyperventilation.



I also helped to organise people who wanted to help but did
not know what to do, eg taking them off the pitch to where

the ambulances were waiting.
12.   Slowly but surely the pitch cleared as the casualties were

      being moved away.   The situation eased and things became

      calm.   The last casualty I helped was a Liverpool man who

      was in shock.   I took him under the stand and left him with
      the police and other helpers.



13.   I would like to say that all the Liverpool supporters I came

      into contact with and all the police I met were doing all
      that they could to help.



14.   The police put a line of men across the pitch and I would

      like to say this was a very good thing, it prevented crowds

      of people coming across and treading on us and the injured
      we were treating.


Dated the      r £ i day of   O   •    '      1989
