          - AMBULANCEMAN - BARNSLEY AMBULANCE STATION


Date:   20.4.89

Call Sign:   B1104

Duty:   Came off night duty that morning

No crew member


I had finished my night duty that morning after getting up I was watching
the start of the game on TV, and I noticed the incident. I phoned Control
straight away, and I asked them if they needed any help.

The Control Officer asked me to hold a minute, then came back to me and
said yes you are in - report to Barnsley Station.

I changed into uniform and came as quickly as I could to the Station. I
informed L/A       what I was doing and we informed Control that I had
reported for duty.

Control Superintendent Clarke asked me to take a vehicle up to Barnsley
District General Hospital A/E and pick up a medical team and transport to
Hillsborough Football pitch.

On arrival at Barnsley District A/E   I was met by A/M         and senior
charge nurse         . I told them    I had come to transport the medical
team to Sheffield.Within three or     four minutes we had loaded the vehicle
and on our way. The team consisted    of one doctor and two nursing staff. I
followed A/M                          ambulance to Sheffield.

We arrived and were directed inside the perimeter to park up on the dual
carriageway. We parked up close to the gym on Penistone Road. ACMAO Jones
approached us and asked to identify ourselves.

I told him that we had brought a medical team and majax equipment from
Barnsley District General Hospital. He directed us to the gym/mortuary.     I
asked a traffic warden to assist in carrying the equipment ot the gym.

As we entered the gym Mr Hopkins suggested that at that point in time we
were not required. I re-loaded the equipment and informed ACMAO Jones we
were leaving. He suggested to us that as we had a doctor we would still be
better off employed in the gym, with that the doctor and staff returned to
the gym and ACMAO Jones requested me to get as many body bags and blankets
as possible.

These were collected and taken to the gym and placed at the side of the
bodies. I moved three bodies out of the way to make room near to the door
for a gangway. After this I returned to Mr Jones and he directed me to
park up at Herries Road.

On completion of the incident I finished duty at 1900.
