           -STANDARDS AND EFFICIENCY OFFICER

Based at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

Date;   18.4.89

Time:   1030-1115


I received a call at home asking me to report direct to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital unsure of time. I thought it was an exercise,
confirmed on car radio incident at Hillsborough. I parked on OPD apron,
there were ambulances everywhere discharging at A/E and Orthopaedic door.

I organised parking within yard. Found telephone to confirm arrival, spoke
to          . Checked on parking.              ^informed me to route
empty ambulances to Netherthorpe Parkway. Crews were arriving in a state
of shock.

Casualty started slow down and directed arriving ambulances to Door 10
(hospital triage area).

I was informed by Control that no more casualties to Royal Hallamshire
Hospital to go to Barnsley District General Hospital. I relayed the
message to Sister in charge of Triage and Dr Schroeder. Second thought
hospital to bursting point, checked with admin who didn't know. Asked to
shunt out 20 stretchers and 5 chair from FI and F2. Sister Wright on G2
discharged 5 chairs to KEH, 22 patients made their own way home.

I informed           and went to 'B' reception to organise crews,
ambulances arrived within minutes. Also in between times I visited
administration.

            asked to see someone from the ambulance service, I briefed him
of the situation. There was then a lot of activity within the department
involving trollies and staff due to a message that bodies would be
arriving. I confirmed with            the position who said that the
Ambulance Service would not be transporting bodies to the RHH.

I checked the mortuary, many staff were awaiting for bodies, but were
unsure where the message had come from.

I reviewed the situation in A/E and contacted Control.   I was told of a
fight in Ecclesfield.

          said they could accept more casualties, unable to get concrete
information from the Police for Admin.

Admin was in a state of shock and lacking information from the Police, so I
contacted Control to ask the Police on our tie lines to speak to admin
personnel.
SHEET 2             -   Standards and Efficiency Officer




I reviewed the situation and contacted Control. Control said an ambulance
would collect a body in the temporary mortuary as the Coroner had taken
reponsibility.

1720               phoned saying the            and team at RDGH are on
standby and would they be receiving any casualties,            said he
could cope.

During the incident fire alarms went off adding to the events.


Personal feelings - Inadequate - a radio would have helped.
