John Alexander Costley states



1.   I am employed by Trent Regional Health Authority as the

     Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer.



2.   My date of birth Is 2nd March 1932.



3.   My   home   address   is _

                     Derbyshire,


4.   I joined Yorkshire Regional Health Authority in 1975 having

     previously been in the RAF for 26 years.          I became    a

     training officer in the RAF in 1965, a Staff Officer in 1968

     and a training adviser and co-ordinator of courses in 1972.


5.   When I joined Yorkshire Regional Health Authority I was
     given    a job as a legal      executive.   I have no   legal

     qualifications except for the legal content of one of my RAF

     exams.      In 1976 I was appbinted Senior Administrative

     Assistant (Capital and Service Planning) and was appointed
     Deputy Secretary BTS (Blood Transfusion Service) in February

     1980.    I was appointed as the Regional Health Emergency

     Planning Officer in February 1982;    I am the first person to
     hold that position in Trent.



6.   The most important aspect of my job is to plan for a whole

     variety of possible emergencies in order to ensure that the
various parts of the health service are in a position to

respond and are able to liaise with all relevant parties.



In January 1977 the Department of Health and Social Security
had issued a circular,      number HC(77)1 entitled   "Health

Service Arrangements For Dealing With Major Accidents", a

copy of which is enclosure 1 to this       statement.      The

circular was,    itself,   used as a guide until I produced

separate guidelines in 1986.      That document is entitled
"Guidelines     on Major Accident    Procedures"    and   forms
enclosure 2 to this statement.   The Guidelines were approved

by the Regional Health Authority at its meeting of 11th

April 1986.    Enclosure 3 to this statement is a bundle of

documents on the first page of which is a copy of the
relevant Regional Health Authority minute, and on t h e second

page of that bundle is the Regional General Manager's report

referred to in the minute.     The Guidelines were circulated
to those persons listed on page (II) of the Guidelines with

a letter dated 15th April which appears on pages 3 and 4 of

enclosure 3.



I understand that major incident response procedures were

discussed at a meeting of Regional General Managers in 1986

and following this a letter dated 29th January 1987 was sent

from the Department of Health and Social Security to all

Regional General Managers.     A copy of that letter and its

enclosure appears at pages 5 to 7 of enclosure 3.   A copy of
      the Regional General Manager's response (which I had been

      involved in drafting) appears at pages 8 and 9.     Further

      relevant   correspondence appears at pages 10 to 13 of

      enclosure 3.


9.    Major accident procedures are constantly under review and as

      part of this review process I wrote to all District General
      Managers, the Chief Ambulance Officers, the Director of the

      Blood Transfusion Service within Trent on 22nd August 1988.

      A copy of that letter appears at page 14 of enclosure 3 and
      the responses of the General Manager at Sheffield Health
      Authority, and of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance

      Service appear at pages 15 to 18 inclusive.



10.   At pages 19 and 20 of enclosure 3 there is a copy of a

      letter which was sent to all District General Managers on
      19th December 1988 referring to two meetings which I had

      arranged which relate to planning for a major disaster.    I

      produce this letter merely to emphasis the fact that major

      incident planning is an ongoing procedure.



11.   At enclosures 4, 5 and 6 respectively I produce the major

      incident plans of each of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan

      Ambulance Service, the Northern General Hospital, and the

      Royal Hallamshire Hospital.     Updated versions of these
      documents are sent to me from time to time.    Although the

      major   incident   plan of South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service Is actually dated 1985 I know that It has

been updated since then.



I have not,   in my statement,    gone through each of the

enclosed documents in detail because I believe that those
documents speak for themselves.
 John Alexander Costley states:-



 1.    I am employed by Trent Regional Health Authority as the

       Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer.



 2.    My date of birth is 2nd March 1932.


 3.    My   home    address   is

                      . Derbyshire,


 4.    I joined Yorkshire Regional Health Authority in 1975 having

       previously been in the RAF for 26 years.           I became   a

       training officer in the RAF in 1965, a Staff Officer in 1968

      and a training adviser and co-ordinator of courses in 1972.


5.    When I joined Yorkshire Regional Health Authority I was

      given    a job as a legal executive.         I have no   legal

      qualifications except for the legal content of one of my RAF

      exams.       In 1976 I was appointed Senior Administrative

      Assistant (Capital and Service Planning) and was appointed
      Deputy Secretary BTS (Blood Transfusion Service) in February

      1980.    I was appointed as the Regional Health Emergency
      Planning Officer in February 1982;     I am the first person to
      hold that position in Trent.



6.    The most important aspect of my job is to plan for a whole
      variety of possible emergencies in order to ensure that the
 various parts of the health service are in a position to

 respond and are able to liaise with all relevant parties.



 In January 1977 the Department of Health and Social Security

 had issued a circular,      number HC(77)1 entitled    "Health

 Service Arrangements For Dealing With Major Accidents", a

 copy of which is enclosure       1 to this   statement.     The

 circular was,    itself,   used as a guide until I produced

 separate guidelines in 1986.      That document is entitled
 "Guidelines     on Major Accident    Procedures"   and    forms
 enclosure 2 to this statement.    The Guidelines were approved

by the Regional Health Authority at its meeting of 11th

April 1986.    Enclosure 3 to this statement is a bundle of

documents on the first page of which is a copy of the
relevant Regional Health Authority minute, and on the second

page of that bundle is the Regional General Manager’s report

referred to in the minute.     The Guidelines were circulated
to those persons listed on page (II) of the Guidelines with
a letter dated 15th April which appears on pages 3 and 4 of
enclosure 3.



I understand that major incident response procedures were

discussed at a meeting of Regional General Managers in 1986

and following this a letter dated 29th January 1987 was sent

from the Department of Health and Social Security to all
Regional General Managers.     A copy of that letter and its
enclosure appears at pages 5 to 7 of enclosure 3.   A copy of
 the Regional General Manager's response (which I had been
 involved in drafting) appears at pages 8 and 9.       Further

 relevant   correspondence appears    at pages    10 to 13 of
 enclosure 3.



 Major accident procedures are constantly under review and as

 part of this review process I wrote to all District General

 Managers, the Chief Ambulance Officers, the Director of the

 Blood Transfusion Service within Trent on 22nd August 1988.
 A copy of that letter appears at page 14 of enclosure 3 and

 the responses of the General Manager at Sheffield Health

Authority, and of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Service appear at pages 15 to 18 inclusive.



At pages 19 and 20 of enclosure 3 there is a copy of a
letter which was sent to all District General Managers on

19th December 1988 referring to two meetings which I had
arranged which relate to planning for a major disaster.     I

produce this letter merely to emphasis the fact that major
incident planning is an ongoing procedure.



At enclosures 4, 5 and 6 respectively I produce the major

incident plans of each of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan

Ambulance Service, the Northern General Hospital, and the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital.     Updated versions of these
documents are sent to me from time to time.      Although the
major   incident plan of South Yorkshire      Metropolita n
Ambulance Service is actually dated 1985 I know that it has
been updated since then.



I have not,   in my statement,    gone through each of the

enclosed documents in detail because I believe that those
documents speak for themselves.
                                                                            e w          . —^                <c^ p jL>s
                                                                                                                                             X'^V-j ^                  ^          . _i     i     n ^ r iiT ^




    ^h*&.

    \ x       ^        < £ **■      06         ,-d^jfeS                                                                                VaoA-K.




X     m   ,       \ ct~7S*                          o—        0                                                 ________ ~ ' \ p     ^ g ^ -X         &SK^                                                    __
                  H "7 b                                                                 -O—«.A^


                                 „£&&»    .JZ.-SL.



                              u ^ - 7 -7) ]


                             _ Cj~v^J^^a-?--- ,                                 T>.                                                                           >                   }                         ...




                                                        ...                       ......h?5.                         fg s^ -v i-5    ,ja ^ r> 5 ^ 4 k a ----                  .r ? > _ 1 ^ .            -:
                                               ,..____ ...... . „ __                        ,._________                             J&iCSttifc__ *>


                                                                                           A y ^ -v                                              —V rx ^ —                                -A         r^r
                                                                                          O^a-'                             KjaoiK.                                      _


                                .          -                                                                                        I l^ 1                        _     ^ _           i          _c
                                                                                                                                                                                                 P V yA -
                                                          c ! r y l^ Y t ^                       o-v-                                           ^X «lA .                v -ix v A -        —3_     vre-«-&vyi)

                                                                                 <*>                           <!»-e<^> C,3-«—3_ ___                          ,.                      4_
                                                                                                                                                                                  3


                     Rs>3— 3             j *       H               s        r       ■ ^              AV~_         .
                                                                                                                  <!iJa-^“.                                                       Wj
                              Co—          «lA -                  JLe_          =-                  -/ .
                                                                             „«*,.U-..-=------. ---- - ^ -       -.«vw*#A
                                                                                                               ■< ^ ^ V :                          ,
                                                                                                                                                   __

                                                    -   . w ’ J fc fc ...         ....               —       _____   ~<k    —                                              5 ^o -A . N flp b -«
                                                                                                                                                A.^^--.   _           c)cx.   .
                        -     ------------          O y p ^
                                                                                                     APPENDIX C


                               HOSPITAL OPERATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS


INFORMATION ABOUT THE MAJOR ACCIDENT PLAN

1.     A hospital w ill function well in a major emergency only if responsibilities are clearly defined and
everybody has a thorough understanding o f their own individual duties and how in general terms the total plan
is intended to work. To help achieve this consideration should be given to issuing key personnel w ith action
cards detailing their role and conducting exercises at intervals (see paragraph 10 of the circular).

ALERTING PROCEDURES

2.     The ambulance service is responsible for alerting the designated and supporting hospitals and advising
whether or not a mobile medical and nursing team should be despatched immediately. However the hospital
major accident procedure should be initiated on reliable information received from any source, although in
these circumstances it is advisable not to despatch the mobile team until confirmation is received from the
ambulance service or Site Medical Officer that it is required. As notice of a major accident w ill normally be
received by telephone at the main hospital switchboard, hospital telephone operators have a vital role in
activating the hospital plan by alerting key personnel and departments. Standard procedures for operators
should therefore contain the telephone numbers of hospital staff involved including home telephone numbers,
in order of priority, and details of how to contact staff not available by telephone. Arrangements should be
made to make additional and relief telephone operators available, and care should be taken to keep outgoing
calls to the minimum. Full use should be made of any direct lines and public telephones in the hospital which
bypass the hospital switchboard and any prior plans agreed with the Post Office for the installation of extra
telephones should be implemented. A ll operators should be briefed frequently on their responsibilities in the
event of an emergency and should check the agreed 'call out' procedures at regular intervals.

THE SITE MEDICAL OFFICER

3.     As part of the hospital major accident procedure the Site Medical Officer w ill immediately proceed to
the scene, where he w ill have overall responsibility for all medical activity, liaising closely w ith the ambulance
and other emergency services. Designation o f the Site Medical Officer w ill need to take account o f the
likelihood that he w ill have a clinical role in the initial stages. By prior agreement he should be supplied by a
listed hospital or the health authority. The Site Medical Officer should not be a member of a mobile medical
and nursing team.

4.     It is essential fo r the Site Medical Officer to be readily identifiable as soon as he arrives at the scene of
the accident and as he may be called out from his home it may be necessary for him to carry his means of
identification and protective clothing w ith him at off-duty times. Consideration should also be given to the
possible need to provide transport for him to the site.

5.     His first duty on arrival w ill be to establish the current situation in consultation w ith the various
Incident Officers o f the emergency services and set up his headquarters at the Ambulance and Medical Control
Point. If he considers that a medical and nursing team is required and one has not b e e n summoned already, he
should initiate the necessary action. If further teams are required either to augment, or if activity is prolonged,
to relieve the first team he should make the necessary changes in consultation w ith the Chief Site Nurse (see
para 7). Casualty Clearing Stations should be established as necessary and the priority of evacuation of
casualties should be assessed. Close contact should be maintained with the designated and supporting hospitals
via the ambulance radio link.

6.     As far as possible the Site Medical Officer, or a doctor on site appointed by him, should confirm death
before any body is removed from the scene by the police, acting under the instructions o f the coroner, or
under their authority, by the ambulance service. It should not be necessary to take bodies to hospital for
certification, or re-certification, o f death. Finally it is the Site Medical Officer's duty to give the stand down to
the mobile medical and nursing team(s) and to the designated and supporting hospitals. He should ensure that
the D istrict Community Physician (or Area Medical Officer in a single district area) knows that this has been
done and is fu lly aware o f the state o f affairs at the site.




                                                        (i)
CHIEF SITE NURSE

7.     Where two or more mobile medical and nursing teams are required at the site of amajor accident, or
where circumstances create a need fo r her presence, a previously nominated senior nursewho is familiarwith
the major accident plan, should be supplied by a listed hospital to act as Chief Site Nurse. She should have
protective clothing (including headwear) which w ill ensure that she can be easily recognised. On arrival a tt e
site she should

      i.      liaise with the Site Medical Officer and assume overall nursing responsibility

      ii.     assess the situation from the nursing stand-point

      iii.    control the activities, replacement and reinforcement of nurses working on site

      iv.     assist the Site Medical Officer in his duties as necessary.

MOBILE MEDICAL AND NURSING TEAMS

SUMMONING
8 .   The first mobile medical and nursing team w ill usually have been summoned by the a m b u l a n c e s e r v i c e in
accordance with the locally agreed plan. No additional team should be despatched unless requested by the Site
Medical Officer. Where additional teams are so summoned the Chief Site Nurse should go to the site.

9.    Each listed hospital should arrange fo r a mobile medical and nursing team to be despatched on request,
and have readily available fo r their use warm waterproof protective clothing (including suitable headwear) in
which they w ill be easily recognisable and medical supplies packed in light, strong and reasonably sized
carrying boxes or holdalls. Account should be taken of what is carried by ambulances to avoid duplication of
items and wherever possible equipment should be compatible eg adaptors and connectors should match.
Arrangements should be made for periodic checking of equipment and the replacement of perishable supplies.

TRANSPORT

10. Prior arrangements should exist for the transport of mobile medical and nursing teams. This task may be
allocated to the ambulance service.

THE DUTIES OF THE CONSULTANT IN CHARGE OF MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE

11. The Consultant in charge of Major Accident Procedure (usually the Consultant in c h a rg e o f the A & E
Department) w ill, w ith appropriate colleagues be concerned in the formulation and updating of the hospita
plan. If the hospital becomes a designated or supporting hospital, he w ill be responsible for implementing the
medical arrangements. He should despatch a mobile medical and nursing team (either from his own or another
hospital) if asked to do so by the Ambulance Service, Site Medical Officer or other a u t h o r i s e d body. He should
maintain close contact at all times w ith the Casualty Assessment Officer and in consultation w ith the bite
Medical Officer should decide at what stage supporting hospitals should be nominated to receive casualties.

CASUALTY ASSESSMENT OFFICER (OR TRIAGE OFFICER)

12. A senior member of the medical staff of a designated hospital w ith considerable experience of accident
and emergency work should be appointed to be responsible with a senior nurse for assessing all casualties on
arrival at the hospital and fo r deciding their priority o f treatment and appropriate transfer.

THE DIVISIONAL NURSING OFFICER (NURSING SERVICES GENERAL)

13. The Divisional Nursing Officer (Nursing Services General) is responsible to the District Nursing Officer
for ensuring
       i.     that nursing staff understand the major accident plan and the detailed arrangements for their part
       w ithin the whole team
       ii.  that appropriately trained and experienced nursing staff are available to act as members of a
       mobile medical and nursing team and are fu lly conversant with resuscitation techniques

       iii.    the nomination of Chief Site Nurses

       iv.  that a list o f nurses (with telephone numbers) liable to be called to the hospital in the event of a
       major accident is maintained and regularly up-dated
      v.    that nursing staff participate in training programmes and exercises

      vi.   that appropriate relief arrangements are made for nursing staff selected to deal w ith emergencies
      both at the designated hospital and at the site.

SECTOR ADMINISTRATOR

14. The Sector Administrator is responsible for ensuring that the resources of the hospital are fully
mobilized; that a hospital information centre is set up (para 18) and that essential information about casualties
in the hospital, including condition, is collated and passed to the hospital information centre and to the central
casualty bureau (para 17). He is also responsible for seeing that there are sufficient clerks (sometimes members
o f the voluntary services may have to be used) to record details of condition of casualties, bed state and
theatre availability and that porters or volunteers are available to help unload and re-equip ambulances to
facilitate a quick turn round. He is responsible fo r alerting the hospital chaplains and the linked social services
department as appropriate (see para 12 of the circular). He should review all aspects of the hospital plan
regularly in conjunction w ith the Consultant in charge of Major Accident Procedure, the Divisional Nursing
Officer (Nursing Services General), the Medical Records Officer and other heads of departments.

15. In the event o f a major accident involving an international airliner the possibility of enquiries from
relatives and legal representatives o f casualties whose knowledge of English may well be imperfect, as well as
from consular and diplomatic representatives, should not be overlooked. In these circumstances
communication w ith casualties may also prove more than usually d iffic u lt and the sector administrator may
therefore wish to maintain a list of staff with a knowledge of one or more foreign languages.

PUBLIC RELATIONS

16. The police appoint a Press Liaison Officer to handle press and television enquiries in the immediate
aftermath of a major accident. Nevertheless the clamour for information from relatives, press, television and
radio may be the biggest single administrative problem o f a major accident for a hospital. Arrangements for
coping w ith the demand must be carefully planned to ensure that information is given as effectively as possible
while avoiding serious interference with the hospital's primary task of caring fo r casualties. The pressure of
enquiries is likely to be particularly heavy in the firs t 24 to 48 hours so it is suggested that fu ll use should be
made of the Regional Public Relations Officer and his staff to help in handling news media queries, press
releases etc. TV interviews on the general medical condition of patients are normally best assigned to a
consultant.

CENTRAL CASUALTY BUREAU

17. A central casualty bureau w ill normally be set up and manned by the police away from the hospital to
handle all general enquiries about casualties, including those dealt w ith at the site w ithout referral to hospital,
from the press or public. The telephone number(s) of the bureau, which w ill have been agreed in advance with
the Post Office, w ill be made known immediately to the public via local and national television and radio. The
hospital switchboard should transfer all initial enquiries about casualties to the bureau. The use of the central
casualty bureau w ill be particularly helpful when casualties are sent to more than one hospital and/or have
been transferred from the designated hospital. Close liaison between the bureau and the hospitals involved is
vital to ensure that a simple up-to-date list of casualties is maintained. Arrangements fo r this service should be
agreed w ith the police at the planning stage.

HOSPITAL INFORMATION CENTRE

18. In addition to the central casualty bureau manned by the police it w ill be necessary to provide an
information centre at the hospital receiving casualties from a major accident where people can come to make
enquiries about the condition of patients. It is essential to set aside a clearly signed area where relatives and
friends can congregate and where catering facilities are available, away from the reception and clinical areas.
Representatives of the news media are likely to attend the hospital and separate provision w ill need to be made
for them.




                                                        (iii)
HEALTH CIRCULAR                                                                                        HC(77)1



                                                        & & > ■'« - V.V.-....... ..



DHSS                      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY



To:   Regional Health Authorities )
      Area Health Authorities      ) fo r action
      Boards o f Governors         )
      Community Health Councils
      Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan County Councils
      Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan District Councils                fo r information
      London Borough Councils
      Greater London Council
      Common Council o f the C ity o f London                                                      January 1977



                                    HEALTH SERVICES DEVELOPMENT

            HEALTH SERVICE ARRANGEMENTS FOR DEALING WITH MAJOR ACCIDENTS


SUMMARY

This circular, which advises Health Authorities on health service arrangements for dealing w ith major
accidents, expands previous guidance in the light of NHS reorganisation and the experience gained from recent
national and international major accidents. In order to avoid possible confusion, definitions of the terms used
in the circular are given in Appendix A ; Appendix B describes ambulance service operational arrangements and
Appendix C hospital operational arrangements.

GENERAL

1.    There is no standard definition of a 'major accident' which would satisfy the health service, the
emergency services and local authorities as each tends to look at such incidents from the point of view of its
own responsibilities. For the purpose o f this circular a major accident is one which because o f the number and
severity o f live casualties requires special arrangements by the health service. Where the nature of the
occurrence is such that the emergency services cannot cope unaided, it w ill be necessary for local authorities to
implement their emergency plans as described in Home Office Circular No ES 7/1975 (Department of the
Environment Circular No 80/75, Welsh Office Circular No 146/75) issued to health authorities under coverof
DS Letter 275/75 in September 1975. In these circumstances co-ordination of arrangements w ill be the
responsibility o f the appropriate local authority.

2.     The advice contained in this circular is necessarily general in scope because no two major accidents are
identical nor is it possible to foresee how any particular situation may develop. The plans of authorities should
therefore be as flexible as possible and be reviewed regularly with the other emergency services in the light of
local discussions and circumstances.

3.     Because o f the varying circumstances o f major accidents it is important that the problems arising and the
lessons learned should be made known as widely as possible. In recent years authorities have normally sent
reports on major accidents to the Department (Regional Liaison Division) in the form of a brief initial report
to enable Ministers and officials to handle any immediate enquiries, followed at a later stage by a more
detailed report. This practice should continue and those directly involved should be encouraged to consider
whether publication o f their experiences might be of help to colleagues elsewhere. The Department s Library
(at Alexander Fleming House) can provide a bibliography o f recent articles on major accidents.

THE ROLE OF REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITIES

4.    Regional Health Authorities should ensure that plans fo r the health service arrangements for dealing w ith
such emergencies are prepared throughout their regions by Area Health Authorities and Metropolitan
Ambulance Services, and also co-ordinate and advise on such plans and generally monitor standards of service.
Special account should be taken o f the possibility of a major accident being spread over several square miles
and overlapping Area and Regional boundaries. In certain localities a jo in t plan covering more than one AHA
may be appropriate.
      date a lS t’o f h S S .u     Aut*,o ritv' *" consultation w ith appropriate bodies, should prepare and keep up to
      casualties      a 24 h o u r            " t e™ rg* nCV departments which * e suitable for designation to receive
      deal with casualties in relation t^ V h 9      broad areas that they are intended to cover and their capacity to
      this listShould                      the nature o f predominant injury (severity and type) sustained. Copies of
      Fire Services in the Region       *         3     alth Authorities, ambulance controls, hospitals, and Police and

      PLANNING BY AREA HEALTH AUTHORITIES

   with th ^ D a ^ ti^ n a tin n ^ 0^ 3^ 9 ^ delin®s'
                                                   Area Health A uthority should draw up a plan for their Area,
   neiqhbourina Health A.ith v '                   ^
                                                 ®na9ement Teams> consulting Family Practitioner Committees,
                                             Authorities, Police and Fire Services, the Post Office, the Armed
   bervices and any other appropriate statutory or voluntary body. These plans should include

                                    U?«a«.0ns sch! me PrePared    consultation w ith the local telephone Area General
                 anH +ho      t , * ? j Ce'         communications at the site of a major accident and between the site
                 and the hospitals involved are essential

                          role     Qeneral practitioners at the site of the incident (particularly where there are GP
                  mmediate-care schemes in the area), in health centres and at hospitals

                 iii.     the role o f community physicians

                 iv.      the role of community based staff and the procedures for alerting          them

                 L r« i^ Ihe ? ' l ° f th! St John Ambulance, the British Red Cross Society, the Women's Royal Voluntary
                 Service and other voluntary organisations, taking into account their plans for mobilization

                                           l3ti° ?    th,e area' such a ir p o r ts , oil installations, chemical plants etc, which are
                 including                special risks (if in doubt local authorities w ill know of facilities where hazards exist)

                          a.    nature of risk

                          b.      names, addresses and telephone numbers (business and home)of key staff
                          c.   access points

                          d.   location of medical and firs t aid rooms

                          e.   emergency services marshalling points

                         f.    any special arrangements made by the organisation to deal with major accidents

            ambulance*service* ^               SeCUrin9 help and support from neighbouring authorities especially for the

 7.         Authorities should ensure that

            i.           each non-metropolitan ambulance service has a plan fo r mobilizing in the event of a major accident
            ii.          each listed hospital has its own internal plan.

AMBULANCE MOBILIZATION

m a in r        a (f* n.ta‘ns        suggested ambulance service operational arrangements in the event of a
major accident. Ambulance authorities plans fo r mobilizing the ambulance service should ensure that

           L a iia w l6^    3 QJICk mitial response with ambulances and specialised equipment so that they are
           have occurred * SC6ne ” 5000 3S posslble after receipt o f the firs t indication that a major accidentmay

           ii.          thereafter further ambulances are sent as needed

           in.          follow ing action fo r (i) and (ii) adequate emergency cover is maintained throughout the area

        iv.             ambulance controls are capable o f handling the ambulance service role in a major accident.




                                                                    2
HOSPITAL PLANS

9.     Appendix C contains suggested hospital operational arrangements. Each listed hospital should draw up
its own internal plan in consultation with the District Management Team to deal with a major accident, taking
into account any guidance issued by the Regional and Area Health Authorities. Staff should be given an
outline of the overall arrangements and be made aware of their individual roles by use of action cards or
similar means. The Department, though not wishing to lay down the precise form which the plan should take,
believes that there are advantages in the interests of continuity in designating posts rather than individuals.
However potential holders of certain key posts, eg that of Site Medical Officer, should be n a m e d . It w ill also
be necessary to name individuals agreeing to participate in mobile medical and nursing teams who do not have
this feature in their current job description (eg junior hospital doctors). A ll staff (and members of the other
emergency services and voluntary bodies) who are likely to be at risk in extricating casualties from wreckage at
the site of a major accident should be up-to-date w ith tetanus immunisation.

EXERCISES

10. To ensure that plans w ill work as efficiently and smoothly as possible, practise of the local major
accident plan is important and new staff should receive instruction on it as soon as practicable. Joint exercises
may be held in consultation w ith the other emergency services and, where appropriate, health authorities
should take the initiative in suggesting such exercises. Frequent full-scale exercises are not essential but
elements of the plan particularly the communications and ambulance aspects should be tested at, say,
six monthly intervals and where practicable key site personnel should have the opportunity to participate.
Plans should be reviewed as necessary in the light of such exercises and staff informed of any changes.
Regional Health Authorities should be notified of any revisions at AHA level.

11.   Elements of the ambulance plan appropriate fo r practice could include

      i.    'M obilization' (to test at any given moment what ambulance resources could be made available
      quickly)

      ii.  ambulance communications exercises (see Appendix B) including use of the emergency reserve
      channel

      iii.    incident approach exercises

      iv.     exercises in site reconnaissance, reporting back to control and selecting the designated hospital

      v.   establishment of ambulance and medical mobile control points, parking, loading and stretcher
      bearer assembly points; hospital reception and tum round o f ambulances

      vi.     casualty evacuation procedure

      vii.    notification of o ff duty staff

      viii.   release of extra equipment and supplies

LIAISON WITH SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENTS

12. Health Authorities are advised, as part of their standard procedure in emergencies, to arrange for their
linked social services department to be informed at once o f possible calls on their resources to visit and help
victims, their relatives or dependants, in particular elderly and handicapped people and children, at home and
in hospital. The social services department also has a role in organizing and co-ordinating voluntary agencies
and volunteers and in contacting the social services departments o f victims who come from other areas.

POLICE RESPONSIBILITY FOR CO-ORDINATION

13. Experience of major accidents underlines the need fo r well planned and co-ordinated operations at the
site, for dose co-operation between the emergency services and the need fo r co-ordination and control of
voluntary helpers. Except in the case of fire, the police normally co-ordinate on-site work of the emergency
services including the supply of inform ation to press, radio and television at the scene of the accident. The
senior police officer, or in the case of a fire the senior fire officer, at the scene w ill operate from his control
post in dose consultation w ith the representatives of the other emergency services involved. He w ill be
responsible fo r co-ordinating the work o f the various services employed and fo r maintaining cortKW 1over the
whole area. It is im portant that health service staff at the major accident site should be readily identitiame.
Authorities should liaise w ith the police and the other emergency services on this aspect at the planning stage.
REMOVAL AND CUSTODY OF FATALITIES

 14. The overall responsibility fo r all matters concerning bodies lies with Her Majesty s Coroners. The police
acting under the instructions of the coroner w ill make arrangements for the temporary charge of bodies. As far
as practicable no body should be removed w ithout police authority; this is particularly important in an aircraft
crash. Normally bodies w ill be transferred to one specifically designated accident mortuary so that all fatalities
can be examined by the same pathological team. Before this is done it may be necessary to establish a
temporary mortuary on site or near by; refrigerated road vehicles may have to be used for emergency storage.
Serious public health and other problems may arise as the result of inadequate refrigerated body storage and it
is important that the distribution and number of such storage places is known. In all cases there should be
discussions between the coroner, the police, the local authority and the health authority in planning the
mortuary facilities to be used in the event of large numbers o f deaths.

CIRCULARS/NOTICES CANCELLED

15.     HM(54)51, CIRCULAR 13/54

ACTION

16. Health Authorities w ill already have plans to cover the health service response to a major accident. It is
not the intention that they should necessarily immediately amend these plans in the light of this guidance but
rather revise them as appropriate at the next review. Any revisions should be brought to the attention of the
staff concerned.




From:

Health Services Division 2C
Hannibal House
Elephant and Castle
London SE1 6TE
01-703 6380 Ext 3419

Further copies of this circular may ba obtained (by written request wherever possible please) from: DHSS Store,
Scholefield Mill, Brunswick Street, Nelson, Lancs B89 OHU Tel: 0282-62411/2 Ext 17.




                                                        4
                                                                                APPENDIX A TO HC(77)1


                  DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY FOR MAJOR ACCIDENT PLANNING


GENERAL TERMS

Ambulance Control:                  The permanent office which receives all demands fo r the ambulance
                                    service in a specified area, co-ordinates them and allocates them
                                    to stations or vehicles.

Central Casualty Bureau:            A bureau set up by the police to maintain a list of casualties
                                    resulting from a major accident, including casualties dealt with
                                    at the site w ithout referral to hospital and to answer all initial
                                    enquiries.

Emergency Services:                 The ambulance, fire, police and coastguard services.

Major Accident:                     For health service purposes a major accident is one which because
                                    of the number and severity of live casualties it produces requires
                                    special arrangements.

SITE TERMS

Ambulance Incident Officer:         The officer of the ambulance service responsible for the work of
                                    that service at the scene of a major accident.

Ambulance Loading Point:            The place designated at the scene of a major accident where
                                    ambulances are loaded.

Ambulance and Medical               The headquarters of the Site Medical Officer and the Ambulance
 Mobile Control Point:              Incident Officer and the focal point fo r all medical, nursing and
                                    ambulance staff at the scene of the major accident.

Ambulance Parking Point:            The place designated at the scene of a major accident where arriving
                                    ambulances park so that the attendant can report arrival, thus
                                    avoiding congestion at the entrance to the site or at the ambulance
                                    loading points.

Casualty Clearing Station:          A post set up at the major accident by the Site Medical Officer, in
                                    liaison w ith the ambulance service, to sort casulaties and direct
                                    their evacuation.

Chief Site Nurse:                   The most senior nurse w ith overall nursing responsibility at the
                                    scene of a major accident where tw o or more mobile medical and
                                    nursing teams are required or where circumstances create a need
                                    for her presence.

Mobile Medical and Nursing Team:    The team sent to the scene of a major accident usually at the
                                    request of the ambulance service or Site Medical Officer.

Site Medical Officer:               The medical officer w ith overall medical responsibility at the
                                    scene of a major accident who w ill liaise with the ambulance and
                                    other emergency services. He should not be a member of any mobile
                                    medical and nursing team.

Stretcher Bearer Assembly Points:   The places designated by the Ambulance Incident Officer where
                                    volunteer stretcher bearers can assemble to be directed where
                                    required.




                                             (i)
HOSPITAL TERMS

Ambulance Liaison O fficer;    The ambulance officer responsible fo r providing radio communications
                               and fo r the supervision of ambulance service activity and liaison
                               at a hospital receiving casualties from a major accident.

Casualty Assessment Officer:   A doctor who w ill receive and assess all casualties as soon as they
(sometimes termed the Triage   enter the hospital and decide the priority of treatment.
 Officer)

Consultant in charge of        The Consultant (usually the Consultant in charge of the A & E
Major Accident procedure:      Department) who is nominated to be responsible for co-ordinating
                               all hospital medical arrangements relating to major accidents.

Hospitals • designated:        The first listed hospital to be alerted by the ambulance authority
                               to receive casualties in the event of a major accident.

         • listed:             Hospitals listed by the Regional Health A uthority as adequately
                               equipped to receive casualties on a 24 hour basis; able to provide,
                               when required, a Site Medical Officer, Chief Site Nurse and a
                               Mobile Medical and Nursing Team.

          - supporting:        The listed hospitals nominated to support the designated hospital
                               in dealing with casualties from a major accident.

Hospital Information Centre:   A centre at a hospital, set up by the Sector Administrator, to
                               collect information about casualties at the hospital and pass it
                               to the Central Casualty Bureau manned by the police. The centre
                               w ill also deal w ith callers enquiring about such casualties and
                               handle follow-up telephone enquiries about specific patients.
                                                                                                  APPENDIX B

                         AMBULANCE SERVICE OPERATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

                                           AMBULANCE CONTROL

IN ITIA L CALL

1.    Although the initial call w ill frequently come from one of the emergency services it may come from any
source and it may not, therefore, always be clear to ambulance control whether the incident is one of major
proportions. Therefore ambulance crews should have standing instructions to report back to control
immediately whenever they consider that an incident, to which they have been sent in the ordinary way, could
be a major accident.

INITIATION OF MAJOR ACCIDENT PLAN

2.    As soon as reports indicate that a major accident may have occurred (the number of casualties ma> not
be easily determined at the outset) the senior officer on duty should initiate the major accident plan. It may
be better to bring the major accident plan into operation too early and possibly unnecessarily rather than to
delay doing so w ith consequent risks to the injured. The plan should indicate the initial action to be taken by
ambulance control, by the first ambulance crew at the site, the role of each senior officer and the extent to
which those senior officers not on duty are to be called out.

ALERTING PROCEDURES

3.      Because major accidents and local circumstances vary, controllers must always be ready to use their
initiative and to meet the unexpected. Action likely to be needed initially at control and which ambulance
plans should cover includes

      i.      despatching a number of ambulances and sitting case vehicles in the light of information received

      ii.     radio communications - immediate utilization of the Emergency Reserve Channel (LHAL9/72)

      iii.   notifying police and fire services that the major accident plan has been put into operation and
      giving them essential information about the location and nature of the accident

      iv.   selecting from the RHA's list of hospitals suitable to receive casualties, the hospital (the designated
      hospital) most appropriate in the circumstances of the accident to receive the initial flow of casualties
      and a second hospital (a supporting hospital) to act in support of the first. Both hospitals should be
      informed immediately by telephone to the main switchboard (not to the A & E Department) using the
      words "PRIORITY-MAJOR-ACCIDENT". This phrase should only be used to initiate the major accident
      procedures. The use of code words and/or special telephone numbers is a matter fo r local decision.
      Where the information received by control is so imprecise that the implementation of the major accident
      procedure is not immediately justified, it may be apnropriate fo r the hospitals to be given advanced
      warning via the main switchboard o f the possibility of a major accident

      v.      despatching a senior officer w ith mobile radio to act as "Ambulance Incident O fficer" at the site

      vi.   requesting the attendance of a mobile medical and nursing team where the intial reports suggest
      that this is desirable and providing transport fo r the team if necessary (the Site Medical Officer w ill be
      despatched by the appropriate hospital as part of the standard procedure fo r major accidents)

      vii.    despatching the ambulance mobile control to the site

      viii.   despatching an equipment vehicle to the site

      ix.   despatching officers w ith mobile radios to act as Ambulance Liaison Officers at the designated
      hospital, and at other hospitals expected to receive casualties

      x.      alerting neighbouring ambulance services

      xi.     checking the bed states at the designated and supporting hospitals




                                                         (i)
SUBSEQUENT ACTION BY CONTROL

4.    Subsequent action at control w ill have to be determined by a senior officer on the basis of the repor s
from the scene by the Ambulance Incident Officer and the duration of the medical and ambulance operations
there. Such action may include
      i.    arranging availability and tactical disposition of additional ambulances; despatching further
      vehicles and staff as required; the reduction or cessation of routine ambulance out-patient work, t
      retention of staff about to go o ff duty; the recall of 'o ff duty' staff in order to provide the necessary
      number of manned ambulances

      ii.   establishing communications and maintaining close liaison w ith the hospital(s), the Ambulance
      Incident Officer, Ambulance Liaison Officer(s) and other interested parties

      iii.  requesting support from other ambulance services, the British Red Cross and St John Ambulance if
      required
      iv.  alerting other listed hospitals if requested by the Consultant in charge of Major Accident
      Procedure at the designated hospital

      v.      effecting discharges and transfers as required by hospitals to f ree beds fo r casualties

      vi.     maintaining a log of all messages and a running record of the number of casualties

      vii. arranging as necessary fo r vehicle refuelling and fo r ambulance staff reinforcements and reliefs at
      control, the site of the accident and at hospitals

      viii. maintaining adequate cover fo r ordinary accident and emergency calls and disposing of emergency
      cases not related to the major accident in accordance with an agreed plan.

AMBULANCE CREWS
5.    The driver of the first ambulance at the scene, finding that there are indications that a major accident
may have occurred, should inform ambulance control immediately giving such information about ite nature
and magnitude as is available. Time should not be lost in trying to obtain detailed information before sending
the initial message. He should state whether he thinks it advisable fo r a mobile medical and nursing team to be
sent to the scene. He should remain near his vehicle in radio contact with ambulance control.

 6.     Meanwhile the ambulance attendant should make a brief reconnaissance, contact police and fire!iervioe
 officers at the scene and give a situation report to control. Pending the arrival ofthe Ambulance Incide
 Officer the attendant in consultation with senior police and fire officers should asfar as possible

       i.      set up an ambulance and medical mobile control point

       ii.     set up an ambulance parking point and establish the approach to it

       iii.    set up ambulance loading and stretcher bearer assembly points.

 7.   Crews subsequently directed to the incident should look out fo r theAmbulanceParkmgRoin^                Drivers
 should remain with their vehicles while attendants report to the ambulance o f f ic e r in chargeof the AmtxUanoe
 Loading Point. After each hospital journey ambulances should return to the Ambulance Parking Point as
 quickly as possible unless re-directed elsewhere.
 8.    It may not always be possible fo r ambulance crews to record the usual details of patients carried. In this
 event, records should be by description, eg "elderly man", "teenage g irl" etc.

 AMBULANCE INCIDENT OFc ICER

 9.    The Ambulance Incident Officer should be a senior officer of the ambulance ^ i(;eh; ^ P 0" si^!®afr° r
 co-ordinating the work of the ambulance service at the scene of a major a c c id e n t. He shouId be clearly
 identifiable as such both by day and night and should normally wear a suitably inscribed flu^ “ “ n^ c . '
 armband or helmet. On a n L l he should relieve the firs t attendant of his special.duties.« «
 communications w ith ambulance control, make a quick appreciation of the situation in consultation w ith a y
 Incident Officers of the emergency services present and report to control as soon as practicable

       i.      the precise location of the incident

       ii.     the precise location of the Ambulance Parking Point




                                                          (ii)
      iii.   an approximate assessment of number and nature of casualties

      iv.    the current requirement for ambulances and sitting case vehicles

      v.     whether additional ambulance service equipment is required

      vi. the routes agreed with the police to be used to the parking point and from            the scene to the
      designated and supporting hospitals

     vii. whether to send fo r a mobile medical and nursing team or fo r further teams (on the authority of
     the Site Medical Officer if present).

10. He is responsible in consultation w ith the Site Medical Officer, police and fire services for establishing
and marking w ith signposts

      i.    the Ambulance and Medical Mobile Control. (The control vehicle should be asclose aspracticable
      to the police and fire service incident/control posts)

      ii.  Ambulance Loading Points. (These should be sited near to Casualty Clearing Stations and,
      wherever possible, in such a way as to facilitate the free movement of ambulances)

      iii.   Ambulance Parking Points

      iv.    Casualty Clearing Stations

      v.     Stretcher Bearer Assembly Points (see para 13(i>).

11. As the above points are established the police w ill normally take charge of them. If this is not the case
the Ambulance Incident Officer should arrange fo r ambulance service staff to take charge.

12. For the orderly movement of vehicles between parking points and loading points some form of
communication is required; this can be provided by telephones portable radio sets or runners. The Emergency
Reserve Channel should not be used fo r this purpose.

13. The Ambulance Incident Officer should maintain close supervision of the number and movement of
ambulances at the site. He should keep-control informed of all developments and any further requirements for
ambulances, staff and equipment. A t the site of the accident he should

      i.    establish stretcher bearer parties, asking the police to secure the services of able bodied persons
      particularly in d iffic u lt terrain and assemble them at the Stretcher Bearer Assembly Point (see
      para 10(v>>

      ii.   consult frequently w ith the Site Medical Officer on the distribution of casualties between the
      various listed hospitals

      iii.  co-operate w ith the police in ensuring that adequate transport is provided fo r the removal of
      patients or other persons involved in the incident who do not require further medical treatment,
      especially in areas isolated from public transport facilities or where such facilities have been curtailed as
      the result of the accident.

14. Ambulances should not be delayed at the scene in order to obtain personal details of individual
casualties which w ill be obtained by the police at the receiving hospitals. A ll casualties should be placed on
carrying sheets to ensure speedy recovery o f trolleys and stretchers at hospitals.

IMMEDIATE CARE TEAMS

15. A t the site of the accident ambulance aid treatment has an essential role in the life saving arrangements.
This, with the conveyance of the injured to hospitals, is clearly one of the most important tasks of the
ambulance service. Ambulance aid should be provided

      i    not only by ambulance crews as part of their tasks of transporting patients to hospital - before and
      during the journey - but also by other ambulance staff sent to the site by control specifically fo r this
      purpose

      ii.  by voluntary workers made available under the arrangements w ith the voluntary organisations and
      others mentioned in paragraph 6 o f the circular.




                                                       (iii)
 CASUALTY LABELLING SYSTEM

 16. It is essential that all casualties are labelled in accordance w ith a uniform previously agreed casualty
labelling system w ith which everyone is conversant. It is particularly important that those patients who have
received pain relieving drugs can be readily identified on admission to hospital.

AMBULANCE LIAISON OFFICERS

17. A t the initiation of the major accident plan ambulance control w ill ensure that Ambulance Liaison
Officers equipped w ith radios (and accompanied by radio operators as necessary) are established at the
designated and supporting hospitals to be responsible fo r

      i.    supervising and directing ambulance movements at the hospitals

      ii.  ensuring the quick turn round of ambulances bringing casualties            to thehospital,returning
      ambulances to the site if so directed by control

      iii.  ensuring that as ambulance equipment (eg stretchers, blankets and pillows) is released by the
      hospitals it is returned to the scene if required

      iv.   informing ambulance control at regular intervals of changes in numbers of beds available for
      casualties

      v.    meeting, in consultation with ambulance control, hospital requests for transport for patients to be
      discharged or transferred

      vi.    maintaining the radio link w ith ambulance control and with the ambulance and medical mobile
      control point at the scene of the accident. (The radio link should also be available for liaison between
      the Site Medical Officer and the designated hospital)

      vii. ^ remaining at the hospitals after the scene of the accident has been cleared to deal w ith any
      continuing need fo r ambulance transport fo r discharges and transfers.

COMMUNICATIONS

 18.   LHAL9/72 paragraph 3(ii) of Appendix B gave guidance on the use of the Emergency Reserve Channel
for major accidents. To reduce radio traffic, thus ensuring the availability of the ERC for urgent messages best
sent by radio, the maximum use should be made of telephones at or near the scene of the accident, especially
fo r messages of some length or those which are less urgent.




                                                    (iv)
it . ' : 3
-
I


I
f
I
.f§
                                        TEL No .                                     21,04.89   11:58   P.01



     Futwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
     Fulwood
     Tel: Sheffield (0742) 306511     Telex: 547246 TRHA G      Fax: (0742) 306956
                                                                                           trent
                                                                                           REGIONAL
                                                                                           HEALTH
                                                                                           AUTHORITY




FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION HEADER SHEET




TO: ADDRESSEE                     U - * - f ,‘TfarO   1^ A f a C A v n e A P

    FAX NUMBER         <5 ^ 5     ^       4 - g ' L Q b ‘2 .

    f o r th e a t t e n t io n o f                      £ + J J L c *h » r'


FROM: NAME OF SENDER              T ,       Ce»S“T L ^ y         .




PAGE 1 OF                   SHEETS

DATE:      s ,\    ( o b , l% U f

TIME:         12 ^ 00 ^



 IF YOU DO NOT RECEIVE ALL THE PAGES OR IF SOME OR ALL OF THE PAGES ARE ILLEGIBLE
 PLEASE RING SHEFFIELD 630000 e x t . 349 (REGISTRY),


 MF.SSAGE /ADDITI0NAL_C0MMENT5
                          TEL No                            21,04.89       12 s06   P .01

                                        -3 -

               In the discussion which followed, Members expressed their
               continuing concern over this matter. It was felt that Advisory
               Appointment Committees for accident and emergency consultant posts
               should have maximum representation from the specialty.

               The Sub-Committee also recommended that two Consultants from the
               specialty should sit on appointment committees for Senior
               Registrar posts.
 AE66/4    DECONTAMINATION ROOM FOR TRENT REGION

           Mr, j.a. Costiey, Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer,
           introduced a paper on this item. He asked members to support the
           following recommendations: firstly that the specification for a
           decontamination room outlined in this paper should be used for onooina
           schemes: secondly, that the specification should be used for new
           schemes with priority given to the five hospitals in the Trent Region
           loentified in the circular HC(7 6 )52 1 and thirdly, that all A & E
           Departments in the Trent Region should aim to have this
           decontamination facility in the longer term.

          Discussion followed on the need for a decontamination room and the
          possible alternative to such a room. The alternativea suggested
          included a mobile room which could be taken direct to the BcenR of an
          lnridwhL, and tho development    * temporary structure which could be
          erected on a suitable site at a hospital as the need arose. A further
          suggestion was thB development of a balloon-type tent which could be
          inflated inside an examination room in a hosptal, and serve as a
          decontamination room. However, these suggestions were not supported;
          it was felt that the mobile facilities presently available were
          unsuitable as casualties not able to walk could not be treated. It
          was also felt that the raising of a temporary structure might be too
          time consuming in cases of immediate need, while it may also not be
          suitable to use a temporary structure in adverse weather conditions.

          Members felt that a dual purpose room, close to the entrance of the A
          & £. Department and resuscitation facilities was the most appropriate
          solution, as this would ensure that thB room would be ready for
          immediate use. However, Members questioned the suggested size of the
          room proposed in mr. costiey's paper, and felt that the room should be
          at least 16 square metres. Mr. Costiey agreed to amend hie paper
          accoroingly.                                                 r r

          Mr. Costiey informed Members that his amended paper would now go
          forward to the Capital Management Team - Standards Sub-Group.
AE66/5    REGIONAL HANDBOOK ON MAJOR ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY PROCrnilftrs

          Mr. 3.A. Costiey introduced the Regional Handbook of Major Accident
          and Emergency Procedures which he had compiled. He explained that the
          Handbook was intended to provide a common terminology for peoplB
          involved in dealing with a major accident, and to clarify for the
          other emergency services the roie of the National Health Service in
          dealing with a major accident.

          Attention was drawn to the statement that a hospital flying squad
          should be sent to the scene of a major incident if requested. It was
          pointed out that a hospital was obliged to eend a flying squad in such
          instances•
                              TEL   No■                         21,04,89      1 2 :0 4   P.ll
                                                                                             '%
                                                                                         *



                                          -   4 -

             It wao pointeo out that Districts needed to appoint a Site Mfcdi(.y.i
             Officer. It was also teit that a resuscitation ooctor arid a cioafing
             station doctor should be identified, Members also stressed thtii. the
             person who initiated the hospital's major accident procedure ehuulo be
             the senior medical officer involved in dealing with the incioent.

             Consideration was also given as to whether the treatment of poisoning
             should be included in the Handbook and it was felt that as an scute
             poisoning incident could have many casualties the section should be
             retained.
             With reference to the title of the document, Members felt it was
             important to stress that the recommendations in the Handbook WBre only
             guidelines. Therefore it was suggested that the title should be
             amended to s
              'Guiaeiines on Major Accident Procedures'.
             Mr. Costiey agreed to amend his paper before it was published and
             circulated.
    AE86/6   RECRUITMENT OF SENIOR HOUSE OFFICERS TO THE SPECIALTY
              The Chairman referred to the problems some Districts were experiencing
              in recruiting Senior House Officers to the Specialty. He felt this
              situation was due to restrictions placed on non-EEC doctors from 1st
              April, 1965 working in this country.
              In the discussion which followed, Members expressed the opinion that
              the situation was likely to worsen over the next few years.

              As a method of overcoming this problem, Professor Wallace advised
              Members that immigrant doctors would still be allowed in this country
              to train in jobs specifically sBt aside for this purpose.

              Another suggested possible solution was that Clinical Assistants and
              Associate Specialists could be appointed in place of Senior House
              Officers.
              Members were asked to consult with their local colleagues on this
              issue, and it was agreed that the problem should be discussed further
              at the next meeting.
    AE86/7    VICTIMS OF RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT ATTENDING THE ACCIDENT AND
              EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
              A Member pointed to the increased incidence of victims of rape and
              sexual assault attending Accident and Emergency departments, and asked
              whether advice or guidelines on the treatment of such patients existed
              ur were desirable.
               Particular reference was made to the need to call in the Police
               Suryeon as soon ss possible to examine the patient, lhe need for an
               early psychiatric analysis of the patient was also pointed out.

               Members felt that guidelines on the management of such patients should
               be established. Mr.          1was asked to seek advice on the matter
               from the Casualty Surgeons Association, and the Chairman Secretary
               were asked to approach the Police and the British Hectical Association.
               Their findings would be reported back at the next meeting.



m
                                      TEL N o .                                   21,04,89   11:59              P.05
                                                          ■ ■ --ia.


                       DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                       HANNIBAL HOUSE   Room 10 U
                       ELEPHANT AND CASTLE LONDON SE1 6TE
                       Telephone 01-703 6980 ext   3324
                                               18 April 19®6
you r reference   JAC/C17 /24
Our reference




 j A Costiey Esq
 Regional Health Emergency
   Planning Officer
 Trent Regional Health Author^ y
 Fulwood House
  Old Fulwood Road
  SHEFFIELD    S10 3TB




   Dear Mr Costiey

                     «n Manor Accident Procedure?.

   I am writing to thank you for your £ * £ % £                        ^ t‘pr11
   and the guidelines which were sent
                                                                                                                     ■
                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                     ,
                                                   Yours sincerely                                    .1i'll:
                                                                                                     ft!*1:1!:;;.:.::!, T"v




                                                                      [Miss)
                                                    Secretary to Dr M Prophet
TELEPHONE:
SHEFFIELD (0742) 78522
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
 C                                         SNIG HILL
                                               SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P, WRIGHT, O.B.E.
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                               25 April 1986

 J A Costiey Esq
 Regional Health Emergency
     Planning Officer
 Trent Regional Health
     Authority
 Fulwood House
 Old Fulwood Road
  Sheffield S10 1TH



  Dear Mr Costiey

  I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 16 April and the
  accompanying two copies of the Guidelines on Major
  Accident Procedures.

  Yours sincerely
Sheffield Health Authority
                                                       Sheffield S i t 8EU
O l'i      GENERAL MANAGER                                       , _
           Harper, D.P.A . F.HA., J.P.                 Telephone (0741)686911


Pltasc    <c*f
Qtn*cl:                                  fo u r ret;




 1** May 1986

 Mr J A Costiey
 Regional Emergency Planning Officer
 Trent Regional Health Authority
 Fulwood House
 m ri Fill wnnri Rnad
 SHEFFIELD
 S10 3TH

 Dear Mr Costiey

  re:      Major Accident Procedures

  Thank you for your letter dated 15 April 1986
  enclosing a copy of a document giving guidelines on
  Major Accident Procedures. I should be grateful
  if you could provide me with a further dozen copies
  of this document in order that they may be distributed
  to Unit General Managers within this District.

 Youra sincerely




 Frinc ipalTtdrainietrative Assistant
                                        MED MPO Division
                                        DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                        euston to w er                       Room 1838
       W
                                        286 EUSTON ROAD
                                        LONDON NW1 3DN

                                        T E L E P H O N E 0 1 - 3 8 8 1188 EXT   3747

Your reference                                                    3      December 1986
Our reference    N/309/CEZ/76
 Mr J A Costiey
 Regional HEPO
 Trent RHA
 Fulwood House
 Old Fulwood Road
 SHEFFIELD S10 3TH




 EMERGENCY PLANNING IN THE NHS: CIVIL DEFENCE

  As you are aware the Home Office has set up a study to examine co-ordination in
  civil defence planning and the problems posed by lack of co-terminous boundaries
  for various types of authority.

  It is reasonable to suppose that one eventual outcome of the study will be
  pressure to address some of the difficulties and to carry forward planning
  activity including liaison with a number of agencies.    There could be some leverage
  here since as you know the allocation under D A (81)9 is made via DHSS from the
  Home Office Vote.  It is also clear from correspondence reaching us that some
  local authorities, prompted perhaps by the 1983 civil defence regulations, are
  seeking closer co-operation with health authorities.

  In addition as you will realise following the recent seminar on joint civil/
  military medical planning there will be an increased workload in this area,  ihe
  number of HEPOs in each region is now between one and three; it is clear therefore
  that there is considerable variation in the amount of time that can be devoted
  to planning activity.

  We would like to be in a position, if requested, to indicate to Home Office and
  MOD how planning co-ordination might proceed in the light of the initiatives
  mentioned above.  In order to clarify the position it would be helpful to collate
  some essential facts and figures.

  I should be most grateful for your help in providing me with the information on
  the enclosed questionnaire.  I am copying this letter to your RGM to keep him
   in the picture.




                                                                          L J Martin
                                                                          Senior Medical Officer
Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S 1 0 3T H

Tel: SI              1(07 4 2 )3 0 6 5 1 1   Telex: 5 4 7 2 4 6 T R H A G   Fax: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 3 0 6 9 5 6   trent
Y o ur R e fe r e n c e :   N/309/CEZ/76
Our R e fe r e n c e :      C 17/ 1                                                                        REGIONAL
                                                                                                           HEALTH
Ple as e ask f o r          Mr J A COStley                                                                 AUTHORITY

      IN CONFIDENCE
    Dr. L.J. Martin
    Med MPO Division
    Department of Health and Social Security
    Euston Tower
    Room 1838
    286 Euston Road
    LONDON NW1 3DA

    Dear Laurence

    EMERGENCY PLANNING IN THE NHS: CIVIL DEFENCE
    Your letter dated 3 December 1986 refers.

   1 a^ t!c tl fheL^ P l e t e d questionnaire and should be
   grateful to be kept informed of events as they emerge
   Yours sincerely



  A'A COSTLEY
  Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
  cc: Mr. F.J. Kenny
/—\




      E M E R G E N C Y P L A N N I N G IN THE NHC: C I V I L D E F E N C E
                                                                                  (Oxford RHA)
      Region                                                        * TRENT .Plus .Northamptonshire

      Population (millions to 1 decimal place )                         ..^1*.74M .t .Q•.■?§ .19^.3 1       *.^1 . .
                                                                                      (Northampton and
      Number of Districts in Region                     .. .1? .t.\ . .Ketter ingX.. . . . . . . . . . . .

      Name (s ) of HEFO(s)                                                                 .CQSUey .




      Number of sessions per week worked by
       each (footnote)                                                  ....IQ




      Total sessions                                                    ....IQ

      Please denote if involved in contingency
       planning other than civil defence
       (tick as appropriate;                                            Major Accidents                 J
                                                                        Chemical Hazards

                                                                        Radiation Hazards           [ y_/|

                                                                        Infectious Disease |

                                                                        Industrial Action           |

      Estimated percentage of total HEPO
       sessions spent on these collr-ctively
       (as opposed to civil defence planning!                                       25?

      How many Districts in your Region have                              ^11 ]2 + 2 Total 14
       drawn up any civil defence plans?                                ..................

      Have any refused to do so?                                       )WNo


      FOOTNOTE:
      1 session = 1 half day - please give weekly total irrespective of whether
      consecutive or spread eg a total of    working days per week = 5 sessions
      *Additionally JAC covers Northamptonshire (Northampton & Kettering DHAs)
      DEfence Planning Purposes and Liaison on all other aspects of contingency planning



                                                IN CONFIDENCE
Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield SlO 3TH                                      trent
Tel: Sheffield (0742) 306511      Tele*'. 547246 TRHA G   Fa*: (0742) 306956

                                                                                        REGIONAL
Your Reference:                                                                         HEALTH
Our Reference:                                                                          AUTHORITY
                ^                              KM, ((17W                         — .— -----------

 Addressed to D i s t r i c t                  * o i U < TrCnt Re9l° n
 Chief Ambulance O f f ic e r s in th e T ren t Region



 5 March 1987



  Dear Colleague
  REGIONAL GUIDELINES ON MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE - CHAPLAINCY ARRANGEMENTS


  r         s        5   E        j    i   s      a       ;                      * a r::     -
  14 April 1986.




   arrangements which should be                               J S e a l ttp1 Sns°m«yf t « * c o u n ? o " 9


      Emergencies".

      Yours s i n c e r e l y




      0 A COSTLEY                _   ,   *#p«.
      Regional Health Emergency Planning O f fic e r

       cc
                    County Emergency Planning O f f i c e r s in T rent Region
                    Mr         TRHA S e c r e t a r i a t
Trent Regional Health Author!ly


guideline on major accident procedures
SECTION FOR INCLUSION COVERING THE ROLE OF THE
h o s p i t a l c h a p l a i n c y SERVICE AND LOCAL CHURCHES



"THE ROLE OF THE HOSPITAL CHAPLAIN AND LOCAL CHURCHES IN EMERGENCIES11


l,     in a Major Accident or Major Disaster situation involving a large number
       of casualties the Hospital Chaplains will be included in first stage call-out
       procedures of key officers to be notified.           The hospital will identify the
       chaplain to be called initially, the decision regarding follow-up action will
       rest w i t h this individual and take account of locally agreed policy and
       planning arrangements.           These policies and arrangements should include the
       provision of an identifying fluorescent jacket or similar for use of the
       c h a p l a i n s , to aid indentification.



 2.    The chaplains wi3 3 provide a ministry and pastoral support to patients,
       an*Lous relatives and all staff involved in the major disaster.   The^chaplains
       may minister to victims under immediate medical care, e.g. by annoiting, as
       well as providing spiritual care to those not receiving medical care, e.g.
       the shocked and dying.


 3.    The chaplains will liaise with local churches and representatives of other
       faiths as Lhe situation requires.


 4.    The chaplains will liaise and co-operate with the other members of the
       emergency twain, particularly to provide a chaplain at the site of the
       incident if required.   This request would .probably be made via Control to
       the receiving hospital.


  5.    The local churches have resources, e.g. buildings and potential volunteers
        and clergy which may be used in times of Major Disasters.  It would be
        helpful if the local churches had their own emergency plans and that these
        should be complementary to the District plan. Hospital Chaplains should
        be aware of the extent of these facilities in their area and the procedure
        for activating them.
- 2 -
- 3 -
J A COSTLEY - MEETINGS


TRENT HEALTH EMERGENCY PLANNING TEAM                        ANNUALLY           A/R
CROWN SUPPLIERS (EX PSA) , BURTON WOOD, WARRINGTON (DHSS)   6 MONTHLY
TRANSITION TO WAR MEASURES WORKING GROUP (DHSS)             MONTHLY
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH WORKING GROUP (DHSS)                   6 WEEKLY
AMBULANCE SERVICE/VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES (DHSS)            2-MONTHLY
REGIONAL HEALTH EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICERS CONFERENCE
 (DHSS)                                                     6 MONTHLY          N
CIVIL DEFENCE LOCAL AUTHORITY CO-ORDINATION MEETING
 ZONE 2.1                                                   ANNUALLY
 ZONE 3.1 & 3.2                                             ANNUALLY
RMO WITH DMDS                                               ANNUALLY
RGM WITH DGMS                                               ANNUALLY
ADVISORY SUB-COMMITTEE ON A & E MEDICINE                    6 MONTHLY
DHA NOMINATED OFFICERS (14 DHAS INCLUDING NORTHAMPTON/
 KETTERING)                                                 APPROX 3 MONTHLY
GOVERNMENT REGIONAL EMERGENCY CCMMITTE NO 2 & NO 3 REGION ANNUALLY             A/R
CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICERS MEETINGS                           6 MONTHLY
AMBULANCE SERVICE - NOMINATED OFFICERS OF THE FIVE
 SERVICES                                                   3 MONTHLY
ASSOCIATION OF CIVIL DEFENCE & EMERGENCY PLANNINGOFFICERS 2-MONTHLY
ASSOCIATION OF CIVIL DEFENCE & EMERGENCY PLANNINGOFFICERS
 STUDY                                                      ANNUALLY           N
CIVIL DEFENCE COLLEGE - VISITING SPEAKER ETC                3 MONTHLY          N
REGIONAL POLICE TRAINING SCHOOL - VISITING SPEAKER          3 MTS/YEAR
POLICE AUTHORITIES IN EACH COUNTY                           ANNUALLY
FIRE AUTHORITIES IN EACH COUNTY                             3 MONTHLY
BRITISH TELECOM                                             ANNUALLY
WATER AUTHORITIES                                           ANNUALLY
MAJOR A & E DEPARTMENTS IN TRHA                             ANNUALLY
LOCAL AUTHORITY COUNTY EMERGENCY PLANNING TEAMS
 (6 COUNTIES)                                               6 MONTHLY
VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETY, COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE
 MEETINGS AND EXERCISES (6 COUNTIES)                        3 MONTHLY
TRHA HEALTH CARE POLICIES UNIT                           3 MONTHLY
REGIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE - WORKING GROUP       MONTHLY
N W RHA (RHEPO NORTHERN LIAISON GROUP)                   2 MONTHLY
TRHA FIRE PRECAUTIONS ADVISORY GROUP
LOCAL AUTHORITY REGIONAL CONVENORS WORKING PARTY         6 MONTHLY
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL - HAZARDOUS SITES
 WORKING GROUP
CIVIL/MILITARY WORKING GROUP - EASTERN DISTRICT HQ,
 COLCHESTER                                              3 MONTHLY

CIVIL/MILITARY WORKING GROUP - NORTH EASTERN DISTRICT,
 YORK                                                    3 MONTHLY

LINCOLNSHIRE CO-ORDINATING COMMITTEE ON CONTINGENCY
 PLANNING                                                3 MONTHLY




•N' = NATIONAL
A/R = AS REQUIRED
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

DHA POINT OF CONTACT MEDICAL/ADMIN




DHA & TEL NO      MEDICAL OFFICER        ADMINISTRATOR   OTHERS/REMARKS



North             Dr H Fearn
Derbyshire        Senior SCM
(0246) 77271

South             Dr L D Davies
Derbyshire
(0332) 363971


Leicestershire    Dr J J Jones SCM
(0533) 549969


North             Dr K E Jones DMO
Lincolnshire      Dr M S Blackburn
(0522) 32321       SCM


South             Dr S Mcllroy DMO
Lincolnshire
(0529) 303241


Bassetlaw         Dr K Allen DMO
(0909) 472831




Central           Dr A A Mousley DMO
Nottinghamshire   Dr R Machell(co-ord)
(0623) 22515      (0623) 24591


Nottingham        Dr K Mason DMO
(0602) 603621     Dr J Curnow
                   Sen Registrar


Barnsley          Dr J D Hall DMO
(0226) 41421      Dr G C Oddy SCM


Doncaster         Dr R Stalker DMO
(0302) 67051


Rotherham         Dr I F Ralph DMO
(0709) 36222


Sheffield         Dr D P Adams SCM EH
(0742) 686911     School Health Clinic
                  Leopold Street 78885
AMBULANCE SERVICES



DISTRICT & TEL NO    DEPUTY CHIEF AMB OFFICER   COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER


Leicestershire       Alan Parker        CAO
(0533) 542715/       A Simpson      Dep CAO
       549586



Nottinghamshire      M Handy        RAO/CAO
 (0602) 296151       J Simons       Dep CAO
        296451/3



Lincolnshire         J McCafferty      CAO
(0522) 720004/       M Ruffle      Dep CAO
       33471         D Clutterbuck Div Off



SYMAS                Don Page           CAO
(0709) 361581        Alan Hopkins   Dep CAO



Derbyshire           P A S Kirkham     CAO
(0332) 372441/       D Cobb        Dep CAO
       365831



Northants            M Tarry            CAO
 (0604) 20271
        isflif




                 %
                 8$M




llllf




                       SHU
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
                                      V




                    ROTHERHAM_ _ _
                    HEALTH AU1W HTY
                                          OONCASTiR
                                          HEALTH AUTHORITY




                                                     8ASSETLAW           I
                                                     HEALTH AUTHORITY
                                                             •E atifM D n l


  NORTHDEW gHBE
  HEALTH AUTHORITY                                CBfTAAL NOTTMGHAMSHRE
                                                  HEAITH AUTHORITY
       •B ak am S




                                                                                  SOUTH UNCOU6HK
                                                                                  HEALTH AUTHORITY

   SOUTHERN OERBYSHRE
   HEALTH AUTHORITY
                                             1 NOTTMHAM
                                              HEALTH A U W H TY


                                      Lngtaogr
                                                    IH E T E R S H H
                                                    HEALTH AU1W HTY

                                                                  llE C E SIH l



                                                           MaMHatan#*!




                       emergenc y planning

  MANUAL FOR CN CALL OFFICERS
PREFACE



It is a fact of life that today, few can be unaware of the effects of the
natural and man made emergencies reported in our newspapers or on TV. Such
major catastrophes can happen anywhere in the world.

On the one side are extremes of      weather and natural disasters, like
earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. On the other, tragedies such as aircraft
crashes or motor accidents, industrial accidents, chemical pollution and
tragedies at sea.

In this country, the 999 emergency services cope with the immediate effects
of most disasters but, clearly, some require more resources than are normally
on hand.  Or else they have wider consequences which need co-ordination on a
far larger scale.

To provide this backup, the emergency services and many other groups of
professional and voluntary organisations work together to prepare plans which
can be brought into effect if and when needed.    Some people are involved m
this work full time, for example,      the Local Authority County Emergency-
Planning Officer and his staff.     For others, it is simply an extension of
their normal, everyday job or a spare time activity.


  Distribution

Regional General Manager
Assistant RGM (Admin)
Assistant RGM (Capital)
Regional Medical Officer
Specialists in Community Medicine
Secretariat
Regional Public Relations Officer
Regional Nursing Officer
Regional Scientific Officer
Others as required
CONTENTS                                                           PAGE NO




PART 1     POLICY

1.0        Introduction                                                1
2.0        The County Peacetime Major Disaster Plan                    2
3.0        Public Authorities concerned with Environmental
            Health                                                     3
4.0        District Health Authority - Outline
            Responsibilities in a Major Emergency                      5
5.0        Health Authority co-ordination of incidents involving
            radiation
6.0        Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards
            (CIMAH) Regulations 1984                                  12
7.0        Nuclear Incidents                                          16



PART 2     ROLES OF ORGANISATIONS

1.0        The Role of the District Medical Officer
            or Appropriate Specialist in Community Medicine           17
2.0        The Police Role in Major Incidents                         19
3.0        The Role of the Fire Service                               22
4.0        The Role of the Ambulance Service                          24
5.0        The Role of the Listed/Designated Hospital                 26
6.0        The Role of the Medical Physics Department                 31
7.0        The Role of Volunteers                                     33
8.0        The Role of the Local Authority                            34
9.0        Emergency Roles of Government Departments                  36
10.0       Role of Military Aid in the Civil Community                37

PART 3     GENERAL

1.0        Rabies                                                     39
2.0        Home Dialysis Patients                                     44
3.0        Infectious Diseases                                        46
4.0        Helicopter - Policy and Procedures                         50

PART 4     EMERGENCY CONTACT LIST

           Regional and District Health Authorities                   51
           Ambulance Service                                          53
           Regional Specialty
             (i) Neurosurgery                                         53
            (ii) Plastic Surgery/Burns                                53
           (iii) Thoracic Surgery                                     53
            (iv)   Spinal Injuries Unit                               53
           District Supplies Officers                                 54
           County Police Service                                      55
           County Fire Service                                        57
           Hospitals with Major A & E Departments                     58
           County Emergency Planning Officers                         60
           Voluntary Aid Societies                                    61
           Department of Health and Social Security                   62
           Water Authority                                            63
           Compression Chambers for the Treatment of
            Decompression Sickness                                    64
           Regional Blood Transfusion Service                         65
           Helicopter                                                 65
           Medical Officers Environmental Health/Proper Officer       66
List of References                                                    73


                                     (ii)
                      PARI1 1



                      P O L IC Y




Introduction
The County Peacetime Major Disaster Plan
Public Authorities concerned with Environmental
 Health
District Health Authority - Outline
 Responsibilities in a Major Emergency
Health Authority co-ordination of incidents involving
 radiation
 Appendix 1     Radiation Protection Advisers
 Appendix 2     Medical Physics Departments in Trent
                 Region and Capability of Units
Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards
  (CIMAH) Regulations 1984
Nuclear Incidents
 Appendix 1     Advice for GPs in the event of a Civil
                 Nuclear Emergency
                               EMERGENCY MANUAL

                        MANUAL FOR CW CALL OFFICERS



1.0   UNTTRODUCTION

      1.1     This manual is intended to provide NHS 'on call1 staff with
            general information to assist in an immediate response to an
            emergency situation or to enquiries arising out of normal office
            hours.

      1.2    The guidance provided is a summary of information contained in
            Health Service Circulars and Memoranda and _ various other
            documents.   Whilst the guidance should assist in an immediate
            response, the authoritative documents should be consulted at the
            first opportunity to confirm that all necessary action has been
            taken.

      1.3   In the event of an actual or potential emergency the appropriate
            'on call' Officer will be responsible for initiating any action
            to co-ordinate the NHS response within the Health Authority area
            of responsibility.     In accordance with circumstance this may
            involve:

            1.3.1     The alerting of the RHA/DHA chairman, DQYI and/or
                      principal Officers to the situation.

            1.3.2     Obtaining specialist advice or assistance.

            1.3.3       If necessary taking action to activate an 'Emergency
                      Control Centre' at Health Authority HQ to permit more
                      detailed assessment and monitoring of events over a
                      prolonged period.   This may initially be centred on one
                      officer only and subsequently expanded as required.

      1.4   Action Cards. The use of 'Action Cards' for key personnel is to
            be encouraged since it simplifies procedural arrangements in the
            event of any emergency, providing a clear indication of role and
            responsibilities whilst acting as an aide memoire to minimise
            risk of oversight.     The production of action cards must be a
            local responsibility, based on detailed knowledge of management
            structures and available resources.

      DEFINITION OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT

      1.5     There is no standard definition of a "Major Accident" which
            would satisfy the Health Service, the Emergency Services and the
            Local Authorities; each tends to look at such incidents frcm the
            point of view of its own responsibilities.

      1.6   For Health Service purposes a Major Incident is one which because
            of the number and severity of live casualties it produces it
            requires special arrangements for its management.




                                       1
THE COUNTY PEACETIME MAJOR DISASTER PLAN1

2.1. In 1968 Civil Defence Units, which had been responsible for
     disaster planning were disbanded.   Thereafter the County Council
     and the other Borough, Urban and Rural District Councils relied
     on their dormant emergency contingency plans.

2.2   However, following the demise of these authorities on
      re-organisation of local government in 1974 and the Flixborough
      catastrophe on 1 June 1974 this emphasised the need for the new
      authorities to be prepared to deal with natural and man-made
      disasters.    In 1975 the government drew the attention of local
      authorities to their responsibilities in the event of a disaster
      by issuing Home Office Circular ES 7/1975 (subsequently
      consolidated within Section 22 of the Emergency Planning
      Guidance11 to local authorities issued in 1985).   This explains
      the provisions contained in the Local Government Act 1972 of
      which Section 138 empowers County and District Councils to take
      action in emergency situations.

2.3   The County Council has two main roles in an emergency, first to
      help people in distress while maintaining their own essential
      services;   and secondly a general duty to co-ordinate what is
      being done by the various organisations which are giving help.
      It is important that the overall response should be prompt and
      effective.     Each of the authorities, bodies or organisations
      deploying resources to a disaster site have their own emergency
      plan.

2.4   A MAJOR disaster in peacetime can manifest itself in many forms.
      In today's society a minor emergency is a routine, almost daily,
      occurrence in some part of the country.    The response to these
      are normally confined to the emergency services - Police, Fire
      and Ambulance and there is seldom a need for the local authority
      to invoke its Major Disaster Plan.

2.5   The Major Disaster plan is not concerned with minor emergencies
      or incident but with a MAJOR scale disaster to which additional
       resources need to be deployed on a larger scale.   Consequently
       that plan has been drawn up in consultation with the main
       contributory organisations.

2.6   The NHS may be required to co-operate with the Local Authority in
       the implementation of sections of their plans eg the provision of
       advice from the Medical Officer Environmental Health (MoEH)
       sometimes referred to as the "Proper Officer".         A list of
       designateed "Proper Officers" and their "Alternate Proper
       Officers" with contact details as given in Part 4 "Emergency
       Contact List".

2.7   A list of useful Local Authority telephone numbers        is also
      provided at Part 4 "Emergency Contact List".
       priHT.Tr flOTHORITTFy: fTMHKKNEP WTTH E N \fl3 0 M M E ftL HEftLTH



introduction

3 1     In the United Kingdom, reponsibility for measures which contribute
      towards maintaining health and preventing disease rests on a number of
      departments and authorities which are briefly described below:

               Local Authorities (LA.)

      3.1.1     Local Authorities have the primary responsibility for
               environmental health which includes food, hygiene and meat
               inspection.        Local Authorities also have certain
               responsibilities for working conditions in shops, offices aid
               factories etc.      All District Councils employ qualified
               environmental health officers (EHD) who are responsible for
               ensuring that standards of hygiene are maintained, _that pollution
               and pest-infestation problems are dealt with, housing and working
               conditions are satisfactory and food is suitable for human
               consumption. This also includes refuse collection and drainage.
               The Local Authority is also the Statutory Authority for the
               Notification of Infectious Diseases and Food Poisoning.

               Department of the Environment (DOE)

      3.1.2 The Department of the Environment controls water supplies and
            sewage treatment through the Regional Water Authorities and is
            al s o involved in housing standards and some aspects of pollution.


               Department of the Employment

      3.1.3     The Department of Employment is             centrally       responsible   for
               conditions in industry and commerce.

               Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF)

      3.1.4     The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries               and     Food   has   the
               responsibility for the health of animals.

               National Health Service (NHS)

      3.1.5 The NHS operating through Regional Health Authorities (EHAs) and
            District Health Authorities (DHAs) in England, and Health Boards
            in other parts of the UK has statutory responsibility for the
            promotion of health and prevention of disease, for example
            through health education programmes, in consultation with local
            authorities, health screening and immunisation.        Under the
            collaboration arrangements between local authorities and district
            health authorities the latter appoint a Medical Officer for
            Environmental Health (MQEH).

               (Sometimes also referred to as the 'Proper Officer".)   The MOEH
               or Proper Officer is a community physician employed by the DHA
               but with specific statutory duties which include advice to local
     authorities on medical aspects of environmental health and the
     control of infectious disease.        Specialist advice is also
     available frcrn the medical divisions of the DHSS in relation to
     conraunicable diseases and the microbiology of food and the
     environment,   (see Part 4 - Emergency Contact List.)

     Public Health Laboratory Services (PHLS)

3.1.6 Public Health Laboratory Services (PHLS) directs its efforts to
      the control of notifiable diseases and food poisoning; special
      reference laboratories and the Communicable Disease Surveillance
      Centre (CDSC) are available to deal with special problems. The
      CDSC also acts as an epidemiological reference centre.

     (Some useful telephone numbers are given at Part 4 - Emergency
     Contact List)




                             4
4.0    DTffTRTrr HEALTH AUTHORITY (DHA)
                RRRPnMSIBIIJTrES IN A MAJOR EMERGENCY
       n rm .T N R




4.1    To receive from the Police, local authorithy or other statutory bodies
       any assessment of risks, requiring NHS standby alerting procedures or
       other preparatory measures, and to co-ordinate necessary action with
       due regard to the possible sensitivity of information.

4.2    To receive notification of the implementation of emergency procedures
       by any hospital (s) within the DHA area of responsibility.

4.3    To alert key officers of the DHA to the emergency, initiate an
       immediate assessment of general and specific threats related to the
       health service and thereafter disseminate appropriate information and
       instructions.

4.4    To inform the Regional General Manager, or a nominated deputy, of any
       emergency situation within the DHA area, with specific reference to the
       hospitals involved in receiving any casualties.

4.5    To provide support to hospitals in their response to a major emergency
       by co-ordinating any relocation of patients and the acquisition and/or
       redeployment of physical resources and staff, including volunteers.

4.6    To liaise and co-ordinate with adjacent DHA's on mutual support
       requirements, actual or potential, in response to an emergency
       situation.

4.7    To provide advice and assistance as may be required to local authority
       Environmental Health Officers.

4.8    To provide advice as required to:

       a.        Family Practitioner Committee (FPC)
       b.        The Police
       c.        The Fire Service
       d.        Local Authority (County and District Council and Planning Boards)
                 Emergency Planning, Social Services and Environmental Health
                 Departments.
       e.        Appropriate water authorities and companies
       f.        The Public Analyst
       g.        The Divisional Veterinary Officer
       h.        The Health and Safety Executive Inspectorate

4.9    To receive from the local authories or police any information on
       requirements to evacuate an area in response to an actual or potential
       emergency situation and assess all ramifications relevant to health
       services.

4.10   To assess the effect of any emergency, or contingency measures invoked
       as a result of potential hazards, on special care groups, e.g.
       premature babies, dialysis patients etc.




                                          5
4.11   To co-ordinate contingency measures to meet the needs of special health
       care groups.

4.12   To review any requirement to activate additional immediate care
       facilities, with the possible use of designated "Emergency Medical
       Centres".

4.13   To assess the effect of the emergency on premises used in General
       Medical Practice, General Dental Practice and Community Health
       Services.

4.14    It) advise the Family Practitioner Committee and Community Health
       Services, independent hospitals and nursing homes of any local threats
       and all necessary action required in response to the emergency.

4.15    To prepare any press or media releases, on the provision of health
       services or advice to the public, relevant to the emergency situation.
       In many cases this may require liaison/agreement with the county and
       district councils, fire, police or other services as appropriate.

4.16   To review, on a regular basis:      emergency medical supplies;   the^
       availability of sterile fluids; vaccination programmes, including the
       availability of vaccine;       and hygiene measures aligned to the
       prevention of communicable disease.

4.17   To consult and liaise with the DHSS, Public Health Laboratory Services,
       special reference laboratories, port health (where applicable), the
       Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre and consultant colleagues
       regarding any catimunicable or serious infectious diseases.

4.18    To advise the Regional General Manager, as an immediate post-emergency
       action orperiodically in the event of a prolonged emergency, of all
       action taken, with consolidated detail of the treatment of casualties,
       admissions and the discharge or relocation of in-patients.

4.19    To assess the inpact of any emergency and any need to restrict hospital
       admissions to emergency cases, accelerate the discharge of in-patients,
       or curtail or cancel out-patients clinics.

4.20   To submit a post-incident report, including recommendations f o z ^
       follow-up action, to the Regional General Manager for onward
       transmission to the DHSS.




                                      6
5.0      TTC A T.Tff              m-QRDlNftfflCN
                       A T T T T O R -n V          OF   ARRANGEMENTS   FOR   DEALIM?   WTffl
      INCIDENTS          INVOLVING RADIAnON


Introduction

5.1    Expert opinion suggests that an incident similar to Chernobyl is a
      remote possibility in the United Kingdom, however, an Incident of lesser
      magnitude cannot be completely excluded.    Nor can the possibility of a
      further incident abroad be ruled out, which could again affect the
      United Kingdom.

5.2   Although the Health Authority, as distinct from government and other
      relevant agencies, does not have direct responsibility for all actions
      stemming from an incident, one of the lessons of the Chernobyl disaster
      is that the public, Wien there is a potential or perceived health hazard
      involved, will turn at time of crisis to the Health Service for help,
      advice and reassurance.      Moreover, the Health Service through its
      Medical Physics Departments is in a position to make measurements of
      personal and environmental contamination and/or deposition and to give
      professional advice on the interpretation of such measurements and on
      radiological protection generally.   It should be noted that there is a
      national responsibility for environmental monitoring of radiation which
      rests with the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) however it
      is understood that in future a single source, probably the Department of
      the Environment (DoE) will be responsible for co-ordination and issue of
      all information and advice.

5.3   The "Role of Medical Physics Departments" in dealing with National
      Arrangements for incidents involving radioactivity (NAIR scheme) is
      dealt with separately at Part 2 Section 6.

Action

5.4   The act.1on that may be required from Health Authorities in the event of
      a future incident is identified as follows:

      5.4.1 The monitoring of environmental levels of radiation within the
            Region and the presentation and interpretation of technical
            aspects of the data to provide health service managers, medical
            officers and other health professionals including local government
            officials and the general public with easily understandable
            information.

      5.4.2 Advising health professionals, local government officials and the
            general public on the measures to be taken to avoid exposure ^to
            external irradiation from the environment or internal irradiation
            due to inhalation or to ingestion of contaminated foodstuffs.

      5.4.3 Measuring levels of radioactivity within the body of individuals
            who have been or believe they have been exposed to contamination
            and assessing the likely dose from external and internal
            radiation.

      5.4.4 The provision of independent perspectives to health professionals,
            (including Family Practitioners Committees), local government
            officials and the general public on health risks associated with
            the actual or potential radiation exposure.
      5.4.5 Where appropriate, monitoring of long-term trends in excess
           morbidity and mortality that might be attributable to the effects
            of radiation, in particular malignant disease.

      5.4.6 The clinical management of persons suffering from life threatening
            irradiation, probably at those Units specialising in bone marrow
            transplantation in Sheffield, Nottingham and Leicester.

5.4   Co-ordination at Region and District

      5.5.1 The Regional General Manager has nominated the Regional Medical
            Officer (RMO) as the Regional Co-ordinating Officer.      The HMD
            will involve other members of his staff, as appropriate.

      5.5.2 District General Managers have agreed to nominate an officer,
            (usually the District Medical Officer, or the appropriate
            Specialist in Ccsrmunity Medicine) who would undertake the
            following responsibilities:

          5.5.2.1    Immediate Circulation of an Advisory Letter setting out
                    arrangements available for monitoring and sources of advice
                    to: Casualty Departments, Family Practitioners Committees, A
                    General Practitioners, Local Authority County Emergency
                    Planning Officers and Chief Environmental Health Officers.

          5.5.2.2    Maintaining an up-to-date list and regular liaison with
                    Medical Physics Units. The Radiation Protection Adviser
                    normal ly associated with the DHA is shown at Appendix 1
                    whilst Appendix 2 identifies the Medical Physics
                    Departments and the capability of their units.

          5.5.2.3   In the event of an emergency, reinforcing the arrangements
                    and co-ordinating a response to the incident after
                    reference to the Regional General Manager or the Regional
                    Medical Officer.

          5.5.2.4   Log all requests for assistance or advice and deal with
                    requests directly, by reference to the Regional Medical
                    Officer, or as otherwise appropriate.

          5.5.2.5   Log and circulate, as appropriate, information and advice A
                    from the RPA or from elsewhere.

          5.5.2.6     If necessary, advise on the use and distribution of
                    potassium iodate tablets following consultation, if
                    appropriate, with the Regional Medical Officer.

          5.5.2.7    In consultation with the District General Manager, deal
                    with media enquiries referring to the Regional General
                    Manager and the Regional Medical Officer when necessary.

          5.5.2.8    Issuing advice for distribution to the general public on
                    measures to be taken.

          5.5.2.9     Organising and participating in training exercises if
                    required.




                                       8
6 Role of the Radiation Protection Advisers (RPA)

  5.6.1    Appendix 1 identifies the RPAs in the Region. It is proposed
          that the RPAs should fulfill the following functions:

     5.6.1.1 Provide advice to General Managers and medical or other
             appropriate officers at both *Regional and District level, on
             the response required by the health service in the Region
             concerning the public health aspects of any incident. If it
             were deemed appropriate, a similar service could be made
             available to Family Practitioners Ccaonmittees, Local Authority
             Chief Executives, County Emergency Planning Officers and
             Chief Environmental Health Officers of the Local Authority.

      5.6.1.2 Liaison with the nominated District Officers to provide
              professional interpretation of information received from
              bodies such as the National Radiological Protection Board,
              Department of the Environment, Ministry of Agriculture
              Fisheries and Food or other Government Departments.

      5.6.1.3 Arrange supporting services within the appropriate Medical
              Physics Department for monitoring of members of the public,
              the environment and relevant samples.

      5.6.1.4 Where appropriate, providing data with commentary and
              interpretation in support of the issuing of advice to the
              general public and the media.

      5.6.1.5 Participating   in   any   national    training   exercises.

      5.6.1.6 Collaborating as necessary with counterparts in other Health
              Regions or Districts.


   Professor M M Black, Department of Medical Physics and Clinical
 Engineering, Sheffield University, has agreed to act as the Regional
                                                          APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                          PART 1 SECTION 5

Serial   DHA              RADIATION PROTECTION ADVISERS




01       N Derbyshire



02       S Derbyshire



03       Leicestershire




04       N Lincolnshire



05       S Lincolnshire



06       Bassetlaw



07       Central Notts



08       Nottingham



09       Barnsley



10       Doncaster



11       Rotherham



12       Sheffield




                                              10
                                                        APPENDIX 2 TO
                                                        PART 1 SECTION 5
 ^iFTiTf*AL PHYSICS DEPARTMENTS IN TRENT HBGJCN AND CAPABILITY OF UNITS.

                                                                            CAPABILITY
LOCATION            HEAD OF DEPT         ADDRESS                            OF UNIT


Barnsley                                 Barnsley DGH                       2   3
                                         Gawber Road
                                         Barnsley S75 2EP

Chesterfield                             Chesterfield & N Derbyshire        2   3
                                           Royal Hospital
                                         Calow, Chesterfield S44 5BL

Derby                                    Derbyshire Royal Infirmary         2   3
                                         London Road
                                         Derby DEI 2QY

Doncaster                                Doncaster Royal Infirmary          2   3
                                         Doncaster DN2 5LT

Leicester                                Leicester Royal Infirmary          2   3
                                         Leicester LEI 5VJW

Lincoln                                  St George’s Hospital               2   3
                                         Long Leys Road
                                         Lincoln

Boston                                   Pilgrim Hospital                   2   3
                                         Sibsey Road
                                         Boston, Lines

Nottingham                               Nottingham General Hospital        2   3
                                         Park Row
                                         Nottingham NG1 6HA

                                         Queen’s Medical Centre             2   3
                                         University Hospital
                                         Nottingham NG7 2UH

                                         City Hospital                      2   3
                                         Hucknall Road
                                         Nottingham NG5 2UH

Rotherham                                Rotherham DGH                      2   3
                                         Moorgate Road
                                         Rotherham S60 2QU

Sheffield                                 Royal Hallamshire Hospital        12 3
                                          Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2JF
CAPABILITY       --------------------

1.      Whole-body radioactivity counting, thryroid counting, external contamina
        monitoring, measurements of biological and environmental samples.

2.      Thyroid counting, external contamination monitoring, measurements of
        biological and environmental samples.

3.      Limited whole-body counting gamma camera.
6.0   CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL MAJOR ACCIDENTS HAZARDS (CIMAH)
      REGULATIONS 19848

      INTRODUCTION

      6.1   Governments In the European Economic Comnaunity (EEC) have been
            concerned for some years that industrial activities involving
            certain dangerous substances have the potential to give rise to
             serious injury or damage beyond the immediate vicinity of the
            workplace.    The activities have canmonly cane to be known in
            this country as "major hazards".

      6.2   In Great Britain, after the accident at Flixborough in 1974, the
            Health and Safety Commission (HSC) appointed an Advisory
            Committee on Major Hazards (ACMH) to consider the problems and
            make recommendations.       The ACMH published three Reports
             (HMSO 1976, 1979 and 1984) and spearheaded the development of a
            system of controls for major hazards in the United Kingdom.

      6.3   An underlying principle of the ACMH thinking has been that, as
            in the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 (HSW Act), the ^
            primary responsibility for controlling and minimising the risks
            should lie with those who create the risks.      In areas of high
            hazard, however, it has not been considered sufficient for
            employers merely to demonstrate to themselves that all is well.
            It is necessary that they should be able to demonstrate to the
            community's agents, primarily the Health and Safety Executive
             (HSE), that their plants are properly designed, well constructed
            and safely operated.    Further, because the risks extend beyond
            the immediate vicinity of the workplace, it is proper that there
            should be control on the location of major hazards and any
            developments in their vicinity.    Thus three basic elements of a
            control scheme have been put forward as follows:

            6.3.1 Identification - NIHHS Regulations. It has been seen as
                  essential that potentially hazardous activities are
                  identified.        This is now possible through the
                  Notification of      Installations Handling Hazardous
                  Substances (NIHHS) Regulations 19829 which cane into
                  operation on 1 January 1983.      The notifications under ^
                  these Regulations provide the HSE with details of
                  installations that assist in defining priorities for
                  inspection programmes.

            6.3.2 Location. Once the location of an installation is known,
                  its relationship to its surroundings can be examined.
                  The Department of the Environment, the Welsh Office and
                  the Scottish Development Department are currently pursuing
                  proposals to strengthen existing planning controls for
                  installations notified under the NIHHS Regulations.

            6.3.3 Assessment.   One of the main recanmendations of the ACMH
                  was that notification of an installation should be
                  accompanied by a survey of the potential hazards.     This
                  effectively means;that anyone in control of a major hazard
                  site needs to demonstrate to the HSE that the hazards had
                  been recognised and that measures had been taken to
                  minimise these hazards wherever possible and to control




                                    12
           and itdnimise the consequences of any major accidents that
           may occur.

SCOPE OF REGULATION’
                   S

6.4   The main aims of the Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazard
      Regulations (CIMAH) are the prevention of major accidents
      arising from industrial activities, the limitation of the
      effects of such accidents both on man and on the environment and
      the harmonisation of control measures to prevent and limit major
      accidents in the EEC.    A major accident is broadly defined as
      a major emission, fire or explosion leading to serious effects,
      on man or the environment inside or outside the confines of the
      workplace.

6.5   The industrial activities to which the CIMAH Regulations apply
      are defined to two ways and involve specified dangerous
      substances.     The first definition is in terms of industrial
      processes (including on-site transport and associated storage,
      Whereas the second definition covers other storage termed
       'isolated storage'.  In this way, the CIMAH Regulations embrace
      most of the chemical and petro-chemical industries using
      substances which have dangerous, flammable, explosive or toxic
      properties.

REQUIREMENTS OF THE CIMAH REGULATIONS

6.6   The requirements of the CIMAH Regulations can be considered ^as
      being at two levels.   There are sane general requirements which
      are of wide application and in addition, there are sane
      specific, more stringent requirements which are applied only to
      potentially more hazardous installations.

6.7   The general requirements place a number of duties on people in
      control    of   industrial     activities    (manufacturers).
      Manufacturers are made responsible for the safety of their
      activities and for taking all reasonable precautions to prevent
      major accidents and to limit their effects on man and the
      environment.   In addition, all major accidents must be reported
      to HSE.

6.8   The specific requirements of the Regulation are much more
       stringent than the general requirements, but they are of more
      limited application.   Essentially these regulations require the
      preparation of a safety profile, the preparation of on-site and
      off-site emergency plans and informing members of the public
      likely to be affected by a majoraccident.     The Regulations for
      which HSE is the enforcing authority,          place duties on
      manufacturers and local authorities,            and provide for
      consultation which will involve fire brigades, the police,
      ambulance services, hospitals, water authorities and other
       appropriate bodies.

6.9   HSE Area Offices will inform local authorities which
      installations are subject to the provisions of the specific
       regulations.   HSE is also prepared to give planning advice to
       local authorities for such installations and for developments
      near to them in the same way as is done already for
       installations   covered by   the   requirements   of    the NIHHS
       Regulations.

LOCAL AUTHORITY RESPONSIBILITIES

6.10   Local Authorities at county or equivalent level are involved in
       the preparation of on-site and off-site emergency plans for any
       installation falling within the scope of the CIMAH Regulations.
       Local authorities at district or equivalent level will be
       involved in disseminating information to members of the public
       likely to be affected by a major accident.

6.11   The Regulations provide for the off-site plan to be drawn up in
       consultation with manufacturers, HSE, and other bodies such as
       the Bnergency Services, Health Service and Water Authorities.

6.12   The HSE will inform local authorities which installations cone
       within the scope of the Regulations and will provide guidance on
       the hazards and risks involved.    It should be noted that under
       the regulations, local authorities are empowered (if they wish)
       to recover from manufacturers reasonable costs for preparing and
       keeping up-to-date the off-site emergency plan.                  ^

6.13   Off-site emergency plans besides being dove tailed with the
       on-site plans, must be maintained in a state of readiness and
       provision will need to be made for training and exercises.   In
       addition to helping manufacturers deal with the immediate
       effects within the boundary fence, the emergency services will
       need to be prepared to cope with possible consequential effects
       in the surrounding area.    These off-site effects usually take
       longer to develop and allow sane time to put precautions into
       operation.   However, they may continue for a period of several
       hours, or even days, and require considerable mobilisation of
       resources to cope with possible evacuation, restriction of
       access, banning of the movement of foodstuffs or the use of
       water supplies and subsequent decontamination.

INFORMING THE PUBLIC

6.14   The Regulations require that persons in the vicinity of an
       industrial activity who may be at risk in the event of a major ^
       accident should be given specified information about the
       activity and associated hazards.

6.15   Manufacturers will be responsible for providing this information
       but the primary route for disseminating the information to the
       public will be via the district council (or equivalent).    This
       may be achieved by letter to each household located within the
       area which could be affected by an on-site incident, and the
       opportunity may be given for residents to attend briefings
       jointly run by the Manufacturer and the District Council.

CONSULTATIONS

6.16   In producing plans County      Councils   normally     consult   the
       following authorities:




                               14
Regional Health Authority
District Health Authority
The Manufacturer
Other District (Borough or City) Councils
Fire Service
Police
Electricity Board
Water Authorities
Health and Safety Executive
Ministry of Defence (Air)
Gas
Other County Councils (if appropriate)
Other District Councils (if appropriate)




                        15
7.0   NUCLEAR INCIDENTS

7.1   General.   Nuclear incidents may fall into two categories:

      7.1.1   An accidental release of radioactivity from a civil nuclear
              installation.3

      7.1.2   An accident involving radioactive substances in transit.5

7.2    Accident at a Civil Nuclear Installation. There are no civil nuclear
      installations in the Trent Region.   Emergency plans exist in respect
      of all nuclear power stations.    The site operator will take the lead
      in on-site emergency arrangements and, if considered necessary,
      establish an 'Operational Support Centre' (OSC) at the local Police
      Station.   The NHS representation at the OSC will be provided by the
      local Health Authority.   All co-ordination with adjacent DHAs will be
      the responsibility of the NHS representative at the OSC.        Extant
      contingency plans cover the issue of Potassium Iodate tables by the
      Police in the immediate area of the Nuclear Power Station, drawing on
      the stockpile held locally.

7.3    Accident Involving Radioactive Substances in Transit.      Guidance is ^
      provided in HC(76)52 'National Arrangements for Incidents Involving
      Radioactivity' (NAIR).5     In essence the Police, who are liable to
      receive intial notification of an incident, have co-ordinating
      responsibility for any emergency involving radioactive substances in
      transit.    They may approach specialist hospitals4 for first stage
      assistance in terms of advice and monitoring.             Second stage
      assistance is provided by more specialist establishments.

7.4    Treatment of Casualties.    The Ambulance Service will normally take
      casualties to the nearest specialist hospital.    If the need for life
      saving treatment appears to override the need for decontamination,
      ambulance crews may take a casualty to the nearest A & E Department.4
      A booklet "Emergencies at Nuclear Sites - A Handbook for Medical
      Personnel"12 has been circulated to DGMs, A & E Consultants, Chief
      Ambulance Officers and Radiation Protection Advisers in the Region.
      The names and addresses of the Central Electricity Generating Boards
      Medical Officers are listed in this booklet.

7.5    Advice to General Practitioners.    In the event of any emergency *
      involving radioactivity, the general public may seek advice from
      General Practitioners and request monitoring checks.    It is most
      important that all available information should be disseminated to
      General Practitioners at the earliest opportunity.   A copy of the
      guidance for GPs prepared by the national Radiological Protection
      Board is at Appendix 1.

7.6     Contaminated Waste.    Contaminated material and radioactive waste
      collected during decontamination of casualties should not be disposed
      of prior to seeking permission of the Senior Radiochemical Inspector
      Department of the Environment.4   Contact telephone numbers are:

      During normal working hours:     01 273 4014

      Out of office hours:             01 212 7071




                                     16
                                                                                                                  m   t        v •*.   *
                                                                                                                  PART 1 SECTION 7




                 National Radiological Protection Board



        ADVICE FOR
 GENERAL PRACTITIONERS
     INTHEEVENTOFA
CIVIL NUCLEAR EMERGENCY
_______                                                                       i
                                                                              If a
                                                                                 . serious
                                                                                         k reip»«»
                                                                                            releasedid
                                                                                                     didoccur
                                                                                                         occurititwould
                                                                                                                   wouldprobably
                                                                                                                           probablycause
                                                                                                                                     causeno
                                                                                                                                           no
                INTRODUCTION                                             immediate harm to persons in the vicinity but after a latent period
                                                                         of many years, itmight lead to a few extra cases of cancer m the
                                                                         population exposed to the plume. These extra cases would not be
     The Government has made plans for the action to be taken if
                                                                         discernible against the normal incidence of cancer m thisgroup.
an accident at a nuclear power plantor other civilnudeir mstatatnn
                                                                              In serious accidents itispossible thatsome workers at the plant
results m a release of radioactive materials to the environment The      will receive radiation doses that are high enough to require imme­
likelihood of such an accident isextremely remote but itcannot be
                                                                         diate treatment. The medical care of these individuals will not be
completely discounted.                                                   the responsibility of General Practitioners. Itisalmost inconceivable
    This leaflet gives an account of what might happen should an
                                                                         that people off the site could receive doses high enough to produce
accident occur, together with an outline of the plans made to deal
                                                                         earlv symptoms Following very iargedoses of radiation, vomiting is
with itInaddition itprovides informationto helpgeneral practitioners
                                                                         an almost universal sign and will occur within two hours of an
advise the patients who may consult them inthese circumstances.
                                                                         exposure that might prove fatal. However, from the incident at
                                                                         Three Mile Island m the USA a few years ago. itisclear that many
                                                                         people who were not exposed to any significant oose of radiation
                                                                         developed psychosomatic manifestations, including vomiting.
          WHAT COULD HAPPEN                                              Vomiting inmembers ofthe public several hours afteran accident is
                                                                         not therefore a sign of dangerous radiation exposure.
     The potential hazard of a nuclear reactor lies m the large
quantities of radioactive fission products which accumulate in the
reactor core during its operation. These products are normally                     NUCLEAR EMERGENCY
retained within the reactor fuel but in an accident fission products
may be released into the atmosphere and travel downwind from
the site. This material would be invisible but itwould behave likea
                                                                             All operators of nuclear installationsare required to draw up an
plume of smoke, gradually dispersing and depositing some of its
                                                                         emergency plan and have thisapproved by H M Nuclear Installations
content on the ground. The potential hazard might not extend
                                                                         Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive. Copies are held by
beyond the site boundary but ifthe release was on a larger scale it
                                                                         the emergency services and local authorities and are available for
could extend for many miles. Even in the mo*t severe accident,
                                                                         publicscrutiny inlibrariesand otherappropriate placesnear each site.
 a nuclear reactor cannot explode like an atom ic bomb.
                                                                              Ifthe scale of an accidental release were to exceed that for
     People in the vicinity of the plume may be at risk from four
                                                                         which emergency plansare made, the hazard from the plume could
 sources:directradiationfrom the plume and from materialdeposited
                                                                         extend over a greater range and require more extensive action to
 on the ground, inhalation of radioactive particles and ingestion of
 foodstuffs contaminated with radioactive material. Clothing, hair       protect the public.
                                                                             Exposure to radiation from the plume or from material de­
 and exposed skin may also be contaminated with particlesfrom the
                                                                         posited on the ground would then have greater significance and
 plume.
      In the event of a serious release itmight be necessary to advise   evacuation plans might have to be'extended and remain m force
                                                                         over a longer timescale. Restrictions on the distribution of milk and
 some people to stay indoors fora period and to shuttheirwindows
 and doors. K is also possible that some temporary evacuation of         foodstuffs would also have to be introduced over a larger area. In
                                                                         the rare event of this happening the existing emergency plan will
 small numbers of houses would be required. Control of milk and
                                                                         form the basis foraction on a wider scale.
 agricultural produce might be needed inthe area.
     Itmust be emphasised, however, that the chance of an accident        by the release of radioactive material The size of this area will
serious enough to affect people in the immediate vicinityof the site'S    depend on the magnitude and duration of any release as well as on
very iow maeed. The primary protection of the public comes from           the prevailing weather conditions during the release. Itwill take a
nign standards of engineering on the plant. Emergency plans provide       short time to define its limits. The police will then advise people
ar idditionai assurance that, even ifan accidental release were to        livingthere accordingly
occur, arrangements exist for prompt action to protect the public.              As s o o ;t as th e incident b e c o rfjs pub'ic knowledge,
                                                                          you m ay ue consulted (probably by telephone) by a number
                                                                          o f w o rried people. Th ey should be reassured th a t they are
          RESPONSIBILITIES IN A                                           in no im m ed iate danger and th a t the police « ill te ll them
          NUCLEAR EMERGENCY                                               if they need to take any action. If they are w o rried , they
                                                                         can be told th a t they should rem ain indoors (w ith windows
                                                                         and doors shut) if living w ith in a few m iles o f th e plant.
      The arrangements outlined below stnctly apply only to nuclear
                                                                          Up-to-date information will be broadcast on local radio and people
power stations run by the Central Electricity Generating Board.
                                                                         in the area of possible riskwill be contacted by the police within an
Similar arrangements and facilities are provided by the South of
                                                                         hour or two. Once the limitsof the downwind zone are known, any
Scotland Electricity Board at their headquarters and by British
                                                                         persons enquiring from ouside that sector may be completely
Nuclear Fuels pic and the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority
                                                                         reassured and advised to go about their normal activities Prac­
to cover their nuclear sites.
                                                                         titio n e rs m ay obtain inform ation on the location o f the
     Stage I, Em ergency C o n tro ller
                                                                         zone affected from th e O SC o r the police.
     Each nuclear site has an appointed Emergency Controller who
                                                                               Although the advice to stay indoors isprobably overcautious, it
is a senior member of staff and istrained to initiate the necessary
                                                                         will do no harm. A large-scale, unsupervised evacuation, on the
actions inan emergency. He isresponsible for:.
                                                                         other hand, would cause mapr and unnecessary social disrupt*^
 1) allon-site emergency arrangements
                                                                         and you should dissuade people from leaving unless t h ^
2) the immediate monitoring of radioactivity, both on and off-site       a re instructed to do so by th e police.
3) advising the police and local authorities on any immediate
                                                                               A few people who are m or close to the affected area at the
     action necessary to protect the public.
                                                                         time of the accidental release may miss being advised by the police
      Stage 2, O p eratio n al Support C en tre
                                                                         and consult you People who were inside a buiidingcan be reassured,
     Within a few hours of the declaration of the emergency, an
                                                                         but individuals in th e area who spent a period o f m ore
Operational Support Centre (OSC) would be set up in the area of
                                                                         than a few m inutes o u t o f doors should be advised to take
the plant The O S C Controller will:
                                                                         sim ple decontam ination measures. These entail washing
1) relieve the Emergency Controller at the plant of his off-site
                                                                         vvith copious quantities of water (a shower is best). Following this
     responsibilities
                                                                         they should contact the police for further advice Clothes ana
2) co-ordinate advice to outsideorganisations, includingthe police       shoes worn at the time of the accident shouid oe stored in a
3 ) co-ordinate the monitoringofany radioactivematerialsoff-site.
                                                                         container so that tHey can be tested subsequently and. ifnecessary
      Stage 3, G overnm ent Technical Adviser
                                                                         treated for the presence of radioactive contamination
     A Government representative, the Government Technical
                                                                               If the emergency authorities have decided to issue people m
Adviser, would go to the O S C and take responsibility for advising
                                                                         the downwind sector with potassium iodate tablets to protect
those organisations such as the police and local authorities on
                                                                         their thyroid glands from the possible effects of radioiodme m the
actions necessary to protect the public ifthe emergency islikelyto
                                                                         plume, it is important that there should be no omissions. P racti­
be prolonged beyond 24 hours.
                                                                         tioners should re fe r anyone who m ay have been missed in
     T he police
                                                                         th e em ergency distribution to the police so th at the tablets
      The police will,on the basisof the advice they receive, take one
                                                                         can be supplied as quickly as possible. The tablets should be
or more of the following actions:
                                                                         sw allow ed w ith o u t delay, preferably w ithin tw o hours
 1) w a m the publicto stay indoorsand to shutalldoorsand windows
                                                                         exposure. Their beneficial action will, however, still be exerted
2) issue tablets of potassium lodate to inhibit the uptake by the        even when their administration has been delayed for some hours.
     thyroid gland of radioactive iodine when this isa constituent of
                                                                               Practitioners may be required to do house callsor attend other
     the plume
                                                                         emergencies, unconnected with the nuclear incident in the down­
3) evacuate the public from a defined downwind sector from the
                                                                         wind fallout plume. In these circumstances they should obtain
     site
                                                                         advice from the police on the procedure they should follow
4) assist members of the public who have been evacuated to
      return to their homes when the emergency isover.



   WHO MAY SEEK YOUR HELP
  AND WHAT SHOULD YOU DO?
                                                                                               REFERENCE
     Workers atthe plantand people initsimmediate vicinitywillbe
taken care of promptly under the emergency arrangements. As a                 Practitioners interested in the management of workers who
general p ractitio n er you w ill not have to tre a t patients           may have been over-exposed to radiation may obtain information
fo r th e acute effects o f radiation overexposure. There will           about this from The Principles and General Procedures fo r H andling
be intense activity by the emergency authorities inorder to define       Emergency and Accidental Exposures o f Workers. Oxford. Pergamon
as accurately as possiblethe zone :nwhich people might be affected       Press. ICRP Publication 28. Arm. ICRP, 2, No. I(1978).
                      PART 2




             ROLES OF ORGANISAITQMS




The Role of the District Medical Officer
 or Appropriate Specialist in Community Medicine          17
The Police Role in Major Incidents                        19
The Role of the Fire Service                              22
The Role of the Ambulance Service                         24
 Appendix 1    Interservice Comraunications during
                a Major Accident
The Role of the Listed/Designated Hospital                26
 Appendix 1     The Casualty Clearing Station at
                the Site of a Major Accident
National Arrangements for Incidents Involving
Radioactivity - The Role of Medical Physics Depart'ment   31
The Role of Volunteers                                    33
The Role of the Local Authority                           34
 Appendix 1    Schedule of Department Responsibility
Emergency Roles of Government Departments                 36
Role of Military Aid in the Civil Caximunity              37
      PART 2
1 0   THE ROLE OF THE DISTRICT MEDICAL OFFICER OR APPROPRIATE SPECIALIST IN
      CaMMUKHY MEDICINE
      1.1      The District Medical Officer (EMO) is the principal adviser to
               the Health Authority on all matters relating to canraunity
               health.     The IMO is assisted in this task by Specialists in
               CciMiunity Medicine (SCMs) who normally specialise in certain
               areas eg Environmental Health, Health Promotion, Child Health
               etc

      1.2      The following is a list of the areas in which the specialist in
               canmunity medicine has responsibilities; determining the health
               needs of the population; contributing to planning of appropriate
               health services, and evaluating the outcome of such services;
               ensuring that the health authority is provided with medical
               advice of appropriate quality as and when necessary; control of
               ccranunicable disease (including "proper officer" functions);
               medical advice and support to local authorities in connection
               with their other environmental health functions and their social
               services and housing functions; health surveillance of
               pre-school and school age children and advice and support to
               local education authorities in connection with various statutory
               functions; prevention, health promotion, co-ordination, and
               evaluation of programmes which require co-ordination of the work
               of doctors both within and outside hospitals (eg ainrnunisation,
                screening programmes).

      1.3      At least one of the SCMs in each Health Authority specialises as
               Medical Officer for Environmental Health (MoEH), sometimes
               referred to as the "Proper Officer".   This SCM is the caranunity
               physician   with responsibility to the Local Authority (but
               employed by the Health Authority) for the control of notifiable
               *i      and food poisoning, and medical adviser on Environmental
               Health generally.    This includes advice on the prevention and
               the spread of the disease.

       1.4     The EMO or appropriate SCM will normally act as liaison between
               the Health Service and other organisations (Police, Fire,
               Ambulance, Local Authorities etc) on matters of policy and
               advice in regard to community health.

       1.5      The DMO or appropriate SCM would assist where there is a need
               for co-ordination to obtain and interpret expert advice eg frcm
               the Chemical Analysist, the DHSS or the Ministry of Agriculture
               Fisheries and Food (MAFF), Toxicologists or the National
               Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) or other sources.

        1.6    Because the DM0 or appropriate SCM is often required to caranent
               to the 'media'     during and following an incident, it is
               essential that updated information on the incident is passed to
               the EMO/SCM at regular intervals.         Normally it is the
               responsibility of the Ambulance Service to alert and brief the
               District Health Authority General Manager or his deputy. Out of
               office hours the DHA On Call Officer would be informed and he




                                        17
would Involve other senior officers including the DMO/SCM as
necessary.   Additionally, if the incident warrants it,j,.the
DMQ/SCM may require to contact the appropriate control (s) of the
Police, Fire, Ambulance or Local Authority to seek information
or clarification of detail.

 The Emergency Contact List at Part 4 gives details of useful
INITIAL contact numbers.
TOR POT.TC F , ROLE IN MAJOR 33SODENTS

(See Part      4    "Emergency   Contact   List"    for   appropriate    telephone
numbers.

2.1   It is not possible to draw up hard and fast rules to meet all
      emergencies.    Initial police action at the scene must depend
      entirely on the situation which arises.         Most incidents,
      however, generally follow a pattern so far as ccranunicatians
      with other services or dealing with casualties are concerned and
      action in these respects is defined as far as possible.

2.2   Primary Police Responsibilities

       2.2.1       Call out essential services

       2.2.2       Take command of the incident

       2.2.3       Co-ordinate   and   facilitate   the    work   of    the   other
                    services

       2.2.4       Provides means of comtnunication

       2.2.5       Establish identification of the dead and injured,
                   maintain adequate records and link information with
                   relatives

       2.2.6       Provide mortuary    facilities and act on behalf of HM
                    coroner

       2.2.7       Establish traffic control and suitable diversions

       2.2.8       Control crowds

       2.2.9       Initiate action to provide for persons rendered homeless
                   and in need of warmth, clothing and food

       2.2.10      Warn others placed in danger by the incident and where
                   necessary carry out evacuation of an area

       2.2.11      Safeguard property directly or indirectly involved in
                   the incident

       2.2.12      Perform such essential duties as they are able pending
                   the arrival of the specialist services

       2.2.13      Report fully upon the incident following its termination
                   and conduct a criminal investigation where appropriate.

2.3      Within this area of responsibility the police have devised
       methods, procedures and the application of equipment and
       personnel which has been prescribed in a comprehensive plan
       ready for instant application.   The aim has been to clearly
       define duties and responsibilities and to be sufficiently
      flexible in any part to allow initiative to be exercised
      according to circumstances.
MAJOR INCIDENT PLANS

2.4   The Force Standing Orders of the County Constabulary
      comprehensively cover the action to the taken by Police on
      receipt of information, from whatever source, in respect of major
      incidents which could threaten lives and property leading to
      great disruption in normal community life.

2.5   Special instructions are contained in force Standing Orders to
      cater for Police action at incidents which have particular
      hazards attached to them as in the case of accidents involving
      radioactive substances, crashed aircraft carrying weapons etc.
      Advice, guidance and special instructions are also given in
      connection with those types of major incidents which are more
      normally encountered, for example, rail and road accidents.
      Such instructions, however,     are based around the common
      principles which apply to the handling of all major incidents.

2.6   A major disaster within the meaning of the Peacetime Major
      Disaster Plan is defined as:

              Any disaster or serious disruption of life arising with ^
              little or no warning, causing or threatening death or
              serious injury to, or rendering homeless, such numbers
              of persons in excess of those which can be dealt with by
              the Emergency Services and County Council operating
              under normal conditions and which requires special
              mobilisation and organisation of those services.

2.7    It may be apparent at the time of receipt of the initial call by
       the Police that a particular incident is of such magnitude that
       it comes within the definition of a disaster and the procedures
       for initiating the Peacetime Major Disaster Plan will be
       followed from     the outset with the Police major incident
       procedures being run in parallel.        The likelihood is, in
       practice, that a disaster situation within the context of the
       Peacetime Major Disaster Plan will not become apparent until a
       speedy reconnaissance has been carried out, in some instances,
       the build up of what was a relatively minor incident in the
       initial stages will escalate to unpredictable proportions such
       that the decision to implement the Plan may be taken well after
       the normal major incident procedures have been canmenced.

2.8    The decision to implement the Peacetime Major Disaster plan
       therefore will rarely have to be made on receipt of an initial
       call and under certain circumstances the procedures for dealing
       with a major incident may be relatively well advanced before it
       can be reasonably predicted that the the normal emergency
       services cannot cope unaided.    In all, except those incidents
       which are so obviously catastrophic frcrn the outset, or at a
       site for which a special contingency plan has been prepared
       under the Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards
       Regulations8, the decision to invoke the procedures for the
       Major Disaster Plan will be made by the Chief Constable.

2.9     The force procedures for dealing with a disaster will be in
       accordance with the drill laid down in Force Standing Orders for
       major incidents based on the ccocept that the Police role will




                               20
       be to co-ordinate the activity of the emergency and support
       services throughout the initial stages, to facilitate the ^free
       movement of their vehicles to and from the scene of an incident
       and to control traffic and public in the area.

INFORMATION TO SENIOR NHS OFFICERS

2.10     In the event that senior NHS officers require additional
       information about a particular incident, it has been agreed
       that this will be provided by the police, the procedure to be
       followed is to telephone the appropriate police headquarters
       (see Part 4) and ask for Operations, identify yourself and
       request the information required.

2.11    ragiiaity Enquiry Bureau. The Police Casualty Enquiry Bureau
       will be established upon the authority of the Assistant Chief
       Constable (Operations)    - dependant upon the size, number of
       casualties etc.    A telephone number (4 lines) will be released
       to the public, to which all enquiries should be directed. The
       location of the bureau will not be released in order to prevent
       unnecessary personal callers impeding the operational
       effectiveness of the facility.

2.12   On activation of the Casualty Enquiry Bureau, the Police Liaison
       Officer will report to each hospital and mortuary to which
       casualties are being taken, and will be in possession of
       Casualty Books in which details of all casualties will be
       recorded by the Police Liaison Officer and passed by telephone
       to the bureau.

2.13    Messages regarding the death or serious injury of a casualty
       will be delivered personally to a relative by a police officer
       and not passed to them by telephone.




                               21
3.0   TOE FERE SERVICE ROLE IN MAJOR B idD E N IS

      3.1    The Fire Services Acts of 1947 and 1958 place a responsibility
            on 'local authorities' to provide the services of a fire brigade
            within their areas.    Since the Local Government Act of 1373 the
            term 'local authority' has meant in England and Wales the
            Metropolitan and Non Metropolitan Counties and the Greater
            London Council.      It is worth mentioning that although the
            statutory duty of these authorities is confined to making
            provision for fires, the Acts do permit local authorities to use
            fire brigades for other purposes for which their equipment and
            expertise are suitable. Although there is no statutory duty it
            has been accepted by all authorities that the Fire Service will
            attend other incidents, both minor and major, where human life
            is at risk.

      3.2   Nearly all fire appliances carry breathing apparatus suitable
            for use in highly toxic atmospheres as well as smoke, together
            with protective clothing suitable for use where corrosive a
            materials may be present.   The majority of fire appliances also W
            carry specialised cutting, spreading and lifting gear as well as
            a range of hand tools and ropes.          Most importantly each
            appliance carries a crew of resourceful, disciplined men who
            work as a team.    So that the statutory responsibilities of the
            local authority in respect of fires may be met these fire
            appliances are located at strategic points throughout the
            county.   Even in the most remote rural areas the attendance of
            a fire appliance can be achieved within 20 minutes anywhere in
            the county and in a very much shorter time in the more populous
            areas.    Many authorities also provide special vehicles with
            more specialised equipment and highly trained crews sited
            strategically within their area.

      3.3     In addition to this widespread availability of manpower and
            equipment the Fire Service has the capability to reinforce an
            attendance with appliances from further afield and to
            co-ordinate and control the efforts of its resources by virtue
            of a command structure of experienced brigade officers who are a
            constantly available to respond in similar fashion to the crews W
            of the appliances.    Most brigades also have a Control Vehicle
            that carries specialised communication equipment, maps and
            information files so that officers attending may rapidly assess
            the problems of the particular location and risk and develop an
            organised plan of campaign to deal with the more serious
            incidents.   The instant availability of these resources make it
            natural that the Fire Service will be called on to respond to
            any major incident that occurs whether or not a fire is
            involved.

      3.4   If a fire is involved in the incident, the Senior Fire Service
            Officer present has sole charge of all operations related to
            fire fighting, control of and protection from fire in accordance
            with the Fire Services Act 1947, Section 30, Sub Section 3.

      3.5   At incidents not involving a fire, the Senior Police Officer
            present will have overall responsibility for the incident. He




                                      22
      will co-ordinate all relief activities and resources which might
      involve the Fire Service and any other local authority and
      voluntary services.

3.6   The Fire Service Principal Officer will decide when a fire
      incident is of such proportion as to be within the definition of
      a Major Disaster, however notification to Fire Service Command
      and Control Centre of a Major Disaster may come from the Police,
      Ambulance and Hospital Service or from the County Emergency
      Planning Officer.

3.7   Fire Service procedures for dealing with a major disaster will
      be in accordance with Brigade Orders.

Trapped Casualties

3-8    Rescue.   The SENIOR FIRE OFFICER present is responsible for
      initiating the rescue plan.   The co-ordination of the rescue
      activities shall be a joint function of the Police, Fire and
      Ambulance Services.

3.9   Where casualties are trapped a medical and nursing team
       consisting of a minimum of an experienced doctor and senior
       'suitable trained1 nurse will be provided to give intravenous
       fluids, administer entenox, stop bleeing and maintain an airway
       etc.    This will be in addition to the site casualty clearing
       station functions which will also require the presence of
      medical and nursing staff.
4.0   TOR KnfTF. OF THE AMBULANCE SERVICE

       4.1   For more detail reference should be made to the Ambulance
             Service Major Accident Plans and Procedures1.         Details of
             Emergency Contact are given at Part 4 of this manual.

       4.2   In planning for major incidents the objectives of the Ambulance
             Service are to provide sufficient ambulance, manpower and
             equipment to deal promptly with readily accessible casualties,
             to maintain a steady flow of ambulances to meet all requirements
             at the scene, whilst at the same time, providing adequate
             emergency cover throughout the rest of the service area.

       4.3   Information that a major incident has occurred can be passed to
             the Ambulance Control from the Police or Fire services, a member
             of the public dialling 999 or from a radio report from one of
             its ambulances.      On some occasions the switchboard can be
             jammed with emergency calls while on others only a single very
             vague message is received.

       LISTED/DESIGNATED HOSPITALS6                                        %
       4.4   A number of hospitals in the Region are 'listed1 as the Major
             Accident and Emergency Hospitals, providing 24 hour cover. (See
             section 5 for their role.)

      DESIGNATED HOSPITAL

       4.5   It is the responsibility of the Ambulance Service to determine
             the nearest 'listed' hospital to the accident site which is to
             become the DESIGNATED HOSPITAL.       The Ambulance Service is
             responsible for alerting the Designated Hospital and for
             notifying the Police and Fire Brigade of the hospital selected.
             In co-operation with adjacent Health Authorities and Ambulance
             Services this could be a listed hospital within an adjacent
             Health Authority boundary.

      SUPPORTING HOSPITAL

       4.6    Dependent on circumstance, at the outset of an emergency
             subsequently Wien appreciation of the situation has been made at
             the major accident site, the Ambulance Service will be
             responsible for nominating and activating one or more 'listed'
             hospitals as SUPPORTING HOSPITALS to the Designated Hospital in
             dealing with casualties from the Major Accident.      This will
             include close liaison with adjacent Ambulance Services to
             determine the need to use the listed hospitals in their area of
             responsibility

NOTIFICATION OF RHA AND DHA OFFICERS

      NOTIFICATION OF DHA OFFICERS

       4.7   The Ambulance Service will notify the appropriate District
             Health Authority Officers in accordance with local instructions.
             (See also page 17 para 1.6.) These instructions are reviewed
             and updated periodically.




                                       24
EMERnRINfCY MORTUARY AND DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD

4.8     Responsibility.    Emergency mortuary arrangements, including
      disposal of the dead will be the responsibility of the POLICE.




                               25
                                                                                       APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                                                       PART 2 SECTION 4


               INTERSERVICE CQMMQMICATIOMS DURTWC A MA.Tffl? A rrT n K yr




                       > CENTRAL FIRE CONTROL {




                       }FIRE INCIDENT OFFICER^




  CENTRAL      POLICE                            AMBULANCE              CENTRAL        ALERT
  POLICE ■     INCIDENT   <r                     INCIDENT ■             AMBULANCE-    ^DISTRICT HEALTH
  CONTROL      OFFICER                           OFFICER                CONTROL        AUTHORITY
                                                    /1\
                                                                                        (DUTY ON CALL
                                                                                          OFFICER)



                   L > MEDICAL INCIDENT OFFICER ^
                        (SITE MEDICAL OFFICER)




POLICE                     HOSPITAL ACCIDENT                          AMBULANCE
CASUALTY   4               -> AND EMERGENCY £-                     HOSPITAL LIAISON
BUREAU                         DEPARTMENTS                             OFFICER
TOE ROLE OF THE LISTED/DESIGNATED HOSPITAL6

INTRODUCTION

5.1   During the last three decades, UK experience of mass casualty
      incidents based mainly on infrequent railway accidents, road
      accidents and fires has been increased by the spread of urban
      terrorist activity and civil commotion from Northern Ireland to
      mainland Britain.

5.2      The principles of hospital disaster planning are well
      documented3.    Following a disaster, hospital staff need to be
      alerted, recalled from their hones if necessary, assigned duties
      and deployed to their posts.      Casualties require reception,
      identification, sorting and direction to appropriate treatment
      areas.    Sources of information, lines of communication, and
      effective organisation and control of all aspects of hospital
      activity require definition and implementation.          As few
      hospitals will have more than one opportunity of seeing how the
      plan will actually work, well designed exercises are an
      important part of disaster planning.      A diagram showing the
      casualty clearing station at the site of a major accident is
      included at Appendix 1.

CASUALTY MANAGEMENT - TRIAGE

5.3   The basic aim of mass casualty management is to provide the
      greatest good for the largest number.     In order to make sure
      that severely injured casualties are not overlooked, or that too
      much time is spent on caring for casualties with minor injuries,
      a system of triage is necessary.

5.4   Although debate continues about the desirability of using the
      word 'triage1 in disaster management terminology, (seme authors
      preferring the term 'casualty assessment'), 'triage' has been
      used regularly in disaster situations and the world's
      battlefields during this century and has a much more specific
      meaning than sorting alone.     The process of triage involves
      sorting casualties into groups depending on the extent and
      severity of their injuries, the triage categories chosen
      reflecting the facilities and personnel available for treatment
      at the time.

5.5   A number of different systems have been described during the
      last fifty years, mainly based on the experience of military
      surgeons in dealing with battle casualties.    For civilian use,
      however, a simple, clearly understood classification using
      self-explanatory terminology is the most widely used and safest
      method.    Basically Casualties are divided into three groups;
      those needing immediate, urgent or non-urgent treatment.

HOSPITAL FLYING SQUAD

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER

5.6     The Hospital Flying Squad consists of a Mobile Medical and
      Nursing or Mobile Surgical and Resuscitation Team which may be
      provided either by the designated hospital or a supporting
       hospital.   The activation of the team will normally be via the
       Ambulance Service radio ccranunications system.

5.7     If requested by the Ambulance Service a Hospital Flying Squad
       will be dispatched to the scene.     The senior doctor on the
       medical team will evaluate the situation and will become the
       Site Medical Officer, if required.

5.8     Site Contacts and Location. On arrival at the site the Site
       Medical Officer will contact the Ambulance Incident Officer and
       will normally locate himself at the Ambulance Medical
       Coimunications point.

5.9    Responsibilities. The Site Medical Officer is responsible for:

       5.9.1    Formulating a casualty evacuation plan in collaboration
               With the AMBULANCE INCIDENT OFFICER.

       5.9.2    Arranging for the attendance of further medical and
               nursing teams if required eg to deal with trapped
               casualties etc.                                 *

       5.9.3    Keeping the Accident and Emergency department at the
               designated hospital up to date with accurate numbers and
               diagnoses of casualties prior to arrival at the hospital

IDENTIFICATION AND DQgjMENTATION

5.10   On entering the hospital all casualties have either a numbered
       disaster tag placed around their neck, or a numbered identity
       bracelet placed on at least two limbs.          A disaster tag
       incorporating the initial triage category and space to record
       details of initial assessment and treatment may be used.
       Self-adhesive patient identification labels incorporating the
       unique disaster number are invaluable for labelling pathology
       and radiology request forms, specimen bottles and property bags.
       Once a casualty has been moved to a secondary treatment area,
       standard hospital documentation will be brought into use.
       Special and complex disaster documentation is seldom used in a
       real disaster .

PRIMARY TREATMENT AREAS

5.11   ACCIDENT & EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT

       Following triage, casualties are moved to primary treatment
       areas, equipped and staffed to deal with any medical emergency.
       Those in need of immediate care go to resuscitation roans,
       those in need of urgent care to the urgent treatment area;
       and the non-urgent 'walking wounded' to a minor treatment
       area.

5.12   During the early stages of a disaster, the casualty load is
       often unknown and the rate at which casualties arrive at the
       hospital, variable.    While plans exist for expansion of the
       primary treatment areas to prevent overcrowding, a more
       important principle is to move casualties out of the area as
       rapidly as possible after initial assessment and resuscitation.
CONTROL AND INFORMATION CENTRE

5.13   During the early period of a disaster alert, the senior hospital
       nurse, doctor and administrator will work closely together,
       monitoring the hospital's response to the emergency situation
       and modifying the disaster plan as the nature of the incident
       unfolds.

5.14   A combined control and information centre in the administration
       area of the hospital will provide information on which decisions
       can be taken, instructions issued and responses monitored.

INFORMATION

5.15   Every disaster is an information exercise, and the hospital
       Information Centre would provide accurate, relevant information
       so that the senior members of the medical, nursing and
       administrative staff are able to make relevant decisions with as
       little delay as possible.

5.16   Once a disaster alert has been declared, details of the nature,
       site and time of the disaster would be displayed together with
       an estimate of the number and type of casualties.      The names
       and ex-directory telephone numbers of other receiving hospitals
       are recorded.      The presence within the hospital of key
       personnel are logged together with a detailed summary of the bed
       state.

5.17   As casualties are admitted to the hospital, their names and
       disaster tag numbers are recorded, togethe with the location of
       each casualty within the hospital, and his or her clinical
       status. Details of casualties awaiting surgery (name, operation
       and estimated time involved) are recorded and displayed.

5.18   A note is kept of the number of hospital staff available for
       general disaster duties together with the names and skills of
       individuals who present themselves at the hospital.          An
       up-to-date record is also kept of contacts for organised groups
       within the community whose assistance may be required, for
       example, British Red Cross Society and St John's Ambulance.

5.19   Data is received by the Information Centre frcm within the
       hospital, frcm the disaster site, frcm the ambulance service and
       frcm adjacent hospitals.         Within the hospital itself,
       information is passed by using messengers, intercans, internal
       telephones and 'walkie talkies' while communication outside the
       hospital utilises telephone and radio links.

CONTROL

5.20   The Hospital General Manager is responsible for ensuring
       that his departmental heads are familiar with their role during
       a disaster, and for developing a recall system whereby staff can
       be alerted at their homes without involving the hospital
       telephonists in a long series of calls. A cascade system which
       allows duty staff to call out or alert other key staff is
       favoured.
5.21   The Nursing Director co-ordinates the nursing response
       through the nursing officers and ward and departmental head
       nurses.    Rapid redeployment of nurses to key disaster areas is
       a vital aspect of the initial nursing response.         Adequate
       nursing back-up has to be provided to care for patients already
       in the hospital and re-arrangement of rosters to meet the needs
       of a prolonged disaster.    Nurses with particular skills may be
       required to care for casualties with special types of injury,
       while the enthusiastic help of caimunity nurses and members of
       British Red Cross Society and St John Ambulance would be
       invaluable.

5.22   The Hospital Information Officer supervises the work of the
       Information Centre, drawing the attention of the senior staff to
       any relevant items of information that require action.

5.23   The Volunteer Reception Officer receives all volunteers who
       come to the hospital, records details of each volunteer's name,
       address and particular skills, verifies credentials if
       necessary, provides identification in the form of a label or
       coloured sash, and after consulting the Hospital Information
       Officer, directs the volunteer to where his or her skills can be
       of most use.

5.24   The Relatives Reception Officer supervises the care of
       friends or relatives of casualty victims, a number of whom may
       have been involved in the original incident. All these people
       will be under stress, their prime requirement being reliable
       information fron sympathetic members of staff.         Some will
       receive bad news, may have to identify unconscious or dead loved
       ones, and will need to express their grief.     Others will need
       financial or material help before being able to continue their
       journey or return hone. All will need light refreshments.

5.25   The role of the Hospital Chaplain will be to assess the
       requirements and to co-ordinate chaplaincy services for all
       religions.    He will act as the point of contact between the
       many chaplains who will undoubtedly offer their services and if
       required will call out other chaplains as necessary.    Although
       chaplains offer a ministry to the sick and dying they also offer
       an important pastoral role to both hospital staff and patients.
       There may initially be a need for chaplains at the incident site
       and in the receiving wards at the hospital.

MANAGING THE MEDIA

5.26   During a number of recent disasters hospital routines have been
       severely disrupted as reporters, photographers and crews fran
       television and radio stations have all vied with each other to
       be the first with detailed reports, pictures and exclusive
       interviews.

5.27   The key figure managing the media is the Press Officer Who
       should be a member of the top echelon of hospital management
       during a disaster.   For the first hour or so after a disaster
       the media representatives should be excluded fron the hospital
       for security reasons while the Press Roan is made ready.
       Siting the Press Roan close to the centre of clinical activity
       stops reporters frcm wandering about the hospital looking for
       action, and also allows senior medical and nursing staff to
       give short interviews without disrupting their work.  The Press
       Rocin should have a number of telephone lines by-passing the
       hospital switchboard, and a large blackboard or wall-chart on
       which basic information can be displayed and updated as the
       disaster progresses.    Arrangements for dealing with the media
       are given in reference 4.

5.28   During a disaster the decision on how much information to
       release can often be difficult but information should not be
       withheld unreasonably, especially when its release could help to
       stop the publication of rumours and errors.




                               30
                                                                                               APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                                                               PART 2 SECTION 5
                     THE CASUALTY CLEARING STATION AT THE S ITE OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT


               DESIGNATED                                                               SEARCH AND RESCUE
               HOSPITAL                                                                 PRIMARILY FIRE
                                                                                        SERVICE



SUPPORTING                                                                                    I C DOCTOR AND
HOSPITAL                                                                                      AMBULANCE CREW
                                                                                              FOR INDIVIDUAL
                                                                                              TRAPPED CASUALTY


                                                 CASUALTY CLEARING
                                                      STATION
                                                                            DISASTER S IT E
                                                  IMMEDIATE CARE
                                                     DOCTORS
                                                 AMBULANCE CREWS                  I C DOCTOR WITH POLICE
                                                  SURGICAL TEAM                   OFFICER CONFIRMING AND
                                                                                  DOCUMENTING FATALITIES

        EMERGENCY CONTROL VEHICLES

                                                                                  SURGICAL TEAM FOR
  POLICE             FIRE            AMBULANCE                                    PARTICULAR TRAPPED
                                                                                  SURGICAL CASUALTY
    T
 POLICE
                     T
                    FIRE
                                       J
                                 AMBULANCE             MEDICAL
 INCIDENT           INCIDENT     INCIDENT              INCIDENT
 OFFICER            OFFICER      OFFICER               OFFICER




                                     I C DOCTORS      HOSPITAL        VOLUNTEER
                                                      SURGICAL TEAM   DOCTORS
6.0   NATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY -
      ROLE OF NHS MEDICAL PHYSICS DEPARTMENTS

      INTRODUCTION

      6.1   HC(76) 52:  Deals with the National Arrangements for Incidents
            Involving Radioactivity (NAIR) and Arrangements for Dealing with
            Contaminated and Radiation Casualties.             The National
            Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) co-ordinate the scheme.

      6.2   HC(85)24: Requires NHS Major Accident plans to include adequate
            arrangements for the NHS response to an accident at a nuclear
            installation and advises on Health Service Arrangements for
            Dealing with Accidents at Civil Nuclear Installations.      The
            circular is issued as a supplement to HC(77)1 Health Service
            Arrangements for Dealing with Major Accidents.

      SUMMARY OF ARRANGEMENTS

      6.3   In the event of an incident involving a fire and a radioactive
            isotope then the Fire Service will have overall responsibility,
            however, the police will normally be the first authority to be
            informed of a transport accident or other incident in a public
            place.   Consequently, the basis of NAIR is that the arrangements
            will be invoked by the local police.     Help is provided in two
            parts known as first and second stage assistance.       (HC.(76)52
            Appendix 1 refers).

      6.4   First Stage Assistance:      (Hospital Advice to Police)     This
             enables the police to call upon an experienced person who can
             advise then on action.      The arrangements involve Radiation
             Physicists at certain hospitals (see paragraph 5) who, at the
             request of the police, would provide first stage assistance and
             advise on the safety measures to be taken at incidents involving
             radioactive substances.    It may also be necessary to inform the
             Specialist in Community Medicine, Environmental Health (SCM EH)
             so that a medical opinion is also available and any necessary
             steps taken.     Basically, assistance consists of advising the
             police whether there is a potential hazard from radioactivity and
             giving advice on the actions necessary to minimise and contain
             the danger.    It is accepted that hospital radiation staff have
             relatively limited resources and will normally be able to carry
             out only small recovery operations.     They will not be expected
             to cope with incidents involving the spread of contamination
             unless very minor.        Where the incident is beyond their
             capability to deal with unaided, they should advise the police on
             the steps that should be taken to prevent exposure of the public;
             for example, by erection of barriers or by covering and
             containing contaminated material to prevent its spread.

      6.5   Within the Trent RHA the "MEDICAL PHYSICS DEPARTMENT" of the
             following hospitals provide First Stage Assistance :-

             (1)    University Hospital, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham
                    Tel: (0602) 412412
             (2)    Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, Derby Tel: (0332) 47141
             (3)   Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester Tel: (0533) 541414
             (4)   St George's Hospital, Lincoln Tel: (0522) 29921
             (5)    Weston Park Hospital, Sheffield Tel: (0742) 670222




                                      31
6.6    Second Stage Assistance.     Some incidents may prove inpossible
       for hospital radiation staff to deal with because of the need for
       more sophisticated resources.     In such cases the police will
       obtain second stage assistance fran establishements such as the
       United Kingdom Atonic Energy Authority, Central Electricity
       Generating Board, British Nuclear Fuels Ltd or the Ministry of
       Defence.     It is for hospital radiation staff offering first
       stage assistance, either at the time they receive the call fron
       the police or on assessing the situation at the incident site, to
       advise the police whether second stage assistance is required.

6.7    Within the Trent RHA second stage assistance is provided by:

       (1)   AERE, Harwell, Didcot, Oxfordshire 0X11 ORQ
             Tel: (0235) 24141 Ext 444/4059 Working Hours
                               Ext 539/5137 Silent Hours

       (2)       Rolls Royce   (1971)     Ltd,   Raynesway,   Derby   Tel   (0332)
       662441
                (Duty Health Physicist)

6.8    In addition to the NAIR scheme the Fire Service offer facilities
       of monitoring equipment and trained personnel who are capable of
       dealing with    a radiation incident.    The equipment available
       would ensure    adequate surveying ofthe contaminated area, dose
       rate meters     for individuals anddecontamination monitoring
       equipment for use to conclude the incident.

6.9    Hospitals in England prepared to accept contaminated casualties
       and to advise on, and assist with, decontamination of personnel
       are listed in Appendix 2 of HtC(76)52.    Within the Trent Region
       these are the A & E departments of the following hospitals :-

       (1)   Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield
       (2)   Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, Derby
       (3)   Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester
       (4)   County Hospital, Lincoln
       (5)    University Hospital, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham

CONTAMINATED CASUALTIES

6.10   Ambulance crews must be instructed to inform the police (via
       Ambulance Control) immediately they become aware that radioactive
       substances are involved at any incident they attend.   The police
       are responsible for arrangements to protect the public and in
       conjunction with the Fire Service will endeavour to contain, if
       possible, any radioactive substances;    ambulance crews will be
       concerned solely in dealing with any casualties.          In all
       instances ambulance crews should inform the hospital in advance,
       via ambulance control, that radioactive substances are involved
       and, where known, the name of the radioisotope.




                                   32
TOP. ROLE OF THE VOUJSITEERS


7.1    The work of emergency planning is supported by thousands of
      volunteers across the country, some recruited and organised by
      the various Emergency Planning Officers. Others form their own
      groups.    Through their groups or organisations, most of them
      also deal with a wide range of everyday acitivities.

7.2   Following a major disaster, volunteers would be alerted to ensure
      that the injured, disabled and homeless could be helped in as
      caring and efficient a way as possible, assistance is also
      provided by a number of voluntary organisations.

The Red Cross and St John Ambulance Brigade

7.3   The Red Cross and St John Ambulance Brigade (St Andrew Ambulance
      Association in Scotland) view their role alongside the
      professional services as being so important, that they have
      joined together to form both National and County Joint Emergency
      Executive Canmittees to formulate plans.

7.4     Quite apart fran their normal training, they have evolved
      procedures for the management of large numbers of casualties and
      the setting up of first aid posts to deal with them.

7.5    They are also prepared to offer their skills and services to
      assist at the site, in a hospital or to the Ambulance Service.

The Women's Royal Voluntary Service(WRVS)

7.6    The WRVS are capable of setting up rest centres and/or mass
      catering facilities, literally anywhere, using existing
      buildings or make-do facilities to serve hot food and drink. All
      without prior warning.

7.7    In some areas, there is an automatic arrangement with the fire
      service that they are called out to provide food and drink for
      the firefighters in any significant incident.

7.8     The WRVS work in liaison with the local authority County
      Emergency Planning Officers (CEPOs) as well as with the Police,
      Fire and other voluntary services.
8.0   THE BOLE OF THE LOCAL AUTHORITY


      8.1    Emergency Planning is focussed at Local Authority county level.
            In metropolitan areas, joint fire and civil defence authorities
            are responsible e.g. the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
            Authority.    The reason for this localised rather than national
            responsibility is that no two areas are alike; the geography, the
            resources, the people and the problems are all different and are
            best understood by those who live and work there.

      8.2    Emergency Planning is not the sole responsibility of any one
            group of people.    It draws on the training and skills of many
            diverse organisations, some of which are paid for their work,
            some of which contribute voluntarily.

      8.3    A co-ordinating structure has been developed, with the Chief
            Executive of each local authority, at the head of the local
            planning process.  County Emergency Planning Officers, known as
            CEPOs, are employed fulltime to study local hazards, prepare ^
            plans and advice their Chief Executives on the practical w
            application should a need arise.

      8.4    The main responsibility for the preparation of plans lies with
            the counties, helped where appropriate by their districts. Each
            district is required to provide its own emergency centre.

      8.5    In the preparation of all the plans required by law it is the
            County Emergency Planning Officer who acts as chief planner and
            co-ordinator.   What goes into their peacetime plans depends to a
            large extent on the hazards that exist within each local
            authority's boundaries.

      8.6   All plans must take account of such local factors as topography,
            infrastructure and population distribution.     Local authorities
            therefore have two main responsibilities in an emergency;      to
            maintain essential services and to reduce or avoid the effects of
            disaster on those who are involved.

      8.7    There must also be the means to keep the public informed about ^
            what is going on.     If death or injuries have occurred, police
            and hospital reports will have to be conmunicated to relatives
            and friends.    At the same time, it may be necessary to issue
            statements to the press, radio and TV, a task often taken on by
            or shared with the police.    Survivors and relatives of victims
            may need advice on social, domestic or other problems.      Plans
            take this into account and show who to call on to provide it.




                                     34
                                                                APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                                    PART 2 SECTION 7


               LOCAL AUTHORITY : SCHEDULE OF DEPARTMENT RESPONSIBILITY
                                      INCIDENT


          A'
                                     EMERGENCY CALL


                       FIRE-             -POLICE-               -HEAL1H AUTHORITY--



                                                    Ambulance          Hospital
                                                                    Flying Squads
V
                                    Supporting Forces
                                            I
                                                                                  FPC
                                     County Director                          (GPs etc)


                                      County Clerk


                          County Emergency Planning Officer



                         Surveyor                 Works         Education         Other
                                                                                       1
Social Services
                                                                             Departments


    Area                   Area                   Area           Area
    Offices                Offices                Offices        Offices




                               -Liaison with- Chief Officers

                                                District Councils

                                                Emergency Services

                                                Voluntary Organisations

                                                Outside Bodies




                               Co-ordination of Assistance
9.0   EMERGENCY ROLES OF GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS

      9.1   Each Government Department has certain roles to perform in the
              event of an emergency:

             Home Office                     Department of the Environment
             Broadcasting                    Water Supplies
             Criminal Justice                Construction work
             Fire Service                    Building
             Police Service                  Certain sea defences
             WRVS
             Civil Defence
             United Kingdom Warning &
              Monitoring Organisation


             Department of Transport         Department of Energy
             Construction & repair of        Energy Supplies
              roads
             Passenger Transport
             Goods Transport
             Oil or Chemical Pollution
               at sea


             Department of Health and        Ministry of Agriculture,
             Social Security                 Fisheries and Food
             All health matters including:   Food
               Environmental Health          Agriculture
               Ambulance Service             Emergency Feeding
             Emergency Benefit Payments
             Emergency Accommodation


             Ministry of Defence
             Armed Forces
             Royal Observer Corps
             Military Aid to the Civil Community




                                        36
PDT.F. OF MTT.TTARY A ID IN THE C IV IL OCMytMHY

 10.1   Military aid to the civil cormunity is not a new idea.   Many of
        the military activities in this direction have existed for many
        years and are well known.    All three Services represent a wide
        range of professions, trades and skills and together possess a
        variety of specialised equipment not normally held by Local
        Authorities.    Generally the aid of the Services is not sought
        except in cases of natural disaster or some other catastrophic
        event.

 10.2   An outline of the assistance that can be given to Local
        Authories in the event of a major incident is contained in the
        panphlet Military Aid to the Civil Ccranunity dated 1983 and
        issued by the Ministry of Defence, copies are held by District
        General Managers.      Basically assistance given to Local
        Authorities falls into two categories.        Firstly what are
        referred to as quick emergencies such as aircraft crashes,
        railway accidents, explosions, major fires and certain types of
        searches.     Secondly there are slow emergencies that include
        assistance with restoration after a catastropic event such as an
        earthquake, breached sea wall, oil slicks or help with the
        erection of temporary bridges.

 10.3   A request- for military assistance has considerable financial
        implications and any request should be made by an Authority who
        will be prepared to meet any cost involved.          It will be
        appreciated that monies specifically provided by Parliament for
        defence purposes ought not to be utilised for other purposes.
        Duties performed by the Services outside their normal scope must
        of necessity incur costs which must be borne by the Authority
        requesting assistance.    In assessing the likely costs involved
        it should be noted that where the saving of life is concerned
        costs are normally waived but with restoration duties the costs
        may be borne in full.   However any costs involved are by mutual
        agreement.

  10.4 In ordinary circumstances the request for military assistance
       must come from the Local Authority who will in turn request
       the Police to act as co-ordinator.       The Police will then
       request Military Aid through the District Military Co-ordinator
       on behalf of the Authority concerned.

  10.5 Where there is danger to life, or when immediate help is
       essential for any other reason, assistance may be provided by
       the local military unit without reference to higher authority
       who would be subsequently informed as soon as practically
       possible.   In all other instances the Military point of contact
       will be Headquarters Eastern District (HQ EDIST) G3 OPERATIONS
       as follows:

        10.5.1   Routine Office Hours.      S02 Ops/O&D HQ EDIST

                 Tel:   Colchester Military (0206) 595121 Ext 2009
10.5.2 Silent Hours.   Duty Staff Officer HQ EDIST

      Tel:   Colchester Military (0206) 575121 - ask for the
      Duty Officer HQ Eastern District.




                       38
                            PART 3




                            GENERAL




1. 0   Rabies                                              39
        Appendix 1    Action by the County Council
2.0    Kane Dialysis Patients                              44
3.0    Infectious Diseases                                 46
        Appendix 1    Notifiable Diseases in England and
                      Wales
        Appendix 2    Procedure during Outbreak of
                      Notifiable Disease
        Appendix 3    Summary of DHA arrangements
4.0    Helicopters   Policyand Proecedures                 50
PART 3

1.0 RABIES

    References:         Memorandum   to   HC(77)31;   HC(77)29    Pre-exposure
    Vaccination

   RABIES  IS A NOTIFIABLE DISEASE        (Public Health   (Infectious Diseases)
    (Amendment) Regulations 1976)

    The Action by the County Council is given at Appendix 1.

    RABIES IN MAN

      1.1      General.      A Memorandum distributed under Health Circular
             H C (77)31 contains information, intended for Medical Officers for
             Environmental Health, General Medical Practitioners and hospital
             doctors, on the epidemiology of the disease and guidance on the
             action to be taken in a suspected case of rabies in man.

      1.2    Detailed Advice. Detailed advice on the use of rabies vaccine,
             antiserum and immunoglobulin may be obtained from one of the
             laboratories of the Public Health Laboratory Service Where
             stocks of these prophylactic agents are held.   (See paragraph
              1.11   - PHLS list of laboratories holding stocks of Rabies
             Vaccine and Antisera.)

     1.3     Pre-exposure Vaccination

              1.3.1   Pre-exposure vaccination should be offered to all
                      persons exposed in the course of their work to special
                      risks of contracting the disease.    HC(77)29 provides a
                      list of such persons; in summary they include staff in
                      veterinary laboratories and those employed in the import
                      of animals at Quarantine kennels or catteries, as
                      carrying agents, and at sea and airports.   Pre-exposure
                      vaccination is not recommended as a routine prophylactic
                      measure for travellers going abroad except in certain
                      special circumstances e.g. veterinary staff who may be
                      at special risk working in remote rural areas in
                      developing countries.   Vaccination is available free of
                      charge to persons entitled to treatment under the NHS.

             1.3.1    Should an outbreak in animals occur, and a rabies area
                      be declared, vaccination would also need to be offered
                      to those directly involved in control measures and to
                      veterinary surgeons within the infected area.

     i-4    Initiation of Treatment. In the case of travellers returning to
            this country who report: an exposure to an animal abroad, it may
            often be advisable to start treatment while enquiries are made
            on the presence of rabies in the country concerned and, where
            possible, the health of the biting animal.    In this connection
            the International Relations Division of the DHSS may be able to
            provide information and assist in making enquiries.




                                     39
1.5    Local Treatment of Wounds.  The local treatment of wounds
      involving possible exposure to rabies, recommended in all
      exposures, is:

       1.5.1   First Aid Treatment. Immediate washing and flushing with
               soap and water; detergent, or water alone is inoperative
               since elimination of rabies virus at the site of
               infection by chemical or physical means is the most
               effective mechanism of protection. Cleansing should be
               followed by the application of either 40-70% alcohol,
               tincture or aqueous solutions of iodine, or 0.1%
               quaternary ammonium compounds.      (All traces of soap
               must be removed before the application of quaternary
               ammonium compounds because soap neutralizes the activity
               of such compounds.)

       1.5.2    Treatment by a Physician. Treatment by or under the
               direction of a physician should be:

                1.5.2.1 Treat as in sub para   1.5.1 above, then:

                1.5.2.2 apply antirabies serum by careful instillation
                        in the depth of the wound and infiltration
                        around the wound;

                1.5.2.3 postpone suturing of wound: if suturing is
                        necessary use antiserum locally as stated
                        above;                                .
                                                              s

                1.5.2.4 where   indicated,    institute    antitetanus
                        procedures and administer antibiotics and drugs
                        to control infections other than rabies.

1.6   Action by Medical Officer of Environmental Health (MbEH)
      Action to be taken on receipt of notification of a case of human
      rabies will depend on the circumstances of infection of the
      patient concerned:-

       1.6.1   where a patient is known or suspected to have been
               exposed to infection by an animal abroad, action will
               generally be limited to offering prophylactic
               vaccination to the patient's intimate home contacts and
               arranging for the disinfection of soiled articles
               contaminated by the patient before removal to hospital.

       1.6.2   where the suspected source of infection is believed to
               be an animal in this country, in addition to action at
               sub para     1.6.1 above, the appropriate Divisional
               Veterinary Officer and the Communicable Diseases Section
               of the DHSS are to be informed as a matter of urgency.

1.7    Post Mortem Examination.     Rabies virus is classified by the
      Dangerous Pathogens Advisory Group as a Category 'A' pathogen.
      The Group' has advised that where Category 'A' pathogens are in
      question, post mortem examination should not be undertaken save
      in exceptional circumstances.




                               40
OUTBREAK OF RABIES

 1-8     Control Measures. The Rabies (Control) Order 1974 specifies
        measures to be taken in a rabies outbreak.        These include
        movement, confinement and control of dogs, cats and other
        animals; the seizure, detention and destruction of animals not
        under control; the banning or control by licence of specified
        activities such hunting, shooting and dog and cat shows;    the
        compulsory detention and     destruction of animals not under
        control; the banning or control by licence of         specified
        activities such as hunting, shootingand dog and cat shows; the
        compulsory vaccination of dogs and cats; and the destruction of
        foxes.

1.9     Emergency Control. The overall conrol of a rabies outbreak will
        be exercised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
        The Field Co-ordinator and Controller will be the Regional
        Veterinary Officer (MAFF) and local authorities have contingency
        plans to deal with any suspected or confirmed outbreak of
        rabies.    Medical Officers for Environmental Health should be
        aware of Local Authority contingency plans and local liaison
        arrangements following any outbreak of rabies.

1.10     Contact. Local Authority contact is via the County Emergency
        Planning Officer.  See Part 4 for contact numbers.

1-11   PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORIES HOLDING STOCKS OF RARTF.S V A rf TWR AND
       ANTISERA           ~                         -----------------

       The Central Public Health Laboratory
       Colindale Avenue
       LONDON NW9 5HT                       Tel: 01 205 7041

       The Regional Public Health Laboratory
       Fazarerley Hospital
       Lower Lane
       LIVERPOOL L9 7AL                    Tel: 051 525 2323

       The Regional Public Health Laboratory
       Newcastle General Hospital
       Westgate Road
       NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE NE4 6BE          Tel: 0623 38811

       The Regional Public Health Laboratory
       East Birmingham Hospital
       Bordesley Green East
       BIRMINGHAM B9 5ST                   Tel: 021 722 4311
                                                 (ext 4080)

       Public Health Laboratory
       Church Lane
       Heavitree
       EXETER EX2 5AD                       Tel: 0392 77833

       The Regional Public Health Laboratory
       Bridle Path
       York Road
       LEEDS LS15 7TR                      Tel: 0532 645011




                               41
MAFF - Rabies

Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Block 7
Government Buildings
Chalfont Drive
Nottingham

Divisional Veterinary Officer        Tel: 0602 293469
(Dealing with Rabies)                     /2a hour}


The Regional Public Health Laboratory
University Hospital of Wales
Heath Park
CARDIFF CP4 4XW                      Tel. 0222 755 g54




                     42
                                                          APPENDIX 1 TO
ACTION BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL                              PART 3 SECTION 1

GENERAL

1.    Instructions for dealing with an outbreak of rabies in the County are
      contained in the Derbyshire County Council's Rabies Contingency Plan.

2.    If the Plan is activated the Emergency Control will be established in
      the County Offices, Matlock.


RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTION IN AN EMERGENCY

3.    The responsibility for the control of rabies lies with the Ministry of
       Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) in close co-operation with the
       Police.

4.    MAFF will establish a Rabies Control Centre from which to conduct the
       veterinary operations to deal with the outbreak.

5.    The overall co-ordination of the County council's duties will be
       assumed by the Emergency Planning Officer.

6.    A liaison link will be established between Rabies Control Centre and
       the Emergency Control via the Emergency Planning Team.    Assistance
      will be arranged through this link.

7.    A Press Officer will be established near the Rabies Control Centre
       under the supervision of the MAFF Regional Information Officer. All
       information to the news media in the County will be passed through
       this office.

8.    Liaison with the Press Offices on matters affecting District Councils
      will be through the District Chief Executives.

ASSISTANCE AVAILABLE IN AN EMERGENCY

9.    The District Councils may be requested to provide assistance in taking
       action to safeguard and protect human and animal health.

10.   The County Estates Officer will nominate detention pounds in the
       affected area depending upon the availability of existing premises.
2 .0    HOME DIALYSIS EMEEEMS

         2,1      general Contingency Arrangements.    Renal Units provide their
                 patients with an emergency folder in which contact telephone
                 numbers are recorded for action in the event of any equipment
                 failure or disruption in electricity, water or dialysis
                 supplies.    For psychological reasons the onus tends to be
                placed on the patient to be self supportive and in the event of
                an actual or threatened problem the patient is required to
                ascertain its nature and the expected time-frame for remedial
                action;     When possible the patient is expected to arrange
                dialysis sessions to conform to the availability of water or
                electricity services.    In the event of any risk of a prolonged
                interruption in the capability to dialyse, a patient will either
                report to the Renal Unit itself for dialysis or, when
                electricity failure is a problem, in seme cases a portable
                generator may be provided under DHA arrangements.

        2.2     Registration of Dialysis Patients. As a matter of routine and
                according to place of resident, Renal Units notify patient a
               details to the relevant DHA, British Telecom District Office ®
               Water Authority and Electricity Board. This procedure aims to
               provide the public utilities with data relevant to standards and
               Priorities to be established in the provision of services.    It
               must be accepted that Health Authority registers are considered
               the master records' and the public utilities will seek NHS
               verification of patients at risk in the event of any emergency
               situation affecting a specific geographical area.

        2.3      Health Authority Responsibilities.      Health Authorities may
               rf^0^Ve •n°tlfication of actual or potential emergency situations
               which, inter alia, would affect home dialysis patients and Renal
               units.     In particular, water authorities will provide warning
               of any unacceptable level of aluminium in their water supplv
                (maximum acceptable level 30 micrograms per litre).      At ai i
               times Health Authorities should be capable of assessing any
               patients and Renal Units at risk on a geographical basis.

       2.4      Tracer ^Action.    The sources of data on renal patients by a
               geographical area are:                                              \
               2.4.1   DHA Registers

               2.4.2   RHA Computer based data in respect of renal services

               2.4.3   Renal Unit lists

               2.4.5   Computer based data   held by   the Regional   Emergency
                       Planning Officer

       2 '5    ^Mncy_^asures.           The following will form the basis of
              immediate counter measures:

               2.5.1   Telephone contact with home dialysis patients in
                       affected areas to warn them of the risk and advise them
                       to organise dialysis sessions to follow any disruption
                       or fall in standard in essential service provision.




                                       44
2.5.2   In the event of individual problems in organising heme
        dialysis sessions, appropriate action to permit the
        patient to report to their Renal Unit for treatment.

2.5.3   In the case of unacceptable levels of aluminiun in water
        supplies, action to achieve acceptable limits by reverse
        osmosis or de-ionising.




                        45
3.0   INFECTIOUS DISEASE

      3.1      Public health is the statutory responsibility of local
            government authorities      (see Section 3) through their
            environmental health inspectorates.            There is close
            collaboration with the NHS which itself plays a large part in
            prevention, including health education and immunisation, and
            there is a very effective co-ordination of control of disease by
            the Public Health Laboratory Service, the role of which cones to
            public notice nowadays only in the case of the more exotic
            importations such as lassa fever, rabies or legionnaires disease
            or where new diseases are introduced eg AIDS.

      3.2    Under the collaboration arrangements between local authorities
            and district health authorities, the latter appoint a Medical
            Officer for Environmental Health (MoEH).        The MoEH is a
            coranunity physician employed by the DHA but with specific
            statutory duties which include advice to the local authority on
            environmental health and the control of infectious disease.
            Specialist advice is also available from the medical divisions
            of the DHSS in relation to communicable diseases and the
            microbiology of food and the environment.

      3.3    Appendix 1 is a list of the notifiable diseases in England and
            Wales whilst Appendix 2 shows, in diagrammatic form, the basic
            procedure followed in the community during an outbreak.
            Appendix 3 shows a brief summary of the current position in
            each DHA.

      3.4   The NHS operating through Regional Health Authorities (RHAs) and
            District Health Authorities (DHAs) in England has responsibility
            for the promotion of health and prevention of disease, for
            example through health education programmes, health screening
            and immunisation.

      3.5   A list of Medical Officers Environmental Health/Proper Officers
            is given at Part 4 Emergency Contact List.




                                    46
                                                        APPENDIX 1
                                                        INFECTIOUS DISEASES

  NOTIFIABLE DISEASES IN ENGLAND AND VKLES

Anthrax                                 Opthalmia Neonatorum
Cholera                                 Paratyphoid Fever
Diphtheria                              Plague
Dysentery (amodDic and bacillary)       Poliomyelitis
Encephalitis                            Rabies
Food Poisoning                          Relapsing Fever
Infective Jaundice                      Scarlet Fever
Lassa Fever                             Smallpox
Leprosy                                 Tetanus
Leptospirosis                           Tuberculosis
Malaria                                 Typhoid Fever
Marburg Disease                         Typhus
Measles                                 Viral Haemorrhagic Fever
Meningitis                              Whooping Cough
                                        Yellow Fever
                                                            APPENDIX 2 TO
                                                            INFECTIOUS DISEASES

  PROCEDURE PORING OUTBREAK OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE IN THE (XMttMTry



                       Notification to MoEH from source




     Consultation with                               Seek advice from outside
     Microbiologist and                              experts eg DHSS; CDSC:
     Consultant (Infectious                          Public Health Laboratory,
                 Diseases)                           Collindale




                                    Liaison



    GP               SCM          Director               Environmental
                 (Child Health)     of                   Health Officer
                                  Nursing



PLAN OF ACTION

                                    GP
Immunisation-
                                    SCM (Child Health)


                                    GP
Chemoprophylaxis—
                                    Hospital Consultant


                                    GP

Surveillance-                       Health Visitor

                                    MoEH


                                    Health Visitor

Collection of specimens-            Environmental Health Officer

                                    GP




                                         48
                                                                                                                 INFECTIDUS DISEASES
                                                      OUTBREAKS DF INFECTIDUS DISEASES

District Health   Proper Dfficer     Designation     Control of Infection     Designation of   Action plan for outbreaks of infection
Authority                                            Committee?               Chairman         Community             Hospital


Barnsley          Dr Dddy            SCM             Yes                      Microbiologist   DHSS guidelines          Dwn action plan
                                     Env Health

N Derbyshire      Dr Fearn           SCM             Yes                      Microbiologist   DHSS guidelines          Dwn action plan

S Derbyshire      Dr Sayal           SCM             Yes                      Microbiologist   Dwn                      Dwn
                                     Env Health

Leicester         Dr Morgan          SCM             Yes                      Public Health    Dwn                      Dwn    11      ”
                                     Env Health                               Lab Director

S Lines           Dr   Mcllroy       DMD                                      Consultant       Dwn                      Dwn    "
                  Dr   Whiteley      SCM             Yes                      Microbiologist
                  Dr   Hird          S Clin MD
                  Dr   Loftus        S Clin MD

Sheffield         Dr Todd            DMD              Yes                     Asstn General    DHSS guidelines          Dwn
                                                                              Manager

Rotherham         Dr Mahaderan       SCM              Yes                     Consultant       DHSS guidelines          Dwn    "       11
                                     Env Health                               Microbiologist

N Lines           Dr Jones           DM0              No*                     —
                                                                                               Own                      Own

C Notts           Dr Mousley          DMD             Yes                     being            Dwn                      Own    "       11
                                                                              reconstituted

Nottingham        Dr Mason           SCM              No*                     —                DHSS guidelines          Dwn    "       11

Bassetlaw         Dr Allen            DMD             Yes                     DMD              DHSS guidelines          Dwn    11      11
                                                                                               & own

Doncaster         Dr Stalker          DMD             Yes                     Consultant       Dwn                      Dwn
                                                                              Microbiologist

*   Alternative mechanisms have been established locally.
HELICOPTERS - POLICY AND PROCEDURES

POLICY

4.1   The Department has agreed with the Ministry of Defence that in
      exceptional circumstances and subject to service requirements
      and weather conditions Service helicopters may be used in
      certain areas to carry seriously ill patients for whan no other
      transport is acceptable, to hospital or from one hospital to
      another.

4.2   Requests for helicopter transport, whether Royal Naval or Royal
      Air Force will be co-ordinated by one or other of the two Rescue
      Co-ordination Centres of the Royal Air Force.      These Centres
      are at Pitreavie (Scotland) and Plymouth.    As a rule of thumb
      North of Birmingham, Pitreavie is the responsible centre.

4.3   It is important to appreciate that a charge for helicopter
      journeys is assessed by the Ministry of Defence on the total
       flying time involved.  ie it will include flights to and frcsti
       the aircraft's base.

PROCEDURE

4.4   Requests for helicopters are normally made direct to the Chief
      Ambulance Officer by the Consultant caring for the patient.
      Each Ambulance Service has an internal procedure laid down by
      the RHA/DHA for authorising these requests.

4.5   The request for a helicopter is then made to the:

      Duty Controller, RAF Pitreavie Castle, Fife
      Tel: Dunfermiline (0383) 723436/412161.

         If the request is accepted the Royal Air Force Controller will
         advise Ambulance Control of the estimated time of arrival and of
         any further details concerning the flight.

4.6   Ambulance authorities are responsible for ensuring that adequate
      arrangements are made for a helicopter to land and take off
       (usually in liaison with local Police authorities).     Usually
      such provision will be made in the grounds or the vicinity of
      the sending and receiving hospitals.        Details of hospital
      helicopter landing sites are contained in "Helicopter Landing
      Sites - Hospitals United Kingdom11 (a Royal Air Force Flight
      Information Publication).    A copy of which is held by each
      Ambulance Service.
                      BMERGEMCy COMEftCT LIST




  X   ;' Ambulance Service
         Regional Specialty Centres

        Medical Physics Departments ,
          strict Supplies Officers
        c ity Police Forces
        County Fire Services
I*':"' Hospitals with Major A: & E Departments
        Local Authority County Emergency .Planninc
       Voluntary Aid Societies ,
  ',    Department,of Health and Social Security

       Compression Chambers for the Treatment of
               3sign Sickness

       Helicoptor - Policy and Procedures
PART 4 - FMrayffMCT (XNTftCT LIST
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

Hnmp> TW iectaone Nuntoers o f K ey O ffic e r s in th e R e g k x i
(see page 73 for MoEH/Prqper Officer List)

July 1988

Trent RHA - HQ (0742) 630300                                           Out of Hours

Regional General Manager                    Mr B Edwards
Asst. Regional General Manager
 (Administration)                           Mr F J Kenny
Director of Personnel Services
  and Manpower                              Mr J S George
Regional Medical Officer                    Dr R Alderslade
Regional Health Emergency
  Planning Officer                          Mr J   A Costley
Regional Public Relations Officer           Mr D   Hull
Regional Nursing Officer                    Miss   H Miller
Regional Specialists in                     Dr P   H Snell
  CcOTnunity Medicine                       Dr P   R S Gowers
                                            Dr C   M Marvin

North Derbyshire Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager                    Mr C J M Newton
Consumer and Operation Research
Officer/Deputy District General
 Manager                                    Dr K J Woods
District Treasurer                          Mr M P Stevens
District Personnel Officer                  Mr R G Brookes
Senior Specialist in Community              Vacant
 Medicine

Southern Derbyshire Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager                    Mr B S Blissett
Assistant General Manager                   Mr J F Harding
Director of Personnel Services
 and Manpower                               Mr N Brunson
District Medical Officer                    Dr L M Davies

Leicestershire Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager                    Mr G   A   Cinderby
Director of Finance                         Mr K   R   McLean
Deputy of Administration                    Mr G   S   Oddy
Director of Personnel                       Mr N   C   Seddon
District Medical Officer                    Prof   A   R Buchan

North Lincolnshire Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager                    Mr J R Evans
Deputy District General Manager/
 Director of Patients' Services             Dr J A Birch
Director of Planning and Estates            Vacant



                                                 51
  Director of Personnel and
   Administration                    Mr K Woodall
  District Medical Officer           Dr K E Jones

  South Lincolnshire Health Authority - HQ

 District General Manager         Mr M T         Townson
 Deputy District General Manager/ Mr B M         Mayhew-Smith
 Director of Finance & Management
 Services
 Director of Administration &     Mr M w         Froggatt
 Planning
 District Personnel Officer       Mr P M         Dalton
 District Medical Officer/Head    Dr s S         Mcllroy
  of Clinical Planning
 District Nurse Adviser           Mr c L         Pearce

 Bassetlaw Health Authority - HQ

 District General Manager           Mr J D Weth
 General Administrator              Mr R Cockbum
 District Personnel Officer         Mr P A Lewis
 District Medical Officer           Mr K W Allen
 Acting District Treasurer          Mr K Smith
 Planning Co-ordinator              Mrs B Meeke
 General Services Manager           Mr P E Nesbitt
 District Health Services Manager   Mr R G Batterbury
 District Estates Manager           Mr D Lea

 Central Nottinghamshire Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager            Dr   G B Todd
Assistant General Manager           Mr   I H B Clark
Director of Personnel Services      Mr   R j r Jones
District Medical Officer            Dr   A A Mousley
Director of Finance and of          Mr   C Cooribes
Management Information
Director of Estates Management      Mr M R Morris
Unit General Manager (Priority      Mr D G Brotherhood
Care Unit)

Nottingham Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager            Dr   D    C Banks'
Secretary to the Authority          Mr   K    J Sykes
Director of Personnel               Mr   G    J Smith
Director of Canmunity Medicine      Dr   N    A Miles
Director of Finance                 Mr   D    E Morgan
Director of Nursing Services        Mr   N    Lees

Barnsley Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager            Mr R Ackroyd                *1   T .l.
Director of Manpower, Resources     Mr P c Williams
and Organisation (Deputy DGM)
Director of Corporate Services      Mr R E Hulme
Acting District Medical Officer     Dr H D Bingham




                                         52
Doncaster Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager          Mr   J   M Lusby
Chief Planning Officer            Mr   R   J Booth
Director of Personnel Services    Mr   J   B Brayford
District Medical Officer          Dr   R   Stalker
Chief Nursing Officer             Mr   A   J Cudworth

Rotherham Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager          Mr   E    T   Rees
General Administrator             Mr   R    G   Rees
District Personnel Officer        Mr   S    F   Davies
District Medical Officer          Dr   I    F   Ralph

Sheffield Health Authority - HQ

District General Manager          Mr   A   Mapplebeck
Assistant General Manager         Mr   K   Thornton
District Personnel Officer        Mr   S   G Foden
District Medical Officer -        Dr   J   N Todd


AMBULANCE SERVICE                                        Admin   Control

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
Derbyshire Ambulance Service
Leicestershire Ambulance Service
Lincolnshire Ambulance Service
Nottinghamshire Ambulance Service


RADIATION PROTECTION ADVISERS

see page 10


MEDICAL PHYSICS DEPARTMENTS

see page 11




                                       53
REGIONAL SPECIALTY CENTRES

Neurosurgery                   Sheffield - Royal Hallamshire
                                           Hospital
                               Nottingham - University Hospital

Plastic Surgery/Bums           Leicester - Leicester RI
                               Nottingham - City Hospital
                               Sheffield - Northern General

Thoracic Surgery               Leicester -Grdby Road Hospital
                               Nottingham - City Hospital
                               Sheffield - Northern General

Spinal Injuries Unit           Sheffield - Lodge Moor Hospital


RENAL UNITS

DERBY          Derby City Hospital
               Uttoxeter Road
               Derby DE3 3NE


LEICESTER      Leicester General Hospital
               Area Renal Unit
               Gwendolen Road
               Leicester


NOTTINGHAM     Dialysis Unit
               City Hospital
               Hucknall Road
               Nottingham


SHEFFIELD      Lodge Moor Hospital
               Redmires Road
               Sheffield S10 4LH



INFECTIOUS DISEASES

Nottingham     Dr R G Finch                         University Hospital


Sheffield      Dr M W McKendrick                    Lodge Moor Hospital


Leicester      Dr K G Nicholson                     Grobv Road Hospital




                                         53A
 Regional Conmercial Director - Mr R Beardmore -

 DISTRICT SUPPLIES OFFICERS

BARNSLEY HEALTH AUTHORITY                    NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE HEALTH AUTHORITY
Mr                                           Mr
Supplies Department                          District Supplies Department
118 Gawber Road                              1 St Anne's Road, Annexe
BARNSLEY                                     LINCOLN
S75 2PS                                      LN2 5RA


BASSETLAW HEALTH AUTHORITY                  SOUTH LINCOLNSHIRE HEALTH AUTHORITY
Mr |                                        Mr |
Supplies Department                         Supplies Department
Kilton Hospital                             Council Offices
WORKSOP                                     Eastgate,
S81 OPD                                     SLEAFORD, Lines


NORTH DERBYSHIRE HEALTH AUTHORITY           NOTTINGHAM HEALTH AUTHORITY
Mr |
Supplies Department
Scarsdale Hospital                          Berkeley Avenue
Newbold Road                                NOTTINGHAM
CHESTERFIELD                                NG3 5AF
S41 7PF


SOUTHERN DERBYSHIRE HEALTH AUTHORITY        CENTRAL NOTTS HEALTH AUTHORITY
Mr        H                                 Mr|       ~
Supplies Department                         Supplies Department
Boden House                                 Ransom Hospital
Main Centre                                 Southwell Road West
DERBY                                       MANSFIELD
DEI 2PH                                     NG21 PER



DONCASTER HEALTH AUTHORITY                  ROTHERHAM HEALTH AUTHORITY
Mr                                          Mr I
Supplies Department                         Supplies Department
St Catherine's Hospital                     220 Badsley Moor Lane
Tickhill Road                               ROTHERHAM
Balby                                       S65 2QU_____________
DONCASTER
DN4 80P______


LEICESTERSHIRE HEALTH AUTHORITY             SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY
Mr |                                        Mr |          | (Acting DSO)
Supplies Department                         Supplies Department
Services Unit                               The Firs
Grange Lane                                 Middlewood Hospital
LEICESTER LE2 7EG                           Middlewood Road
                                            SHEFFIELD S6 1TP




                                       54
COUNTY POLICE FORCES

Other telephone numbers will be issued for use by Emergency Organisations at
the time of a Major Disaster Incident.


DERBYSHIRE CONSTABULARY

Headquarters:   Butterley Hall, Butterley, Ripley
                                             Telex Nc

 'A' Divisional Headquarters, Alfreton

 'B' Divisional Headquarters, Buxton

 'C' Divisional Headquarters, Chesterfield

 'DV Divisional Headquarters, Derby


LEICESTERSHIRE CONSTABULARY

Headquarters:   St John's, Narborough, Leicester
                LE9 5BX

Central Divisional Headquarters, Leicester

Eastern Divisional Headquarters, Syston

Northern Divisional Headquarters, Loughborough

Southern Divisional Headquarters, Wigston


LINCOLNSHIRE CONSTABULARY

Headquarters:   Deepdale Lane, Nettleham, Lincoln
                LN5 7PH

North Divisional Headquarters, as above

South Divisional Headquarters, Bourne


NOTTINGHAMSHIRE CONSTABULARY                          _________________

Headquarters: Sherwood Lodge, Arnold, Nottingham
              NG5 8PP

'A' Divisional Headquarters, Mansfield

'B' Divisional Headquarters, Hucknall

'C' Divisional Headquarters, Nottingham

'D' Divisional Headquarters, West Bridgford, Nott'm




                                       55
    SOUTH YORKSHIRE CONSTABULARY

    Headquarters:   Snig Hill, Sheffield S3 8LY

    'A' Divisional Headquarters, Doncaster

    'B' Divisional Headquarters, Barnsley

    'C' Divisional Headquarters, Rotherham

    'D' Divisional Headquarters, Sheffield

-— • 'E' Divisional Headquarters, Sheffield

     F' Divisional Headquarters, Sheffield


    NORTHAMPTONSHIRE CONSTABULARY

    Headquarters: Wootton Hall, Northanpton NN4 OJQ

    'A' Divisional Headquarters, Rushden

    A'K Kettering Sub-Division

    A'C Corby Sub-Division

    A'W Wellingborough Sub-Division

    'B' Divisional Headquarters, Toweester

    B'N Northanpton North Sub-Division

    B'S Northampton South Sub-Division

    B'D Daventry Sub-Division




                                           56
COUNTY FIRE SERVICES ~ 24 HOUR MANNED CONTROL FACILITIES

Other telephone numbers will be issued for use by Emergency Organisations at
the time of a Major Disaster Incident.


DERBYSHIRE FIRE SERVICE

Headquarters: The Old Hall, Burton Road, Littleover
              Derby, DE3 6EH


T.F.TCESTERSHIRE FIRE SERVICE

Headquarters: Anstey Frith, Leicester Road, Glenfielc
              Leicester, LE3 8HD


LINCOLNSHIRE FIRE SERVICE

Headquarters: South Park Avenue, Lincoln LN5 8EL


NOTTINGHAMSHIRE FIRE SERVICE

Headquarters: Bestwood Lodge, Arnold, Nottingham
              NG5 8PD


SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE SERVICE

Headquarters: Fumival House, 42-46 Fumival Gate
              Sheffield SI 4QP


NORTHAMPTONSHIRE FIRE SERVICE

Headquarters: 4/5 Moulton Way, Moulton Park,
              Northanpton NN3 1XJ
LISTED HOSPITALS

Ma.jor Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover



HEALTH AUTHORITY (HA)      HOSPITAL, ADDRESS             LOCATION          TYPE OF SERVICE

DERBYSHIRE

North Oerbyshlre HA       Chesterfield & North           2 miles east of   24 hour + Flying Squad
                          Derbyshire Royal Hospital,     C'field on A632
                          Calow, Chesterfield            C'field to
                          (0246) 77271                   Bolsover Road

Southern Oerbyshlre HA    Oerbyshlre Royal Infirmary,    City Centre       24 hour + Flying Squad
                          London Road, Derby
                          (0332) 47141


LEICESTERSHIRE                                                                                      •
Leicestershire HA         Leicester Royal Infirmary      City Centre       24 hour + Flying Squad
                          (0533) 541414


LINCOLNSHIRE

North Lincolnshire HA     Lincoln County Hospital        City              24 hour + Flying Squad
                          Sewell Road, Lincoln
                          (0522) 512512

South Lincolnshire HA     Pilgrim Hospital               City              24 hour
                          Slbsey Road, Boston
                          (0205) 64801


NOTTINGHAMSHIRE

Bassetlaw HA              Bassetlaw DGH, Worksop         City              24 hour + Flying Squad
                          (0909) 472831

Central Nottinghamshire   Mansfield & District General City                24 hour + Flying Squad
HA                        Hospital
                          (0623) 22515

Nottingham HA             University Hospital, Queen's City                24 hour + Flying Squad
                          Medical Centre, Nottingham
                          (0602) 421421




                                                    58
LISTED HOSPITALS

Ma.ior Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover



HEALTH AUTHORITY (HA)      HOSPITAL, ADDRESS            LOCATION   TYPE OF SERVICE

SOUTH YORKSHIRE

Barnsley                  Barnsley DGH, Gawber Road                24 hour + Flying Squad
                          Barnsley
                          (0226) 286122

Doncaster                 Doncaster Royal Infirmary                24 hour + Flying Squad
                          (0302) 666666

Rotherham                 Rotherham DGH                            24 hour
                          Moorgate Road, Rotherham
                          (0709) 36222

Sheffield                 Royal Hallamshire Hospital               DAY : 0900 - 2000 hours
                          Glossop Road, Sheffield                  + Flying Squad
                          (0742) 766222

Sheffield                  Northern General Hospital               DAY : 0900 - 2000 hours
                           Herrles Road, Sheffield                 + Flying Squad
                           (0742) 434343
                                                                   NIGHT ROTA:
                                                                   Mon - Royal Hal lamshlre
                                                                   Tues - Northern General
                                                                   Wed - Northern .General
                                                                   Thur - Royal Hal lamshlre
                                                                   Fri - Royal Hal lamshire
                                                                   Sat - Northern General
                                                                   Sun - Royal Hal lamshlre




                                                  59
LOCAL AUTHORITY COUNTY EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICERS

DERBYSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

EMERGENCY PLANNING UNIT       (0629) 580000 (ext 7364)         Out of Hours

B Moore                               "

I J Shuttleworth                      "

N Holmes                              "


LEICESTERSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

EMERGENCY PLANNING UNIT       (0533) 871313

Keith Beckwith


LINCOLNSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

EMERGENCY PLANNING UNIT       (0522) 33361
(Fire HQ, South Park, Lincoln)

Divisional Officer T Drayton


NOTTINGHAMSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

EMERGENCY PLANNING UNIT          (0602) 823823 ext 3681/3678

Mr H A Tinsley


SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

EMERGENCY PLANNING UNIT           (0226) 733222

Mr S J Turney
VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES (Britsh Red Cross Society and St John Ambulance)

1.     DERBYSHIRE                               OFFICE          HOME

      British Red Cross Society HQ, Matlock     (0629) 2171/2
      Director:     Col Stannard                    "
      Deputy Director Mrs Thompson                  "
      St John Ambulance County HQ, Matlock      (0629) 55030
                                                    II
      Deputy Commissioner, Mrs P Storer
      County Secretary,    Mrs


      NOTTINGHAMSHIRE

       British Red Cross Society HQ, Nottingham (0602) 789222
       Director, Mrs M L Bexon
       St John Ambulance                        (0602) 470566
       Commissioner, Dr J G Elder


       LEICESTERSHIRE

      British Red Cross   Society               (0533) 705087/705925
      Director,
      Secretary, Lt Col   A Flear
      St John Ambulance   HQ                    (0533 553954
      Commissioner Mr E   E Hudson


      LINCOLNSHIRE

      British Red Cross Society                 (0476) 68378
      Mrs W Stirk
      St John Ambulance                         (0522) 23701
      Commissioner, Mrs A Miles


      SOUTH YORKSHIRE

      British Red Cross Society County HQ       (0742) 660656/662962
      Director, Mr A Hemingway
      St John Ambulance Sheffield HQ            (0742) 55217
      Commissioner, Mr P H Palmer


      NORTHAMPTONSHIRE

      British Red Cross Society                 (0604) 33442
      Director, Wg Cdr J D Jenkinson
      St John Ambulance                         (0604) 33711
      Commissioner, Mrs P A M Sykes




                                     61
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY

Medical Section MCD: Cammunicable Disease

Head of Section            Dr D C Ower            01-407 5522 (ext 7334)

Surveillance and          Dr A Fenton Lewis       01-407 5522 (ext 6850)
control of camrnunica
disease                   Dr Mary Sibellas        01-407 5522 (ext 7340)

Vaccination and           Mr J Bames              01-407 5522 (ext 6493)
Immunisation

After office hours telephone number

Ccaxammicable Disease Surveillance Centre

Public Health Laboratory Service Board, Colindale Avenue
                       London NW9 5EQ

Director                  Dr N S Galbraith                        01-200 6868

Professional Staff        Dr N D Noah                             01-200 6868
                          Dr Susan Young

Microbiological Contamination of Food and the Environment

SMO                Dr Helen Murrell         01-407 5522 (ext 6871)

EHO                Mr                       01-407 5522 (ext 7434)
EHO                Mr                       01-407 5522 (ext 7315)

Medical Division Med TEP: Toxicology and Environmental Pollution

Head of Section                                   01-703 6380 (ext 3334)

Chemical                  Dr J H Steadman         01-703   6380    (ext   3366)
Contamination of          Dr L J Facer            01-703   6380    (ext   4381)
Food Section              Dr Sue Barlow           01-703   6380    (ext   3892)
                          Miss                    01-703   6380    (ext   4586)

Consumer Goods            Dr G N Brown            01-703 6380 (ext 4582)
Section                   Dr R Fielder            01-703 6380 (ext 3891)

Environmental             Dr G K Matthew          01-703   6380    (ext   4583)
Pollution                 Dr S Cromwell           01-703   6380    (ext   4588)
Section                   Mr                      01-703   6380    (ext   3043)
                          Mr                      01-703   6380    (ext   3014)

DHSS - MAJOR DISASTER3 INCIDENT POLICY

                                                  01-407 5522 (ext 6074)
Mrs                     (Administrator)           01 407 5522 (ext 6869)

DHSS - CIVIL DEFENCE POLICY (MED MPO)

Dr Laurence J Martin Hannibal House               01-703 6380 (ext 4517)
Secretary_________                                01-703 6380 (ext 3349)
Mr                 [Administrator)                01;703 6380 (ext 3336)



                                           62
WATER AUTHORITIES

British Waterways Board : 24 hour Emergency Contact
       Area Engineer, 24 Meadow Lane, Nottingham            (0602) 862411
       Emergency Contact, Upper Peak Forest Canal only
       Area Engineer, Northwich                             (0606) 74321


North West Water Authority
       Head Office, Dawson House, Liverpool Road
       Great Sankey, Warrington                             (092 572) 4321
       Easter Division Headquarters (Water Supply and
       Effluent Treatment) Oakland House, Talbot Road
       Old Trafford                                         061 872 5919
       Stockport Distribution District, Borron Street
       Stockport                                            061 477 1100
       Peak Supply & Mersey Effluent Treatment Districts,
       St Petersgate, Stockport                             061 480 6271
       Emergency Numbers
            Eastern Division Central Control                061 370 3155
            Audenshaw Depot (24 hour service)               061 370 2307/2645
       Emergency Contact (Rivers Division)
            River Division Headquarters (River Pollution
            and Flood Warning)
            PO Box 12, Buttermarket Street, Warrington      (0925) 53999

If no reply, or outside working hours, telephone Eastern Division Central
Control; ask for Duty Flood Warning Engineer or River Inspector.

Severn Trent Water Authority
       Abelson House, 2297 Coventry Road, Sheldon          021 743 4222
       Birmingham
       County Water Liaison Officer & Emergency Number
       B Bowker, Operations Controller (Systems/Co-ordination)
       Derwent Division, Raynesway, Derby DE2 7JA           (0332) 661481

       Derwent Division                                     (0332) 661481
       Raynesway
       Derby DE2 7JA

       Lower Trent Division                                 (0602) 608161
       Mapperley Hall
       Lucknow Avenue
       Nottingham NG3 5BN

      SOAR Division                                         (0533) 352011
      Leicester Water Centre
      Gorse Hill
      Anstey
      Leicestershire LE7 7GU

Yorkshire Water Authority

      West Riding House, 67 Albion Street, Leeds            (0532) 448201

      Divisional Headquarters & Emergency Number
      Southern Division, Castle Market Buildings,
      Exchange Street, Sheffield                            (0742) 26421



                                     63
     USE OF CCMPRESSICW CHAMBERS FOR THE TRBMOMEWT OF DBC3CMPRESSICW SICKNESS


1.         The Arm/ Diving School has now closed and has moved to join the Navy
          at HMS Vernon.

2.        The current telephone numbers are:

          (a)   Emergencies: 0705 (Portsmouth) 818 888 ask for Duty Diving
                Officer HMS Vernon.

          (b)   Calls of a lesser priority: 0705 (Portsmouth) 822 351 ask for
                Duty Diving Officer - HMS Vernon

It should be noted that the RAF has a Hyperbaric Oxygen Chamber at
Princess Alexander's RAF Hospital, Wroughton on 0793 (Swindon) 812 291.




                                        64
 pwrrrnMAT. RTDDD TRANSFUSION! SERVICE

Longley Lane, Sheffield S5 7JN                (0742) 424242




  HELICOPTER

RAF Pitreavie Castle, Dunfermline, Fife       (0383) 723436/
(North of Birmingham:)                               412161


Rescue Co-ordination Centre, Plymouth         (0752) 562445
(South of Birmingham)




                                         65
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

DESIGNATED PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICERS


                                                           PROPER OFFICER                  ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
DISTRICT HEALTH    LOCAL AUTHORITY                                                                                                EMERGENCY CONTACT
AUTHORITY          DISTRICT          OFFICE ADDRESS               HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS                    HOME ADDRESS


North Derbyshire   Bolsover                                  The MoEH                                        Dr H I Lockett       Chesterfield Royal
                   Chesterfield      Scarsdale Hospital                          Scarsdale Hospital                               Hospital
                   High Peak         Newbold Road                                Newbold Road
                   North East        Chesterfield                                Chesterfield                                     (0246) 77271
                    Derbyshire       Derbyshire S41 7PF                          Derbyshire
                   West Derbyshire                                               S41 7PF
                     (North)          (0246) 31255
                                                                                 (0246) 31255



North              East Lindsey                              Dr K E Jones                                    Dr A Loftus
Lincolnshire                         Cross D'Cliff Court                         The Clinic
                                     Bracebridge Heath                           Cecil Avenue
                                     Lincoln                                     Skegness
                                                                                 Lines

                                     (0522) 32321                                (0754) 4636/2574

                   Lincoln City                              Dr K E Jones                               Dr     M S Blackbourn
                   West Lindsey      as above                                    Cross O'Cl iff Court
                                                                                 Bracebridge Heath
                                                                                 Lincoln

                                      (0522) 32321                               (0522) 32321

Nottingham         Broxtowe                                Dr K D Mason                                  Dr T M Phelps            Nottingham Amb
                   Nottingham City   Community Unit                              Forest House                                     Control HQs
                   Rushcliffe        Memorial House                              Berkeley Avenue                                  Beechdale Road
                                     General Hospital                            Nottingham NG3 5AF                               Aspley
                                     Standard Hill                                                                                Nottingham
                                     Nottingham ^ 1 6HA
                                     (0602) 4 1 5 3 0                            (0602) 691691                                    (0602) 296451/2
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

DESIGNATED PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICERS


                                                          PROPER OFFICER                   ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
DISTRICT HEALTH   LOCAL AUTHORITY                                                                                            EMERGENCY CONTACT
AUTHORITY         DISTRICT           OFFICE ADDRESS              HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS                HOME ADDRESS


Nottingham        Broxtowe                                                      and
  (continued)     Nottingham City                                               County Hall
                  Rushcliffe                                                    West Bridgford
                                                                                Nottingham NG2 7QP

                                                                                (0602) 823823
                  Gedl ing                            Dr J Goldsbrouah                               Dr J S Drummond
                                     Council House
                                     Carlton Square
                                     Carl ton
                                     Nottingham NG4 3DN

                                     (0602) 614084

Rotherham         Rotherham                              Dr S Mahadevan                              Dr Y S Kaplan
                                     Oakwood Hall                               Ferham House                                 Rotherham District
                                     Moorgate Road                              Kimberworth Road                             General Hospital
                                     Rotherham S60 2UN                          Rotherham
                                                                                                                             (0709) 362222
                                                                                (0709) 364082
                                     (0709) 362222

                                                                                                     Dr P K Popat
                                                                                as above
     TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

     CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

     DESIGNATED PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICERS


                                                                PROPER OFFICER                  ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
     DISTRICT HEALTH    LOCAL AUTHORITY                                                                                          EMERGENCY CONTACT
     AUTHORITY          OISTRICT          OFFICE ADDRESS               HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS              HOME ADDRESS



     Sheffield          Sheffield                               Dr J N Todd                                  Dr G Thoms          On Call MO
                                          Environ Health Dept                         Westbrook House                            9am-5pm Mon-Fri
                                          Town Hall Chambers                                                                     Westbrook House
                                          1 Barker's Pool                                                                        Swi tchboard
                                          SHEFFIELD SI 1AY                                                                       (0742) 670333
                                                                                      (0742) 670333
                                          (0742) 734644/5                                                                        5pm-10pm Mon-Fri
                                          or 734611 - 734614                                                                     9am-10pm weekends
                                                                                      Registrars may be available - enquire at   + Bank Holidays
cn                                        Westbrook House                             670333.   Home phone nos: |                Bed Bureau
oo
                                          Sharrow Vale Road                                            Dr Milner                 Nether Edge Hospit
                                          Sheffield Sll 8EU                                            Dr Page                   (0742) 554355
                                                                                                       Dr Watts
                                          (0742) 670333                                                                          10pm-9am Every
                                                                                                                                  Night
                                                                                                                                 Bed Bureau
                                                                                                                                 Lodge Moor Hospit
                                                                                                                                 (0742) 630222
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

DESIGNATED PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICERS


                                                        PROPER OFFICER                   ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
 DISTRICT HEALTH   LOCAL AUTHORITY                                                                                        EMERGENCY CONTACT
 AUTHORITY         DISTRICT           OFFICE ADORESS           HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS               HOME ADDRESS


 Southern          Amber Valley                          Dr C Sayal                                Dr L C Jayasinghe      Ambulance Control
 Derbyshire        Derby City         4th Floor                               4th Floor                                   Kingsway Hospital
                   Erewash            Boden House                             Boden House                                 Kingsway
                   South Derbyshire   Main Centre                             Main Centre                                 Derby
                   West Derbyshire    Derby DEI 2PH                           Derby DEI 2PH
                     (South)                                                  (0332) 363971                               (0332) 365831
                                      (0332) 363971                           Ext 268
                                      Ext 269
                                                                                                     Dr L M Davies
                                                                              5th Floor
                                                                              Boden House
                                                                              Main Centre
                                                                              Derby DEI 2PH

                                                                              (0332) 363971

                                                                                                     Dr D S G Sloan
                                                                              as above




                                                                                                     Dr S Ravindra
                                                                              as above
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

DESIGNATED PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICERS


                                                        PROPER OFFICER                  ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
DISTRICT HEALTH    LOCAL AUTHORITY                                                                                         EMERGENCY CONTACT
AUTHORITY          DISTRICT          OFFICE ADDRESS            HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS                HOME ADDRESS


South              Boston Borough                       Dr V Parker                                   Dr G Hird
Lincolnshire       South Holland     Council Offices                          Boston Health Clinic
                                     Eastgate                                 Lincoln Lane
                                     Sleaford, Lines                          Boston
                                     NG34 7EB
                                     (0529) 303241                            (0205) 60880

                   North Kesteven                       Dr V Parker                                   Dr S S Mcllroy
                                     as above                                 Council Offices
                                                                              Eastgate
                                                                              Sleaford
                                                                              Lines    NG34 7EB

                                     (0529) 303241                            (0529) 303241

                  South Kesteven                        Dr V Parker                                  Dr A E White!ey
                                     as above                                 Council Dffices
                                                                              Eastgate
                                                                              Sleaford, Lines

                                     (0529) 303241                            (0529) 303241
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE OISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

DESI6NATE0 PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICFRS


                                                         PROPER OFFICER                   ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
DISTRICT HEALTH   LOCAL AUTHORITY
AUTHORITY                                                                                                                  EMERGENCY CONTACT
                  DISTRICT           OFFICE ADDRESS             HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS               HOME ADDRESS

Barnsley          Barnsley           Dr C G Oddy                                                       Dr L Raj an         Barnsley District
                                     Hillder House                             New Street Clinic                           General Hospital
                                     49/51 Gawber Road                         Barnsley
                                     Barnsley S75 2PY                                                                      (0226) 286122
                                                                               (0226) 286122
                                     (0226) 286122

                                                                                                    Dr K Balachandran
                                                                               as above




                                                                                                     Dr S D Burgul
                                                                               as above




                                                                                                     Dr E John
                                                                               as above




Bassetlaw         Bassetlaw                           Or K W Allen
                                    Environmental Health Dept
                                    Queen's Buildings
                                    Potter Street
                                    Worksop, Notts
                                    (0909) 475531
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

CONTROL OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING

DESIGNATED PROPER OFFICERS AND ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICERS


                                                           PROPER OFFICER                  ALTERNATIVE PROPER OFFICER(S)
 DISTRICT HEALTH   LOCAL AUTHORITY                                                                                          EMERGENCY CONTACT
 AUTHORITY         DISTRICT            OFFICE ADDRESS             HOME ADDRESS   OFFICE ADDRESS              HOME ADDRESS


 Central           Ashfield                                Dr A A Mousley                            Dr R K Machell         Kings Mill
 Nottinghamshire   Mansfield           Ransom Hospital                           Ransom Hospital                            Hospital
                   Newark              Rainworth                                 Rainworth
                                       Mansfield                                 Mansfield                                  (0623) 22515
                                       Notts                                     Notts


                                       (0623) 24591                              (0623) 22515

 Doncaster         Doncaster                               Dr R Stalker                            Dr 0 C Furlong           Doncaster Royal
                                       York House                                Child Health                               Infirmary
                                       Cleveland Street                          Queervsgate
                                       Doncaster DN1 3EJ                         Doncaster                                  (0302) 666666

                                       (0302) 67051                              (0302) 20111

 Leicestershire    Blaby                                   Dr G Morgan                                                      Ambulance Control
                   Leicester City      Leicester Royal Infirmary
                   Oadby and Wigston   Oxford Street
                   Hinckley and        Leicester                                                                            (0533) 549711
                     Bosworth          LEI 5WW
                   North West
                    Leicester          (0533) 541414
                   Charnwood           ext 5294
                   Harborough
                   Melton
                   Rut!and
REFERENCES


1.    The County Council Peacetime Major Disaster Plan
2.    Health Service Arrangements for Dealing with Major Accidents I K (77)1
      DHSS 1977
3.    Health Service Arrangements for Dealing with Major Accidents (Nuclear
      Installations) (Supplement) HC(85)24 DHSS 1985
4.    Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures - Trent RHA March 1985
5.    National Arrangements for Incidents Involving Radioactivity (NAIR
      Setae) H C (76)52 DHSS1976
6.    Listed Hospital Plan
7.    Ambulance Service Plan
8.    Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards (CIMAH) Regulations
      HMG 1984
9.    Notification of Installation Handling Hazardous Substances (NIKS)
      Regulations 1982 HMG 1.1.83
10.   Guide to Major Incident Management - The British Association for
       Immediate Care -1985
11.   Emergency Planning Guidance to Local Authorities - Heme Office 1985
12.   Emergencies at Nuclear Sites - A Handbook for Medical Personnel
      CEGB December 1986




                                    73
           TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY




          GUIDELINES
              ON
  MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES




1. THIS HANDBOOK IS A SUMMARY OF THE PROCEDURAL ARRANGEMENTS
   FOR DEALING WITH MAJOR ACCIDENTS. IT IS INTENDED TO PROVIDE
   BASIC GUIDANCE ANDTOSERVE AS AUNIVERSAL REFERENCE WITHIN
   THE TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY (T.R.H.A.).

2. THE GENERICTERM'MAJOR ACCIDENT1 IS TAKEN TO EMBRACE ANY
   ACCIDENT, INCIDENT OR DISASTER RESULTING INA LARGE NUMBER OF
   CASUALTIES AND INVOLVINGTHE AMBULANCE, POLICE, FIRE AND
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
       ' ry;".
::rJ             )   .. ,.
Suggestions for inclusion or corrections to this document should
addressed to:


         Mr J A Costley
         Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
         Trent Regional Health Authority
         Fulwood House
         Old Fulwood Road
         SHEFFIELD
          S10 3TH


          TN    Sheffield (0742) 306511



                              AMENDMENT RECCRD




               AMENDMENT NO    DATE       AMENDED BY   DATE




MAPAAD                            ( i)
DISTRIBUTION LIST

DHSS
Regional General Manager
Regional Medical Officer TRHA HQ
Assistant Regional General Manager (Admin)
Corporate Planning Manager TRHA
Regional Public Relations Officer TRHA HD
Specialists in Ccnmunity Medicine TRHA H3
District General Managers TRHA
District Medical Officers TRHA
Chief Ambulance Officers TRHA
All A & E Consultants in TRHA
Standards Group TRHA
Regional General Manager Yorkshire RHA
Regional General Manager Oxford RHA
Regional General Manager East Anglia RHA
Regional General Manager North Western RHA
Regional General Manager West Midlands RHA
Chief Constable    South Yorkshire
                   Derbyshire
                   Nottinghamshire
                   Leicestershire
                   Lincolnshire
Chief Fire Officer South Yorkshire
                   Derbyshire
                   Nottinghamshire
                   Leicestershire
                   Lincolnshire
British Red Cross and St John Ambulance Brigade H3 in:
                   South Yorkshire
                   Derbyshire
                   Nottinghamshire
                   Leicestershire
                   Lincolnshire
County Emergency Planning Officers (Local Authorities) in
                   South Yorkshire
                   Derbyshire
                   Nottinghamshire
                   Leicestershire
                   Lincolnshire

Health and Safety Executive (as appropriate)
Others as appropriate




MAPAAD                           (ii)
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

                                                           SECTION       PAGE

Preface                                                       1             1-2

Health Service Arrangements for Dealing with                   2            3-11
Major Accidents

Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards                   3          12 - 15
Regulations 1984

incidents Involving Dangerous Chemicals                        4          16 - 27

incidents Involving Radioactivity                              5          18 - 22

Incidents at Civil Nuclear Installations                       6          23 - 25

Hospital Treatment of Acute Poisoning                          7          26 - 29

Arrangements for liaison with the media                        8          30 - 36

Annex A - Listed Hospitals - Major Accident and
          Emergency Departments Providing 24 hour
          cover

Annex B - Definitions and Terminology for Major
          Accident Procedures

Appendices

1 to    Section     5     -     Guidance for Hospital Staff and Ambulance
                   Crews Who May Need to Deal with Casualties
                   Contaminated by Lew level Radioactive
                   Substances

1 to Section 6 - Advice to General Practitioners in the event
                 of a Civil Nuclear Emergency

 1 to   Sect.ion    7     -     National Poisons Information Service -
                   Guy's Hospital Guidelines for Users

 1 to   Section     8     -       Checklist to a Major Accident or Emergency




 MAPAAD                              (iii)
                                                              SECTION 1


                    TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

                       MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

                                PREFACE

INTRODUCTION
1.   The guidance for health service arrangements for dealing with Major
      Accidents iscontained in DHSS circular HC(77)1 supplemented by
      HC(85)24.

2.   There is no standard definition of a "Major Accident" which would
     satisfy the Health Service, the Emergency Services and the Local
     Authorities; each tends to look at such incidents from the point o£
     view of its cwn responsibilities.

3.   Where the nature of the occurrence is such that it has widespread
      effects on the canmunity, eg a number of people requiring
      evacuation or rendered homeless, it will be necessary for local
      authorities to implement their emergency plans in accordance with
      current Hare Office guidance. In these circumstances co-ordination
      of arrangements will be the responsibility o£ the appropriate Local
      Authority.

4.   It is the responsibility of District Health Authorities (DHA) to
     ensure that the Major Accident Plan in their respective District is
      kept up-to-date; this includes the ambulance service Eor which they
     may have responsibility.    As a contribution to the overall plan,
     each hospital with an Accident and Emergency Department should
      produce its own internal plan, in consultation with the District
      Executive Team (DET).

5.   This handbook is a summary of the procedural arrangements Eor
      dealing with Major Accidents, it is intended to provide basic
      guidance and to serve as a universal reference within the Trent
     Regional Health Authority (TRHA).

HOSPITAL MAJOR DISASTER PLAN

6.   A Major Accident is a complex problem and planning requires:-


      1.   A simple approach (not a solution).

      2.   Ongoing reviews, particularly after an incident to assess the
            lessons learned.

      3.   Co-qperation between the emergency services (Police, Fire and
           Ambulance) and hospitals.

7.   It is reccmrended that preparation of the hospital Major Accident
      plan should be accomplished by a small select interested group and



MAPAAD                           _   1 _
      when in "Draft" given to the appropriate medical committee for
      content etc.

AIM

8.    The aim should be to produce a brief but ccnprehensive document
      which all relevant      staff must read on appointment         (and
      periodically) and sign as having read.        It should include a
      personal "ACTION LIST" for each key member of staff and this should
      contain a list of key telephone numbers.

OBJECTIVES

9.    In a Major Accident resulting in a large number of live casualties
      the objectives are to:

      (1)    Mobilise hospital staff.

      (2)    Prepare wards and departments at the hospital to receive and
             treat casualties.

      (3)    Ensure effective arrangements for co-ordination and control
             of services, both at the hospital and at the site of the
             accident.

      (4)    Maintain essential communications      between the various
             agencies of the Health Service and other public services.

      (5)    Cope with the    public response, such as    enquiries   fran
             relatives, the    news media, and offers     of help     frcm
             volunteers.

EXERCISES

10. To ensure that plans will work as efficiently and smoothly as
    possible, practise of the important elements of the local Major
    Accident plan is necessary and new staff should receive instruction
    on it as soon as practicable.      Joint exercises may be held in
    consultation with the other emergency services and, where
    appropriate, health authorities should take the initiative in
    suggesting exercises.     Frequent full scale exercises are not
    essential but key elements of the plan, particularly the
    communications and ambulance aspects, should be tested at, say, six
    monthly intervals and where practicable key site personnel should
    have the opportunity to participate.

11. Plans should be reviewed as necessary in the          light of    such
    exercises and staff informed of any changes.

12. It is a requirement that two copies of each plan should be supplied
    to the RHA for use by the Regional General Manager and the Regional
    Medical Officer.




MAPAAD                             -    2 -
                                                                 SECTION 2


HEALTH SERVICE flRRANCTIMENTS FCR DEALING WITH MAJCR ACCIDENTS

REFERENCE.     HEALTH CIRCULAR ~ HC(77)1

introduction

1.   HC(77)1: Advises Health Authorities on health service arrangements
      for dealing with Major Accidents andexpands previous guidance in
      the light of NHS reorganisation and the experience gained fran
      national and international major disasters.

2.   For health service purposes a Major Accident is one which because
     of the number and severity of live casualties, requires special
     arrangements by the health service to deal with it. The generic
     term 'Major Accident' is taken to embrace any accident, incident or
     disaster resulting in a large number of casualties and involving
     the Ambulance, Police, Fire and Emergency Medical Services.

ROLE CF THE REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY (RHA)

3.   The role of the RHA is to:-

      (1)    Ensure that plans are prepared by the District Health
             Authorities and Ambulance Services throughout the Region to
             deal with "Major Accidents".

      (2)    Co-ordinate and advise on such plans and generally monitor
             standards of service.

      (3)    Consult with appropriate bodies to prepare and keep up to
             date a list      of hospitals with accident and emergency
             departments which are suitable for designation to receive
             casualties on      a 24 hour basis; detailing the broad
             geographical area they are intended to cover and their
             capacity to deal with casualties in relation to the nature of
             predominant injury sustained.     Copies of this list (Annex
             'A') will be      provided to District Health Authorities,
             Ambulance Controls, Hospitals, Police and Fire Services in
             the Region and others as appropriate.

PLANNING BY DISTRICT HEALTH AUTHORITIES (DHA)

4.   Taking account of regional guidelines each DHA should draw up a
     plan for their District, with the participation of the District
     Executive Team, Unit General Managers and the Ambulance Service,
     consulting as necessary the Family Practitioner Canmittee,
     neighbouring DHAs, Local Authorities, Police and Fire Services,
     British Telecom, the Armed Services and any other appropriate
     statutory or voluntary body (eg Health and Safety Executive).
     These plans should include arrangements to cover:-

      (1)    Good conmunications at         the   site of a Major Accident
             between the site and           the    hospitals involved. The



MAPAAD                              - 3 -
            organisation of this would rest with the Ambulance Service.

     (2)    The role of general practitioners at the site of the incident
            (particularly where there are GP Iimnediate-care schemes or
            other local arrangements in the area), in health centres and
            at hospitals

     (3)    The role of conmunity physicians

     (4)    The role of community based staff and the procedures for
             alerting them

     (5)    The role of the St John Ambulance, the British Red Cross
             Society, the Women's Royal Voluntary Service and other
             voluntary organisations, taking into account their plans for
             mobilization.   It should be noted that voluntary Ambulance
             resources would cone under the direction of the Chief
             Ambulance Officer.

     (6 )   Details of installations in the area, such as airports, oil
             installations, chemical plants etc,      which are known to
             constitute special risks.    The Health and Safety Executive
             and the Local Authorities have identified facilities where
             hazards exist (see Section 3).       They record and maintain
             details which include the following: -

            a.   nature of risk

            b.   names, addresses and telephone numbers       (business and
                  home) of key staff

            c.   access points

            d.   location of medical and first aid roans

            e.   emergency services marshalling points

            f.   any special arrangements made by the organisation to
                  deal with major disasters

     (7)    Arrangements for securing help and support fran neighbouring
             authorities especially for the ambulance service.

5.   District ffealth Authorities should ensure that

     (1 )   each non-metropolitan ambulance service has       a   plan    for
            mobilizing in the event of a Major Accident.

     (2 )   each listed hospital has its own internal plan.

6.   Review.   DHA plans for dealing with Major Accidents should be
     reviewed annually and tested regularly in collaboration with the
     principal officers of the local emergency services. This should be



MAPAAD                            - 4 -
      regarded as one of the primary administrative responsibilities of
      appropriate District and Unit Officers.

7.    Familiarisation of Staff with Plans. It is of vital importance
      that key members of staff and their nominated deputies at each
       listed hospital (Annex 'A')      are fully conversant with their
       individual roles for dealing with Major Accidents. In view of the
       staff changes that can occur, there should be a positive means to
       confirm staff familiarity with plans.

ATERTING     PROCEDURES
8.    initial Notification.      The   initial notification of a Major
       Accident or Emergency, is likely to be an emergency 999 call to the
       Police.   Established control room procedures of the Police, Fire
       Brigade and Ambulance Service ensure that each service is alerted
       regardless of the initial routing of the emergency/999 call.      It
       should be noted that the Police assume overall ccramand at the
       scene although in certain circumstances ccntnand can be passed to
       the Fire Service.

9.    Hospital Alerting

      Should a hospital receive the initial call their immediate actions
      must be to notify Ambulance Control followed by the A & E
      Department.

       (1)     Designated Hospital.     It is the responsibility of the
               Ambulance Service to determine the nearest "listed" hospital
               to the accident site (see Annex 'A') which is to become the
               DESIGNATED HOSPITAL. The Ambulance Service is responsible
               for alerting the Designated Hospital and for notifying the
               Police and Fire Brigade of the hospital selected.         In
               co-operation with adjacent Health Authorities and Ambulance
               Services this could be a listed hospital within an adjacent
               Regional Health Authority boundary.

       (2)     Supporting Hospital.         Dependent on circumstance, at the
               outset of an emergency or subsequently when an appreciation
               of the situation has been made at the major accident site,
               the Ambulance Service will be responsible for nominating and
               activating one or more "listed" hospitals as SUPPORTING
               H O S P T T A tfi to the Designated Hospital in dealing with
               casualties from the Major Accident. This will include close
               liaison with adjacent Ambulance Services to determine the
               need to use the listed hospitals in their area of
               responsibility if required.

NOTIFICATION CP RHA AND DHA OFFICERS

10.    Notification of DHA Officers. The Ambulance Service will notify
       the appropriate District Officers in accordance with local
       instructions.



MAPAAD                               - 5 -
11. Notification of RHA Officers.       The appropriate District Officer
    vail be responsible for informing Regional Officers, during and
    after normal office hours, when any hospital in their District has
    been alerted to receive casualties fran a Major Accident.       They
    will also notify these Officers when hospitals are released fran
     the alert, at the sane time furnishing details of the number of
     casualties admitted arid the number treated and discharged, i

TRTEPHCME ARRANGEMENTS

12. priority. There is no means to control dialled telephone calls to
     achieve priority in service.    However, by dialing 100 British
    Telecomm Telephone Exchange Operators will accord priority to the
     connection of calls when the prefix "THIS IS A DISTRESS CALL" is
     used.  All listed Hospitals are to be made aware in local plans of
     this priority procedure.

13.   telephone Numbers. A directory of telephone numbers which may be
      required in an emergency should be maintained at each Ambulance
      Service Control and at each Listed Hospital.

14.   Liaison with British T e l e c o m . District Officers should liaise
      with their local British Telecanm Telephone Area Manager (contact
      details given in local Telephone Directories) to ascertain:

      (1)   The point of contact to obtain any assistance required in
            telephone services in an emergency.

      (2)   Any special local arrangements.

Ex-Directory Line in Accident & Emergency (A&E) Department

15.   Consideration should be given to the need for an ex directory line
      to be available in A & E Departments for priority and emergency use
      of staff seeking advice or information as a result of an incident.

MAJOR ACCIDENT SITE PROCEDURES

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER

16.   Provision. If requested by the Ambulance Service a Hospital Flying
      Squad would be dispatched to the scene.   The senior person on the
      medical team will evaluate the situation and this will include a
      request for a Site Medical Officer if required, otherwise the
      Senior tfedical member of the Flying Squad should act as the site
      medical officer.

17.   Site Contacts and Location.    On arrival at the site the Site
      Medical Officer must contact the Ambulance Incident Officer and
      will   normally    locate himself  at   the  Ambulance   tfedical
      Communications Point.

18.   Responsibilities.   The Site Medical Officer is responsible for:-



MAPAAD                             -   6 -
      (1)     Formulating a casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with
              the AMBULANCE INCIDENT OFFICER.

      (2)     A rra n g in g fo r th e a tte n d a n c e o f fu r th e r m e d ic a l and n u rs in g
              tpamg i f re q u ire d eg to d e a l w ith tra p p e d c a s u a ltie s e tc .

19.   id e n tify in g A cco u trem en ts.        An id e n tify in g flu o re s c e n t ja c k e t o r
      cim i la r s h o u ld b e p r o v id e d fo r th e S ITE MEDICAL OFFICER, fro m s ta re s
      a v a ila b le on s it e in th e AMBULANCE SERVICE MAJCR DISASTER V E H IC IE .

HOSPITAL FLYING SQUAD

20.   Provision.  The Hospital Flying Squad consists of a Mobile tfedical
      and Nursing or Mobile Surgical and Resuscitation Team which m y be
      provided either by the designated hospital or a supporting
      hospital.   The activation of the team will normally be via the
      Ambulance Service radio communications system.              y

21.   Transport.   Nornally  the Ambulance Service will send an ambulance
      to the hospital to convey the Flying Squad and their equipment to
      the site as appropriate to local arrangements, however, some teams
      have their own special transport.

22.   Equipment.     It is imperative that the equipment, clothing and
      footwear set aside for the Flying Squad is checked periodically to
      confirm serviceability, suitability and the maintenance of correct
      scvQ gfi of provision.The drugs to be taken by the       team must be
      regularly turned-over     and readily available forissue as should an
      appropriate amputation pack.

S ITE CASUALTY CLEARING STATION

23.   P ro v is io n . The s it e C a s u a lty C le a rin g S ta tio n w i ll be e s ta b lis h e d
      by th e Am bulance In c id e n t O ffic e r ,           n o rm a lly a d ja c e n t to    th e
      Am bulance and M e d ic a l Com m unications P o in t.

24.   F u n c tio n .  A ll c a s u a ltie s w i l l be c h a n n e lle d th ro u g h th e C a s u a lty
      C le a rin g S ta tio n w hich w i l l a c t a s a f i l t e r to e n su re am bulance
      p r io r it y is g iv e n to th e s e rio u s ly in ju r e d , p a r tic u la r ly th o s e
      re q u irin g l i f e    s a v in g s u rg e ry . A ll c a s u a ltie s h an d led by th e
      C a s u a lty C le a rin g S ta tio n sh o uld be la b e lle d by a tr a in e d p erso n
      befo r e b e in g s e n t to h o s p ita l and d e ta ils o f tre a tm e n t g iv e n a t th e
       s it e sh ou ld be re c o rd e d on th e la b e l.

TRAPPED CASUALTIES

25.   Rescue.    The SENIOR FIRE OFFICER present is responsible for
       initiating the rescue plan.   The co-ordination of the rescue
      activities shall be a joint function of the Police, Fire and
      Ambulance Services.

26.   Where casualties are trapped a nedical and nursing team consisting
      of a minimum of an experienced doctor and senior "suitably trained"



MAPAAD                                        - 7-
        nurse will need to be provided to give intravenous fluids,
        administer entenox, stop bleeding and maintain an airway etc. This
        will be in addition to the site casualty clearing station functions
        which will also require the presence of medical and nursing staff.

raERCTKTY M3RTUARY AND DISPOSAL OF THE DEM)

2 7 .   Responsibility.      Emergency  mortuary   arrangements,   including
        disposal of the dead will be the responsibility of the POLICE.

ASSISTANCE OFFERED BY VOLUNTARY BODIES OK S ITE

28.     Reporting.   Members of the St John Ambulance, British Red Cross
        Society and Wbmen's Royal Voluntary Organisation arriving at the
        scene of a Major Accident should report to their respective Senior
        Officer who will be positioned in the vicinity of the AMBULANCE AND
        MEDICAL COMMUNICATIONS POINT.

29.     Duties.   The Senior Officers of the Voluntary Aid Societies will
        assign their members to duties in accordance with the directions
        issued by the AMBULANCE INCIDENT OFFICER.

30.     Liaison.    There should be recognition of the importance o f
        consultation with Voluntary Aid Societies and the Armed Services in
        the   early  stages   of  contingency   planning and periodically
        thereafter when reviewing and revising plans.

 31.    Stretcher Bearers.   Generally, hospitals will prefer to use their
        own staff and medical students as stretcher bearers since they are
        familiar with the procedures and layout of the hospital.

PTTRTVING HOSPITAL PROCEDURES

CASUALTY ARRIVAL PROCEDURE

 32.    Accommodation. When dealing with a large influx of casualties from
        a Major Accident separate accommodation should be allocated where
        possible for the reception of STRETCHER and WALKING CASES.

 33.    Unloading. An AMBULANCE OFFICER should supervise the unloading of
        casualties and quick turn round of ambulances and equipment.

 34.    Labelling.   On arrival at the receiving hospital a casualty label
        should be affixed to ALL casualties, irrespective of whether they
        have been labelled at the major accident site. The hospital label
        shall formthe basis of the         permanent 'Case Notes' of each
        casualty.    It     is recommended that labels should be numbered
        consecutively to provide a tally of casualties and eliminate the
        risk of lost casualties.

 35.    stretcher Bearers.  The District Officers should ensure that the
        DHA plans cover arrangements for the speedy organisation of an
        adequate number of stretcher bearing parties at the site.    All



 MAPAAD                             -   8 -
        p la n s    sh o uld       in c lu d e   a   system   w hereby   v o lu n te e rs ,   and   w here
        applicable lo c a lly a v a ila b le Armed S e rv ic e p e rs o n n e l, can be c a lle d
        upon to p ro v id e s tre tc h e r b e a re rs a t th e s it e .

in f o r m a t io n c e n tr e s


36.     provision.     It will be necessary to establish a HOSPITAL
        INFORMATION CENTRE at each receiving hospital with a senior officer
        trained in handling the media and in matters of confidentiality,
        specifically designated to deal with press and other enquiries.
        This is dealt with in note detail under Section 8 'Arrangements for
        Liaison with the Media'.   Additionally, accommodation must be made
        available for the POLICE DOCUMENTATION TEAM (car Police Liaison
        Officer) and to assist their CASUALTY EN3UIRY BUREAU, which would
        be located at Police Headquarters.

37.     Pacnaitv Enquiry Bureau. The Police Casualty Enquiry Bureau will
        be established upon the authority of the Senior Police Officer at
        the scene of the accident - dependant upon the size, number of
        casualties etc.   A telephone number (with up to 10 lines) will be
        released to the general public, to which all enquiries shculd be
        directed. The location of the bureau will not be released in order
        to prevent unnecessary personal callers iitpeding the operational
        effectiveness of the facility.

38.      As far as casualty injuries are concerned,                         the bureau will only
         require to know whether a person is:-

                   Dead
                   Injured and detained (for treatment or observation)
                   Injured not detained
                   Uninjured

39. These details will be passed via two dedicated telephones at the
    bureau frcm the receiving hospital(s) and duplicated by caird (G300)
    conveyed by Police Motorcyclist frcm the hospital to the bureau.

 40.     Messages regarding the death of a casualty will be delivered
         personally to relatives by a Police Officer and not passed to them
         by telephone.                                           x»k

 41.     Location.   The roans allocated for the HOSPITAL INFORMATION CENTRE
         and POLICE DOCUMENTATION TEAM should be located where possible in
         the vicinity of the Accident arid Emergency Department.  Both rooms
         must be equipped with telephones and the police notified of the
         telephone numbers which would be used.

 42.     Liaison. District Officers should decide, in consultation with the
         local Senior Police Officer, to whom and where nembers of the
         POLICE DOCUMENTATION TEAM should report in the event of any
         hospital in their district being alerted to receive casualties fran
         a Major Accident.




 MAPAAD                                               - 9 -
HOSPITAL SOCIAL WORKERS

43.    It should be recognised that hospital social workers will have a
       role in a Major Accident involving large numbers rf casualties.
       This would be particularly so if families vere involved and several
       hospitals were designated to receive casualties with the
       possibility of split families etc.

44.    Listed hospitals should ensure that local plans identify the
       principal or Senior Social Workers to be called in the initial
       stages of a Major Accident.       The decision regarding follow-up
       action would rest with this individual and take account of locally
       agreed poli<^ and planning arrangements.

CHAPLAINCY ARRANGEMENTS IN EMERGENCIES

45.    In a Major Accident situation involving a large number of
       casualties, the Hospital Chaplain will have an important role.
       lyy^i arrangements should, therefore, ensure that the Hospital
       Chaplain is included in the first stage call out procedures of Key
       Officers to be notified.

46.    The   "Church"   has    a  well established  "social   services
       infrastructure" which would be of great benefit to the health
       service in a Major Accident and in certain circumstances Church
       wails are regarded as primary sites for accommodating the
       temporarily boneless, and in extreme circumstances acting as
       emergency medical centres.

47 .   The role of the Hospital Chaplain will be to assess the
       requirements and to co-ordinate chaplaincy services for all
       religions.   He will act as the point of contact between the many
       chaplains who will undoubtedly offer their services and if required
       will call out other; chaplains as necessary.

48.    Altirau|ih chaplaiiis ^ f e r a mittistty to the Sick and dying they also
       offer an inportant pastoral role to both hospital staff and


49.    it should be noted that there may initially be a need for chaplains
       at the incident site and in the receiving wards at hospitals.

50.    it is reccnmended that each hospital should identify in its Major
       Accident plan the Hospital Chaplain and that he should be included
       iri the first stage call out procedures.

ASSISTANCE OFFERED BY VOLUNTARY BODIES AT RECEIVING HOSPITALS

5 1 . Reporting.   A VOLUNTEER RECEPTION room should be established at a
       receiving hospital as a reporting point for members of tte
       Voluntary Aid Societies or individual volunteers offering their
       services.




MAPAAD                               -   10 -
52.   Duties. Volunteers should remain in VOLUNTEER RECEPTION until they
      are assigned to duties by their respective Senior Officers in
      accordance with directions issued by senior members of the Medical,
      Nursing or Administrative Staff of the hospital or as appropriate
      the Co-ordinator of Voluntary Services.

53 . identification.    Where possible volunteers should be given an arm
      band or a lapel badge/name card indicating the type of assistance
      each individual can provide eg "Trained Nurse", "Trained First
      Aider".    These would normally be provided by the voluntary
      organistion concerned.

ambulance mobilization

54.   The Ambulance Service will re-act to a Major Accident in accordance
      with the locally agreed procedures.

DEFINITION OF TERMS

55. A list of definitions and terminology is given at Annex 'B'.




MAPAAD                            -   11 -
                                                          SECTION 3


CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL MAJOR ACCIDENT HAZARDS (OMftH) REGULATIONS 1984

INTRODUCTION

1.   Governments in the European Economic CanmLuiity (EEC) have *been
      concerned for sane years that industrial activities involving
     certain dangerous substances have the potential to give rise to
      serious injury or damage beyond the immediate vicinity of the
     workplace. These activities have commonly come to be known in this
      country as "major hazards".

2.   In Great Britain, after the accident at Flixborough in 1974, the
     Health and Safety Commission (HSC) appointed an Advisory Committee
     on Major Hazards (ACMH) to consider the problems and make
      recommendations. The ACMH published three Reports (KMSO 1976, 1979
      and 1984) and spearheaded the development of a system of controls
      for major hazards in th^ United KingdCm.

3.   Aar imderiying principle of the ACMH thinking has been that, as in
      the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 (HSW Act), the primary
      responsibility for controlling and minimising the risks should lie
      with those who create the risks. In areas of high hazard, however,
      it has not been considered sufficient for employers merely to
      demonstrate to themselves that all is well. it is necessary that
      they should be able to demonstrate to the community's agents,
      primarily the Health and Safety Executive (HSE), that their plants
      are properly designed, well constructed and safely operated.
      Further, because the risks extend beyond the iirmediate vicinity of
      the workplace, it is proper that there should be control on the
      location of major hazards and any developments in their vicinity.
      Thus three basic elements of a control scheme have been put forward
      as follows:-                                         ..

     (1)   Identification - It has been seen as essential that
            potentially hazardous activities are identified. This is now
            possible through the Notification of Installations Handling
            Hazardous Substances (NIHHS) Regulations 1982 which cane into
            operation on 1 January 1983. The notifications uraSer these
            Regulations provide the HSE with details of installations
            that assist in defining priorities for inspection programmes.

     (2)   Location - Once the location of an installation isknown,its
            relationship to its surroundings can be examined.       The
            Department of the Environment, the Wfelsh Office and the
            Scottish Development Department are pursuing proposals to
            strengthen existing planning controls for installations
            notified under the NIHHS Regulations.

     (3)   Assessment - One of the main recommendations of the ACMH was
            that notification of an installation should be accompanied by
            a survey of the potential hazards.     This would mean that
            anyone in control of a major hazard site would need to
            demonstrate to the HSE that the hazards had fceen recognised



MAPAAD                           -   12 -
           and that measures had been taken to minimise accident hazards
           wherever possible and to control and minimise the conse­
           quences of any major accidents that did occur.

     SCOPE OF THE REGULATIONS

4.   The main aim s of the Ccaitrol of Industrial Major Accident Hazard
     Regulations (CIMAH) are the prevention of major accidents arising
     from industrial activities, the limitation of the effects of siKih
     accidents both on man and on the environment and the harmonisation
     of control measures to prevent and limit major accidents in the
     EEC. A major accident is broadly defined as a major omission, fire
     or explosion leading to serious effects on man or the environment
     inside or outside the confines of the workplace.

5.   The industrial activities to which the CIMAH Regulations apply are
      defined to two ways and     involve specified dangerous substances.
      The first definition is in terms of industrial processes (including
      on-site transport and associated storage), whereas the second
      definition covers other storage termed "isolated storage". In this
      way, the CIMAH Regulations embrace most of the chemical and petro­
      chemical industries using substances which have dangerous,
      flammable, explosive or toxic properties.

     REQUIREMENTS OF THE CIMAH REGULATIONS

6.   The requirements of the CIMAH^ Regulations can be considered as
      being at two levels. There are some general requirements which are
      of wide application and in addition, there are sane specific, more
      stringent requirements which are applied only to potentially more
      hazardous installations.

7.   The general requirements place a number of duties on people in
     control of industrial activities (manufacturers).     Manufacturers
     are made responsible for the safety of their activities and for
     taking all reasonable precautions to prevent major accidents and to
     limit their effects on man aridthe environment. In addition, all
     major accidents must be reported to HSE.

8.   The specific requirements of the Regulations are much more
      stringent than the general requirements, but they are of more
      limited application.    Essentially these regulations require the
     preparation of a safety profile, the preparation of on-site and
     off-site emergency plans and informing members of the public likely
     to be affected by a major accident. The Regulations for which HSE
      is the enforcing authority, place duties on manufacturers and local
     authorities, and provicte for consultation which will involve fire
     brigades,   the police, ambulance services, hospitals, water
     authorities and other appropriate bodies.

9.   HSE Area Offices will inform local authorities which installations
      are subject to the provisions of the specific regulations. HSE is
      also prepared to give planning advice to local authorities for such



MAPAAD                           - 13 -
      installations and for developments near to them in the sane way as
      is done already for installations covered by the requirements of
      the NIHHS Regulations.

      LOCAL AUTHORITY RESPONSIBILITIES

10. Local Authorities at county or equivalent level will be involved in
    the preparation of on-site and off-site emergency plans for any
     installation falling within the scope of the CIMAH Regulations,
    local authorities at district or equivalent level will be involved
     in disseminating information to members of the public likely to be
    affected by a major accident.

11. The Regulations provide for the off-site plan to be drawn up in
     consultation with manufacturers, HSE, and other bodies such as the
    Emergency Services, Health Service and Water Authorities,

12.   The HSE will inform local authorities which installations come
      within the scope of the Regulations and will provide guidance on
      the hazards and risks involved. It should be noted that under the
      regulations, local authorities are enpowered (if they wish) to
      recover frcm manufacturers reasonable costs for preparing and
      keeping up-to-date the off-site emergency plan.

13.   Off-site emergency plans besides being dovetailed with the onr-site
      plans, must be maintained in a state of readiness and provision
      will need to be made for training and exercises.     In addition to
      helping manufacturers deal with the immediate effects within the
      boundary fence, tie emergency services will need to be prepared to
      cope with possible consequential effects in the surrounding area.
      These off-site effects usually take longer to develop and allow
      some time to put precautions into operation.      However, they may
      continue for a period of several hours, or even days, and require
      considerable mobilisation of resources to cope with possible
      evacuation, restriction of access, banning of the movement of food­
      stuffs or the use of water supplies and subsequent decontamination.

      INFORMING THE PUBLIC

14.   The Regulations require that persons in the vicinity of an
      industrial activity who may be at risk in the event of a major
      accident should be given specified information about the activity
      and associated hazards.

15.   Manufacturers will be reponsible for providing this information but
      the primary route for disseminating the information to the public
      will be via the district council (or equivalent).      This may be
      achieved by letter to each household located within the area which
      could be affected by an on-site incident, and the opportunity may
      be given for residents to attend briefings jointly run by the
      Manufacturer and the District Council.




MAPAAD                            - 14 -
      CONSULTATIONS

16.   In producing plans County Councils normally consult the following
      authorities:-

           The Manufacturer
           District or Borough Council
           Fire Service
         . Police
           Ambulance Service
           Electricity Board
           water Authority
           Regional and District Health Authority
           Health and Safety Executive
           Ministry of Defence (Air)
           Gas
           Other County Councils (if appropriate)
           Other District Councils (if appropriate)




MAPAAD                           - 15 -
                                                                     SECTION 4



                  INCIDENTS INVOLVING DANGEROUS CHEMICALS

     INTRODUCTION

1.   The information provided here should be regarded as basic guidance
     only.   When dealing with any incident involving chemicals it is
     essential to identify the substance and if possible the
     manufacturer and to seek expert advice. This facility is available
     frcm the local Fire Service.

2.   Local policy and plans should take account of the need to involve
     the local Specialist in Camuinity Medicine Environmental Haalth
     (SCM EH) and the local authority Environmental Haalth Officers if
     the situation demands it.

3.   Each Ambulance Service is to maintain a detailed procedure covering
     actions by Ambulance Control and a procedure for staff at the
     scene.

4.   Expert advice and assistance can be obtained           fran a number of
      sources some of which are listed here:-

     (1)     Local Fire Service or Police Force          (Hazards)

     (2)     The Manufacturer of the Chemical            (Hazards)        v;

     (3)     The National Chemical Emergency Centre      (Hazards)
           ' AIRE HARWELL
              Oxfordshire
              Telephone - Abingdon (0235) 24141 Ext 2121

     (4)     Guys Hospital Poisons Centre
       (      01 635 9191    (Direct Line for urgent immediate information)
              01 407 7600                (Less Urgent Information)

     (5)     Imperial Chemical Industries                ( H ^ ^d s >ff        ,

     GUIDANCE TO NHS STAFF

5.   It is recanmanded that all major Accident and Emergency Departments
      should have facilities for dealing with chemically contaminated
      patients and for the protection and decontamination of personnel.
      Until such time as proper facilities are available throughout the
      region ad hoc measures will be required in the event of any Major
      Accident involving dangerous chemicals and in this respect the
      local Fire Brigade will be able to provide assistance with their
     mobile decontamination facility. However, generally this facility
     would not be suitable for all casualty situations.

6.   General Procedures. The NHS procedures for dealing with a Major
     Accident involving hazardous chemicals will follow those invoked
     for any Major Accident with the exception that there must be a



MAPAAD                              - 16 -
     •demarcation line' established in the casualty evacuation system to
     define 'clean' and 'dirty' areas in terms of contamination. This
     also applies to ambulance personnel who may accidently become
     contaminated.   Blankets and stretchers used in the 'dirty' areas
     must not cross the demarcation line and there will be a greater
     requirement for reserves of equipment to permit necessary
     exchanges, including, in the case of blankets, the possible taking
     out of service of contaminated stores after one use only.

7.   On stand-down frcm the emergency Situation there will be a
      requirement to provide decontamination facilities         for all
      personnel, vehicles and stores used in the handling of casualties
      on the 'dirty' side of the demarcation line and once again the Fire
      Brigade mobile decontamination facility should be requested for
      this purpose.

     RESCUE

8.   Rescue is the responsibility of the Fire Service and it is
      preferable that ambulance crews should not under any circumstances
      be allowed to enter contaminated areas. However, Hospital Flying
      Squads should receive some training in precautionary measures since
      treatment will occasionally be given in situ and junior medical
      staff who may becone involved could be quite unaware of the
      hazards.

     SUMMARY

9.   With the increase in the conveyance of dangerous substances by road
     it is inevitable that accidents involving such substances will
     occur in greater numbers and hospitals may find themselves having
     to deal with a toxic hazard.

10. Because it is impossible to be familiar with the properties of all
     chemicals being transported or the varying procedures for
     cxxnbatting resultant hazards when incidents occur, expert advice
    must be obtained and followed.       Early identification of the
     substance(s) involved is vital to ensure that correct advice is
     obtained.

11. The FIRE SERVICE should be contacted in the first instance and
    their advice followed.




MAPAAD                           - 17 -
                                                                     SECTION 5


TNT.TnFNTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVITY

REFERENCES: A HC(76)52                        National Arrangeonents for
                                              Incidents Involving Radioactivity
                                              (NAIR)   and    Arrangeonents for
                                              Dealing withContaminated and
                                              Radiation Casualties

            B HC(77)1                         Health Service Arrangements for
                                              Dealing with Major Accidents

            C HC(85)24                        Health Service Arrangements    for
                                              Dealing with Major Accidents
                                              (Supplement)

            D BSE Handbook                    'Emergency    Flans    for Civil
                                              Nuclear Installation (reproduced
                                              as Annex A to HC(85)24)

     INTRODUCTION

1.   HC(76)52: Deals with the National Arrangements for Incidents
     Involving Radioactivity (NAIR) and Arrangements for Dealing with
     Contaminated and Radiation Casualties. /Hie National Radiological
     Protection Board (NRPB) co-ordinate the scheme.

2.   HC( 85)24: Requires Major Accident plans to include adequate
     arrangements for the NHS reponse to an accident at a nuclear
      installation and advises on Health Service Arrangements for Dealing
     with Accidents at Civil Nuclear Installations. The circular is
      issued as a supplement to HC(77)1 Health Service Arrangements for
     Dealing with Major Accidents.

     SUMMARY OF ARRANSEMEMTS

3.   In the event of an incident involving a fire and a radioactive
      isotope then the Fire Service will have overall responsibility,
     however, the police will normally be the first authority to be
      informed of a transport accident or other incident in a public
     place.   Consequently, the basis of NAIR is that the arrangements
     will be invoked by the local police. Help is provided in two parts
     known as first and second stage assistance.   (HC(76)52 Appendix 1
     refers) .

4.   First Stage Assistance: (Hospital Advice to Police) This enables
     the police to call upon an experienced person who can advise them
     on action.     The arrangements involve Radiation Physicists at
     certain hospitals (see para. 5) who, at the request of the police,
     would provide first stage assistance and advise on the safety
     measures to be taken at incidents involving radioactive substances.
     It may also be necessary to inform the Specialist in Community
     Medicine, Environmental Health (SCM EH) so that a medical opinion
      is also available and any necessary steps taken.        Basically,



MAPAAD                               - 18 -
      assistance consists of advising the police whether there is a
      potential hazard frcm radioactivity and giving advice on the
      actions necessary to minimise and contain the danger.        It is
      accepted that hospital radiation staff have relatively limited
      resources and will normally be able to carry out oily small
      recover operations.     They will not be expected to cope with
      incidents involving the spread of contamination unless very minor.
      Where the incident is beyond their capability to deal with unaided,
      they should advise the police on the steps that should be taken to
      prevent exposure of the public; for example, by erection of
      barriers or by covering and containing contaminated material to
      prevent its spread.

5.    Within the Trent RHA the "MEDItAL PHYSlLS DEPARTMENT" of the
      following hospitals provide First Stage Assistance:-

      (1)    University Hospital, Queen's Medical centre, Nottingham, TN
             (0602) 700111
      (2)    Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, Derby, TN (0332) 47141
      (3)   Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, TN (0533) 541414
      (4)   St George's Hospital, Lincoln, TN (0522) 29921
      (5)   Wfeston Park Hospital, Sheffield, TO (0742) 686071

6.    Second Stage    Assistance Sane incidents may prove inpossible for
      hospital radiation staff to deal with because of the need for more
      sophisticated resources.     In such cases the police will obtain
      second stage    assistance fran  establishments such as the United
      Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority,central Electricity Generating
      Board/ British Nuclear Fuels Ltd or the Ministry of Defence. It is
      for hospital     radiationstaffoffering first stage assistance,
      either at the time they receive the call from the police or on
      assessing the situation at the incident site, to advise the police
      whether second stage assistance is required.

7.    Within the Trent RHA second stage assistance is provided by:

      (1)   AERE, Harwell, Didcot, Qxon CKll 0RQ TEL (0235) 24141 Ext
            4444/4059 Working Hours. Ext 5329/5137 Silent Hours.

      (2)   Rolls Royce (1971) Ltd, Raynesway, Derby TEL (0332) 662441
            (Duty Health Physicist)

8.     In addition to the NAIR scheme the Fire Service offer facilities of
       monitoring equipment and trained personnel who are ngpable of
       dealing with a radiation incident. The equipment available would
       ensure adequate surveying of the contaminated area, dose rate
       meters for individuals and decontamination monitoring equipment for
     ,use to conclude the incident.

      DISPOSAL OF (XWE^NATED WASTE

9.    In the event of hospital radiation staff deciding that limited
      decontamination is within their capability, they should ensure,



MAPAAD                           - 19 -
      with the agreement of the police, that steps are taken to deal with
      the situation as outlined in the following paragraphs.

10.   As far as is reasonably practicable, all scattered radioactive
      material and contaminated surface materials (eg soil, herbage etc)
      should be collected and contained in order to minimise the amount
      of residual contamination which may subsequently have to be flushed
      into sewers or watercourses.     The consent of the Department of
      Environment Senior Radiochemical Inspector (see para 11 below)
      should be obtained before any flushing is undertaken but if
      decontamination by flushing is urgently necessary before the
      Department can be contacted, then sufficient flushing water should
      be used to keep the activity of the effluent below the fojlowing
      limits and the Senior Radiochemical Inspector should be informed of
      the action taken as soon as circumstances permit.

      (1)    500 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge to
             sewers;..

      (2)    50 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge into
             a watercourse.

11. The collected material and other collected radioactive waste which
     has arisen during the decontamination operations Should be M|spdsed
     of only with the permission of the Senior Radiochemical Inspector,
    Department of Environment - Telephone 01-273 4014 during office
     hours and 01-212 7071 during silent hours.

      INCIDENT REPORTS

12. In order that the effectiveness of NAIR can be assessed, a brief
     report on each incident will be requited from the radiation staff
     involved and should be sent to the National Radiological Protection
    Board, Harwell Didcot, CK11 0RQ (Telephone No 023 583 600) as soon
     as possible. This is in addition to any police report and should
    cover the following points:

      (1)    Date, location and time of incident.

      (2)    Nature of incident and who reported incident.

      (3)    Assessment of radiological hazard, whether present or not.

      (4)    Nature of assistance given and any difficultiesencountered.

      (5)    Whether Second Stage assistance was sought.

      (6 )   Effectiveness of arrangements.

      (7)    Outcome of incident.




MAPAAD                              - 20 -
      THE HANDLING OF CASUALTIES CONTAMINATED WITH RADIOACTIVE
      SUBSTANCES

13.   Radioactive substances are in wide use in industry, medicine,
      research and teaching and incidents might occur on premises used
      for these purposes. Any incident involving radioactivity may give
      rise to casualties who as well as being contaminated will require
      treatment for their injuries.    The lairge establishments such as
      nuclear power stations and similar sites are likely to have their
      own facilities to deal with such casualties but in other cases they
      may be taken to hospital accident and emergency departments (see
      para. 14).    Where the need for life-saving treatment appears to
      override the need for decontamination, ambulance crews (in liaison
      with their control) must take the casualty to the nearest accident
      and emergency department even though it may be at a hospital not
      listed in Para 14.      In that event the hospital receiving the
      casualty can arrange with the nearest hospital listed in Para 14 to
      obtain advice and assistance in the decontamination of the
      casualty, the ambulance, the ambulance crew, and any other staff.
      Pending receipt of this assistance, the guidance at Appendix 1
      should be followed.

14.   Hospitals in England prepared to accept contaminated casualties and
      to advise on, and assist with, decontamination of personnel are
      listed in Appendix 2 of HC(76)52.     Within the Trent Region these
      are the A & E departments of the following hospitals:

      (1)   Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield
      (2)   Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, Derby
      (3)    Leicester Royal Infirmary# Leicester
      (4)    County Hospital, Lincoln
      (5)    University Hospital, Queen's ffedical centre, Nottingham

15.   Brief guidance for hospital staff and ambulance crews on the
      practical steps to be taken when dealing with contaminated
      casualties is contained in Hl (76)52 Appendix 4 and is reproduced
      here at Appendix 1 for ease of reference.      This information is
      intended to assist those concerned in the period before the arrival
      of expert assistance and in no way obviates the need to obtain such
      assistance.

      CONTAMINATED CASUALTIES

16.   Ambulance crews must be instructed to inform the police (via
      Ambulance Control) immediately they become aware that radioactive
      substances are involved at any incident they attend. The police
      are responsible for arrangements to protect the public and in
      conjunction with the Fire Service will endeavour to contain, if
      possible, any radioactive substances; ambulance crews will be
      concerned solely in dealing with any casaulties. In all instances
      ambulance crews should inform the hospital in advance, via
      ambulance control, that radioactive substances are involved and,
      where known, the name of the radioisotope.



MAPAAD                            - 21 -
17. When the need for life-saving treatment does not override the need
    for decontamination, casualties will be taken to the nearest
    hospital listed in Para 14 and the ambulance crew must confirm this
    with their control who will alert the hospital concerned.

      CASUALTIES EXPOSED TO LfiRGE DOSES OF RADIATION

18. It is not intended that hospitals listed at Para 14 should treat
    casualties affected by a high radiation dose such as might occur
    from an accident at a nuclear power station or Ministry of Defence
    establishment.   Facilities for the treatment of persons suffering
    from severe whole body        irradiation exist at the following
    hospitals.   Enquiries about treatment or admission of casualties
    should be made to the appropriate officer or department indicated.

      (1) The Hammersmith Hospital
          Ducane Road
          London W12 OHS
          TN No 01-743 2030
          (The Duty Medical Registrar)

      (2) The Middlesex Hospital
          Mortimer Street
          London WIN 8AA
          TN No 01-636 8333
          (The Admitting Medical Officer)

      (3) The Royal Marsden Hospital
          Fulham Road
          London SW3 6JJ
          TN No 01-352 8171
          (The Medical physics Department)

      (4) The Royal Marsden Hospital
          Downs Road
          Sutton
          Surrey
          TN No 01-642 6011
          (The Medical Physics Department)

19.   General Practitioners may be involved in NAIR incidents and Health
      Authorities after consultation with their Family Practitioner
      committee and Local ffedical committee should notify general
      practitioners of local arrangements.




MAPAAD                            -   22 -
                                                          APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                          SECTION 5

GUIDANCE FCR HOSPITAL STAFF AND AMBULANCE CREWS WHO MAY NEED TO DEAL
WITH CASUALTIES CONTAMINATED BY LOW LEVEL RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

NOTE: Casualties heavily contaminated with highly radioactive substances
are likely to arise only from accidents in specialised nuclear
establishments which have their own facilities for decontamination.
Such casualties are outside the scope of this guidance.

1.   As a result of an incident covered by NAIR, or an accident at an
      industrial or other establishment using low level radioactive
      substances, hospital staff and ambulance crews may be called upon
      to deal with a casualty viio may be contaminated with a substance of
      low radioactivity. This appendix provides guidance on the handling
      of such cases.

2.   It should be noted that low level contamination presents no
      immediate hazard to the casualty or those who cone in contact with
      the casualty; attention to this guidance will ensure that any long
      term risk is minimised by preventing contamination of surrounding
      areas. Historically no victim has ever been so contaminated that
      he was a threat to his rescuers.

     BASIC PRINCIPLES

3.   The following basic principles should be observed when dealing with
      casualties who are possibly contaminated:

      (1 )   If available, a large plastic sheet should be spread under­
             neath the patient in the ambulance and the patient shOiiLd le
             kept on it when moved by stretcher to the hospital.

      (2)    After the patient has been delivered to the hospital, the
             ambulance should not be used for other calls except in dire
             emergency until it has been shown to be free from
             contamination.

GUIDANCE FCR DOCTORS, NURSES AND OTHER STAFF IN THE CASUALTY DEPARTMENT
OF THE HOSPITAL

4.   A casualty suspected of being contaminated with radioactivity will
      have been brought to a hospital other than those listed in Paras 14
      and 18 only when the injuries have been judged so severe as to need
      urgent medical attention.     This attention must obviously take
      precedence, but a few simple preparations and observance of the
      basic principles outlined below can help to minimise arty possible
      spread of radioactive contamination vihilst tfteadvice * 0 f a
      radiation expert is awaited.

5.   If time is available, the following preparation should be made
     before the casualty(s) arrives at the hospital:

     (1)     An area, not necessarily within the Accident and Emergency
             department, should be set aside (the 'dirty area') for the



MAPAAD                            A PI-5
       reception of casualties and, if the floor is not easily
       cleaned, it should be covered with plastic sheeting or heavy
       duty paper.    Newspaper can be use& if nothing else is
       available.

(2)    Protective clothing should be issued for all staff who will
       handle the patient.

(3)    A plentiful supply of paper towels and tissue should be
        available.

(4)    Large polythene or paper bags will be needed for the
        collection of the patient's clothing and contaminated
        equipment etc.

(5)    An area should be cleared where the ambulance can wait for
       monitoring and possible decontamination.

(6 )   A limited number of staff should be appointed to handle the
        patient and a person should be designated to log the
       movements of any of those staff who must leave the 'dirty
        area' after the casualties have arrived, in order to minimise
        the difficulty of tracing contamination.

C7)    If other areas of the hospital became involved in handling
        the patient, eg a theatre or intensive care unit, similar
        arrangements should be made for these areas as appropriate.

The following     initial   decontamination   procedure   should   be
follcwed:-

(1)    Experience has shown that washing with soap and water will
       effectively remove contaminated material frcm the skin in
       most cases.   Initial treatment and any necessary washing to
       remove as much of the suspected contamination as practicable
       should be done in the 'dirty area'.

(2)    qpen wounds should be irrigated. Special care needs to be
       taken in the cleaning of areas near the eyes and in
       preventing the spread of possible contamination to other
       parts of the body.

(3)    It will usually be possible to seek further expert advice
       frcm a designated hospital before proceeding beyond the
       initial treatment stage, it is inadvisable to excise wounds
       unless contamination is obvious or unless surgically
       indicated before monitoring assistance is available.
                                                                    SECTION 6


     INCIDENTS AT CIVIL NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS

     REFERENCES:    A   HC(77)1             Health Service Arrangements far
                                            Dealing with Major Accidents
                    B   HC(85)24            Health Service Arrangements for
                                            Dealing with Major Accidents
                                            (Supplement)

     INTRODUCTION

1.   The Government has reviewed the emergency arrangements for ctealing
     with the consequences of an accident at a civil nuclear
      installation and has issued HC(85)24 as a supplement to HC(77)1.
     The revised arrangements are described in the Health and Safety
     Executive     handbook   'Emergency   Plans   for   Civil   Maclear
      Installations', the text of which is reproduced at Annex A of
      HC(85)24. The handbook has been issued to all those concerned with
      the emergency arrangements and is available to the general public.
      (Additional copies are available fran HMSO).

2.   The revised arrangements take account of the existing site
     emergency plans of nuclear operators.     They do not involve major
      changes in the emergency plans of local authorities and health
      authorities but emphasise the need for close co-ordination of the
      emergency services, including the health services, and for a single
      comprehensive response to the interest of the public and the news
      media. The role of central Government and its links with the local
      emergency arrangements are clarified.

     SCALE AND CONSBQUENCES OF A NUCLEAR ACCIDENT

3.   The likelihood of an accident at a civil nuclear installation
      leading to the physical injury or radioactive contamination of
      people on or off the site is small. It is nevertheless prudent to
      make arrangements to deal with the consequences of an accident
      should one occur. The emergency arrangements described here and in
      the HSE handbook are based on a 'reference' accident, the probable
      consequences of which can be foreseen. The scale of a 'reference'
      accident is described in Paras 4 and 10 of the handbook.       The
      arrangements are capable of extension to cover the remote
      possibility of a more serious accident.

4.   A reference accident, though unlikely, might give rise to:

     (1)   for people within the site boundary; internal and external
           radiation doses and possibly a few contaminated casualties
           with physical injuries;

     (2)   for people outside the site boundary; external radiation
           doses frcm airborne radioactivity or fran activity deposited
           on the ground or on the skin and internal radiation doses
           fran inhaled or ingested radioactivity.




MAPAAD                             - 23 -
      (3)    for the population at large; internal radiation doses fran
             the consumption of contaminated foodstuffs (including milk)
             and possibly of contaminated water.

5.    A nuclear accident could therefore lead to the following demands on
      the health services:

      (1 )   an immediate need for the treatment of casualties, almost
             certainly limited to nuclear site personnel;

      (2 )   a possible demand for medical advice and treatment frcm
             people off the site who had been (or thought they had been)
             exposed to radioactivity.

6.   Although there are no Civil Nuclear Installations within or near to
     the Trent RHA^ bowidajries, the circular states that:

     (1)     'A nuclear site will have emergency plans which are designed
             to take account of the dispersal of radioactivity arising
             frcm a reference accident and will provide for radioactivity
             monitoring 15) to a distance of 40 kilometres (about 25 miles)
             frcm the site.       The emergency arrangements for health
             authorities must, therefore, involve actively all Health
             Regions and Health Districts within a radius of 40 kilometres
             frcm the nuclear installation.     Site emergency plans refer
             only to the distance (40 J^l<^tres) from the site at which
             the site operator will provide radioactivity monitoring.

     (2)     It is possible that monitoring may be required beyond the 40
             kilometres distance and people may seek medicaladvice     at
             distances greater than those at which monitoring is known to
             be required. Health Authorities should, therefore, give some
             consideration to the need to extend their arrangements to
             distances up to 100 kilometres (about 64 miles) frcm a
             nuclear site.'

7.   In coopliance with Appendix 'D\ Para 9 of HC(85)24 Mersey RHA have
     identified two licensed civil nuclear installations within the
     Mersey Region which fall into the above criteria, namely:

     (1)     BNFL Capenhurst, Chester CHl 6ER (Map Ref 3645739)

     (2)     Northern Universities Joint Research        Reactor,   Risley,
             Warrington, Cheshire (Map R e f 660920)

8.   The 100 kilometre radius from these sites just impinge upon part of
     the Trent RHA (Barnsley, Sheffield, North and Southern Derbyshire).
     The appropriate hospitals which provide first stage assistance under
     the National Arrangements for Incidents Involving Radio- activity
     (NAIR) (see Section 5, Para. 5) should note this information for
     local planning purposes. The extent of this assistance would be to
     establish a local background radiation level and make further
     background measurements during an emergency if required by the



MAPAAD                             - 24 -
     National Radiation Protection Board (NRPB).

9.   However small the likely hazard, an accident at a nuclear site
     would create concern amongst the local population.       This would
      involve not only those working in hospitals but primary care staff.
     The National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) has produced a
     leaflet on the advice to be given to members of the public who may
     have been exposed to radiation - the text is reproduced at Annex B
      of HL(85)24 and is included here at Appendix 1 for ease of
     reference, copies have been sent to Family Practitioner committees
     by the NRPB, and committees have been asked to issue these to
     general medical practitioners practising in the vicinity of nuclear
      installations.   It may be useful to other primary care staff and
     also to hospital staff.    (Extra copies can be obtained from NRPB,
     Chilton, Didcot, Oxfordshire CKll ORQ).

10. Ambulance Service It is unlikely that a reference accident would
     make significant demands on the ambulance service, but all
     ambulance staff should be aware of the likely scale of such an
     accident and its consequences, copies of the HSE handbook should
     be seen by all ambulance staff, who should also be aware of
     contingency arrangements and how they fit in with health
     authorities' major accident plans. It may also be useful for them
     to see the NRPB leaflet referred to in Para 9 above.




MAPAAD                           - 25 -
                                                                                                                         APPENDIX 1
                                                                                                                       TO SECTION 6




                    National Radiological Protection Board



         ADVICE FOR
 GENERAL PRACTITIONERS
     IN THE EVENT OF A
CIVIL NUCLEAR EMERGENCY                                                             If a serious release did occur it would probably cause no
                  INTRODUCTION                                                immediate harm to persons in the vicinity but. after a latent period
                                                                              of many years, it might lead to a few extra cases o f cancer m the
      The Government has made plans for the acton to be taken if              population exposed to the plume. These extra cases would not be
an accident at a nuclear power plant or other civil nuclear installation      discernible against the normal incidence o f cancer m this group
results m a release o f radioactive materials to the environment The                In serious accidents it is possible that some workers at the plant
likelihood of such an accident is extremely remote but ft cannot be           will r eceive radiation closes that are high enough to require imme
completely discounted.                                                        diate treatment The medical care o f these individuals will not be
      This leaflet gives an account of what might happen should an            the responsibility o f General Practitioners. It is almost inconceivaole
accident occur, together with an outline o f the plans made to deal           that people o ff the site could receive doses high enough to produce
with iL In addition it provides information to help general practitioners     early symptoms Following very large doses o f radiation, vomiting is
advise the patients who may consult them in these circumstances.              an almost universal sign and will occur within two hours 01 an
                                                                              exposure that might prove fatal. However, from the incident at
                                                                              Three Mile Island m the USA a few years ago. it is clear that many
                                                                              people who were not exposed to any significant dose of radiation
          WHAT COULD HAPPEN                                                   developed psychosomatic manifestations, including vomiting
                                                                              Vomiting in members of the public several hours after an accident >s
                                                                              not therefore a sign of dangerous radiation exposure.
     The potential hazard of a nuclear reactor lies in the large
quantities of radioactive fission products which accumulate in the
reactor core during its operation. These products are normally
retained within the reactor fuel but in an accident fission products
                                                                                        NUCLEAR EMERGENCY
may be released into the atmosphere and travel downwind from                                PLANNING
the site This material would be invisible but it would behave like a
plume of smoke, gradually dispersing and depositing some of its                    All operators of nuclear installations are required to draw up an
content on the ground The potential hazard might not extend                   emergency plan and have this approved by HM Nuclear Installations
beyond the site boundary but if the release was on a larger scale it          Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive. Copies are held by
could extend for many miles. Even in the m ost severe accident,               the emergency services and kxal authorities and are available for
a nuclear reacto r cannot explode like an atom ic bomb.                       public scrutiny m libraries and other appropriate places near each site.
    People m the vicinity of the plume may be at risk from four                    If the scale of an accidental release were to exceed that for
sources: direct radiaton from the plume and from material deposited           which emergency plans are made, the hazard from the plume could
on the ground, inhalation of radioactive particles and ingestion of           extend over a greater range and require more extensive acton to
foodstuffs contaminated with radioactive materal. Clothing, hair              protect the public.
and exposed skin may also be contaminated with particles from the                 Exposure to radiation from the plume or from material de­
plume                                                                         posited on the ground would then have greater significance and
     In the event of a serious release it might be necessaiy to advise        evacuation plans might have to be extended and remain in force
some people to stay indoors for a period and to shut their windows            over a longer timescale. Restrictions on the distribution of mtlk and
and doors It is also possible that some temporary evacuation of               foodstuffs would also have to be introduced over a larger area. In
small numbers of houses would be required Control of milk and                 the rare event o f this happening the existing emergency plan will
agricultural produce might be needed in the area.                             form the basis for action on a wider scale




                                                                            API-6
     It must de emphasisea, however, that the chance of an accident       by the release of radioactive material. The size of this area will
serious enough to affect people m the immediate vicinity of the site >s   depend on the magnitude and duration of any release as well as bn
very low indeed. The primary protection of the public comes from          the prevailing weather conditions during the release. It will take a
nign standards of engineering on the plant. Emergency plans provide       short time to define its limits. The police will then advise people
ar idditional assurance that, even if an accidental release were to       living there accordingly.
occur, arrangements exist for prompt action to protect the public.             A* so©.'! as the incident becorr'M public knowledge,
                                                                          you m ay Ise consulted (probably by telephone) by a number
                                                                          o f w o rried people. They should be reassured th a t they are

          RESPONSIBILITIES IN A                                           Sn no im m ed iate danger and th a t the police will te ll them
                                                                          if they need to take any action. If they are w o rried , they
          NUCLEAR EMERGENCY                                               can be told th a t they should rem ain indoors(w ith windows
                                                                          and doors shut) if living w ith in a few m iles o f the plant.
     The arrangements outlined below strictlyapply only to nuclear        Up-to-date information will be broadcast on local radio and people
power stations run by the Central Electricity Generating Board.           in the area of possible risk will be contacted by the police within an
Similar arrangements and facilities are provided by the South of          hour or two. Once the limits of the downwind zone are known, any
Scotland Electricity Board at their headquarters and by British           persons enquiring from ouside that sector may be completely
Nuclear Fuels pic and the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority          reassured arid advised to go about their normal activities. Prac­
to cover their nuclear sites.                                             titio n ers m ay obtain inform ation on the location o f the
     Stage I, Em ergency C on troller                                     zone affected from the O SC o r the police.
   ; Each nuclear sitehas an appointed Emergency Controller who                Although the advice to stay indoors is probably overcautious, it
is a senior member of staffand istrained to initiate the necessary        will do no harm. A large-scale, unsupervised evacuation, on the
actions inan emergency. He isresponsible for:.                            other hand, would cause major and unnecessary social disruption,
 1) allon-site emergency arrangements                                     and you should dissuade people from leaving unless they
 )
2 the immediate monitoring of radioactivity, both on and off-site         are instructed to do so b y the police.
3) advising the police and local authorities on any immediate                 A few people who are m or close to the affected area at the
     action necessary to protect the public.                              time of the accidental release may miss being advised by the police
      Stage 2, O peratio n al Support C en tre                            and consult you; People who were inside a buiidmg can oe reassured,
      Within a few hours of the declaration of the emergency, an          but individuals in the area who spent a period o f m ore
Operational Support Centre (OSC) would be set up in the area of           than a few m inutes o u t o f doors should be advised to take
 the plant The O S C Controller will:                                     sim ple decontam ination measures. These entaii washing
 1) relieve the Emergency Controller at the plant of his off-site         ■with copious quantities of water (a shower is best). Following this
      responsibilities                                                    they should contact the police for further advice Clothes ana
 2) co-ordinate adviceto outsideorganisations, includingthe police        shoes worn at the time of the accident should De stored in a
 3) co-ordinate the monitoringofany radioactivematerialsoff-site.         container so that they can be tested subsequently and, if necessary
       Stage 3, G overnm ent Technical Adviser                            treated for the presence of radioactive contamination
      A Government representative, the Government Technical                    If the emergency authorities have decided to issue people m
 Adviser, would go to the O S C and take responsibility for advising      the downwind sector with potassium iodate tablets to protect
 those organisations such as the police and local authorities on          their thyroid glands from the possible effects of radioiodme m the
 actions necessary to protect the public ifthe emergency islikelyto       plume, it is important that there should be no omissions. Practi­
 be prolonged beyond 24 hours.                                            tioners should re fe r anyone who m ay have been missed in
      T h e police                                                        the em ergency distribution to the police so th a t the tablets
      The policewill,on the basisofthe advice they receive, take one      can be supplied as quickly as possible. The tablets should be
 or more of the following actions:                                        swallow ed w ith o u t delay, preferably w ithin tw o hours of
  1) warn the publicto stayindoorsand to shutalldoorsand windows          exposure. Their beneficial action will, however, still be exerted
 2) issue tablets of potassium lodate to inhibit the uptake by the        even when their administration has been delayed for some hours.
      thyroid gland of radioactive iodine when this isa constituent of        Practitioners may be required to do house calls or attend other
      the plume                                                           emergencies, unconnected with the nuclear incident in the down­
 3) evacuate the public from a defined downwind sector from the           wind fallout plume. In these circumstances they shoyld obtain
      site                                                                advice from the police on the procedure they should follow
 4) assist members of the public who have been evacuated to
       return to their homes when the emergency isover.



    WHO MAY SEEK YOUR HELP
   AND WHAT SHOULD YOU DO?
                                                                                                 REFERENCE
     Workers at the plant and people in its immediate vicinity will be
 taken care of promptly under the emergency arrangements. As a                Practitioners interested in the management of workers who
 general p ractitio n er you w ill not have to tre a t patients           may have been over-exposed to radiation may obtain information
 fo r the acute effects o f radiation overexposure. There will            about this from The Principles and General Procedures fo r Handling
 be intense activity by the emergency authorities in order to define      Emergency and Accidental Exposures o f Workers. Oxford. Pergamon
 as accurately as possible the zone :n which people might be affected     Press, ICRP Publication 28. Ann. ICRP, 2, No. I ( 1978).




                                                                  AP2-6
                                                                SECTION 7


HOSPITAL TREATMENT CP ACUTE POISONING

           Reference A -        TRENT RHA Hospital Treatment of Acute
                                Poiscaling - Report of the Working Party
                                of the Trent RHA, May 1983.

                     B -         HN(84)25.    The Management of Deliberate
                                 Self Harm.

                     C -         ABC of POISONING     Tim Meredith, Jane
                                 Caisley, Glyn Volans BMJ 22.9.84.



1.   The following is basically a suitmary of the report by the Trent
     Regional Health Authority Working Party on Hospital Treatment of
     Acute Poisoning (May 1983) and is intended, supplemented by more
     recent relevant developments, only to highlight the main working
     party recommendations.

     POLICY IN TRENT REGION

2.   consultants in Accident and Emergency medicine have beenappointed
      to major Accident and Emergency Departments in the Region and
      within their remit is the responsibility for the treatment of
      poisoning cases arriving in their departments.    This may include
      the management of some in-patients as wall as acting as a source of
      advice to colleagues.

3.   Designated Poisoning Treatment centres. All hospitals with a major
     Accident and Emergency Department are designated poisoning treat­
     ment centres and this is the pattern followed generally throughout
     the country. If a patient requires admission it is usually under
     the care of the consultant physician or paediatrician on emergency
     take. In certain Health Districts some of the acute medical beds,
     and some or all of the paediatric beds, may be in hospitals other
     than the one containing the Accident and Emergency Department.
     Under these conditions ;it follows that all hospitals with acute
     medical or paediatric beds are effectively part of the Health
     District poisoning treatment centre.     It is essential that all
     treatment centres should have facilities for intensive care.

4.   Since all major Accident and Emergency Departments receive cases of
     acute poisoning, essential equipment must include up-to-date works
     of reference and names and telephone numbers of sources of infor­
     mation.    Local information sources should be considered before
     referring to the national information centres described at para 12 .

5.   The ambulance services are already aware of the concept of
     designatedhospitals and designated Poisoning Treatment centres and
     that only in exceptional and critical situations are patients to be
     taken elsewhere.




MAPAAD                           - 26 -
6.     Admission of Children. In general, like adults, children should be
        taken to the nearest major Accident and Emergency Department.
       Accident and Emergency Departments should, where possible, have
        staff who are used to dealing with children and the facilities and
       equipnent appropriate to their special needs. close co-operation
       with the local paediatric unit is essential so that expert advice
        can always be obtained.

7.     it is considered that the treatment of cases of acute poisoning
        requires a 'team' involving, in hospital, the staff of the accident
        and emergency, nedical and psychiatric departments and also
        laboratory staff and social workers. After discharge the general
        practitioner may also need to play an important part in follow up
        and continuing care.

8.     laboratory Support.   There are many drugs and poisons for which
        assays may be required but relatively few where the results have an
        immediate effect on clinical management. For those which do have a
        direct bearing on clinical management, facilities must be available
        at all tines and the working party recommended the following (assay
        capability) list:-

                   Salicylate
                   Paracetamol
                    Barbiturates
                   -Tron
                    Ethanol (and if possible, Methanol)
                    Lithium
                   carbaxyhaemoglobin
                   Paraquat (screening test only)

       adults

9.     Psychiatric Services.   A psychological and social evaluation of
       every case of self-poisoning before discharge from hospital should
       be carried out. The working party was of the view that the medical
       teamshould decide for each individual case whether there was a
       need for specialist psychiatric opinion and this view has since
       been supported by new draft guidelines (Reference B) issued by the
       DHSS for consultation in December 1984.

10.    Each District Health Authority should have a clear policy on this
       issue and a psychiatrist should be designated to co-ordinate the
       policy.    The availability   of a "liaison psychiatrist" in the
       Accident and Emergency Department 24 hours a day to advise on
       mental illness problems can be of considerable benefit.

11.    Children. The situation is different as far as children with acute
     % poisoning are concerned.       Non-accidental injury can sometimes
       present as poisoning in young children, older children almost
       invariably have caiplex family problems and need specialist help.
        "Glue Sniffers" are included in this category. The Working Party
       is strongly of the opinion that all older children with self­



MAPAAD                              - 27 -
      administered poisoning should be seen by a child psychiatrist in
      consultation with the paediatrician.

      POISONS INFORMATION AND ADVISORY SERVICES

12.   The following is a brief summary of sources of             information and
      advices-

      (1)   Id e n tific a tio n o f Medicinal P ro d u c ts . Identification of
            medicinal products (tablets and capsules) can be achieved at
            each Listed Hospital (Annex A) by use of the 'TAELIDENT'
            system, complementary services also exist for other medicinal
            products.

      (2)   The N a tio n a l P oisons In fo rm a tio n Service provides information
            on the symptoms, toxicity, and management of poisoning With
            all drugs.        It monitors cases of unusual drug overdose to
            maintain the database needed to answer inquiries, and
            welcomes reports of such cases, especially for those agents
            where the u a i M t t e e o n Safety of Medicines invites special
            care in the reporting of adverse reactions.               Recently, with
            the collaboration of the drug manufacturers, efforts have
            been made to include in the database not only earmarked drugs
            but also products undergoing largescale clinicaltrials,
            since overdose cases have been reported at...this^jstage. ;.i(The
            large and ever increasing number of potential poisonb make it
            impractical for every hospital to keep a comprehensive and
            up-to-date information system.               Five main national centres
            have, therefore, been established to provide a 24 hour
            service, including clinical advice.              Guidelines for Users is
            given at Appendix 1. The centres are located ins-

            a)     London           01 635 9191 (direct   line   for   urgent
                                                iipediate irfqnration^ i v
                                   01 407 7600 (less urgent information and


            b)     Mini»jrgh -     031 229 2477
                                   031 228 2411 (Viewdata      see   sub   para   4
                                                below)

            c)    Cardiff      - 0222 569200

            d)    Belfast      - 0232 240503

            e)    Dublin       - 0001 745588

      (3)   Plants.    Identification of plants and berries ingested by
            children can often be difficult and help can sometimes be
            obtained fran local authority Parks Departments or University
            Departments of Botany.




MAPAAD                               -   28 -
       (4)   T^Hnhnrgh viewdata System. The Scottish Poisons Information
             Service in Edinburgh has developed a computerised information
             file whereby their poisons information database has been put
             on to a private viewdata system. Users are approved by, and
             registered with, the Poisons information Service and include
             Accident and Emergency units, drug information centres and
             general practitioners. Apart from an initial small outlay on
             the VDU, the only cost to the user is the telephone call to
             Edinburgh when information is required. The availability of
             the viewdata system does not replace the need to contact the
             national poisons information services directly on occasions
             for clinical advice about particular patients.

       (5) Advice can also be obtained from local industries concerning
           poisonous substances used by them, however the importance of
           liaison with a named member of the laboratory staff concerned
           with investigation and diagnosis is stressed. Many enquiries
           are also made to and dealt with by hospital pharmacy
           departments even though they are not formally constituted to
           provide such information.

      QfTFTRR SOURCES OP INFORMATION

13.   some poisons information is available through the Regional Drug
      Information Centre based at Leicester Royal Infirmary Tel (0533)
      551234 Ext 418 but it is not equipped and staffed to provide a 24
      hour service. It has access to various computerised data-bases (eg
      Toxline, Toxback and Rtecs) which are available via Blaise-link,
      (British Library viewdata service) and contacts with product
      manufacturers and other bodies such as the Ministry of Agriculture,
      Fisheries and Food and the Royal Society of Chemistry.

14. Reference C - ABC of Poisoning is an interesting and comprehensive
    article on "Emergency Drugs: Agents Used in the Treatment of
    Poisoning" which was published in the British Medical Journal
    (Volume 289) on 22 September 1984 and is recommended reading.




MAPAAD                                 - 29 -
                                                            APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                            SECTION 7

           NATIONAL POISONS INFORMATION SERVICE - GUY'S HOSPITAL
                            GUIDELINES FOR USERS

1.   The caller should be ready to give the name of the suspected
     agent(s) involved as accurately as possible.  Since the manufac­
     turer's name or other details may also be needed, container(s)
      should, if possible, be at hand.     In addition the following
      information is usually required.

     (1)     the patient's name and age

     (2)     time of exposure

     (3)     any apparent signs or symptoms

     (4)     treatment already given

2.   Patients or relatives should not be asked to telephone the
      information service since inquiries from the general public cannot
      be answered.   The emergency information service answers inquiries
      only frcm hospitals, general practitioners, and other emergency
      services.

3.   The caller may subsequently receive a follow up questionnaire
      requesting information regarding the outcome of the poisoning.
      These should be filled in and returned to the information service
      as they are essential to permit the compilation of "acute poisoning
      in man" especially where new or uncommon compounds are involved.

4.   Direct telephone lines are available to the poisons information
      service (01-635-9191).   Only callers requiring information on the
      emergency treatment of poisoning should use this number. All other
      inquiries, including requests for less urgent information and
      laboratory requests, should be made through the Guy's Hospital
      switchboard (01-407-7600).




MAPAAD                             A Pl-7
                                                              SECTION 8


ARRANGEMENTS FOR LIAISON WITH THE MEDIA

1   A Major Accident will, undoubtedly, attract considerable interest
    from   the   media   -   ie   newspapers,  radio   and television.
    Representatives will arrive at the receiving hospital in large
    numbers.   They will also ask for information over the telephone,
    especially in the early stages of an incident - until their
    reporters arrive.     Liaising with the Press and relatives will
    probably be the biggest single management problem for a hospital
    during a Major Accident.       Appropriate staff should therefore
    receive training and be conversant with media methods.

PREPARATION

2    Managers should ensure that arrangements for liaising with the
     Press are included in their hospital's Major Accident plan and are
     tested as part and parcel of that plan.         The Regional Public
     Relations Officer is available to advise on press arrangements.

3   The objective in liaising with the press should be to establish a
     constructive and positive relationship with them, remembering that
     the careful RELEASE of information can be important in easing
     public alarm.

4   The press can also be very helpful to the medical functioning of a
     hospital, especially during a major incident.   They can print or
     broadcast appeals for blood donors, notify the cancellation of
     clinics and/or ambulance journeys and generally inform the public
     (out-patients) of re-arrangements to hospital schedules disrupted
     by the need to invoke the Major Accident plan.

5   As part of the Major Accident plan, a large room should be
     identified as a Press Room.     The Press Room must be as near as
     possible to the JVcciderit arid E^rgency Department and preferably
     have access to outside telephone lines.

6   In the event of a Major Accident unit managers will need to
     designate a member of their staff as Press Officer, either for the
     whole incident or until the Regional PRO can arrive.      The Press
     Officer MOST be of sufficient grade and personality to command
     respect and action within the hospital, especially with medical and
     nursing staffs.

7   The advantages of designating a Press Officer are two-fold:-

     (1)   Journalists/photographers will knowwho will give them
            information and keep in contact with him/her, leaving other
           hospital staff free to carry out         their work without
           interruption.

     (2)   The  Press  Officer will  quickly   build up   a working
           relationship with the Press, each side recognising the
           other's problems and needs.    They   will begin to work



MAPAAD                           - 30 -
            together.

8    The Press Officer will also need the help of one other iremhpr of
      staff, someone to hold the fort on occasions.  The Regional PRO
     will also need help when he/she arrives.

ACTION

9    During a Major Accident handling the press can be divided into
     three phases.    The timings given are approximate and will vary
     according to each situation.

     Phase One - The First Two Hours

10   When the Major Accident is declared, three steps should be taken by
     the appropriate Manager as soon as possible s-

     (1)   Appoint a Press Officer

     (2)   Appoint his assistant

     (3)   Inform the Regional PRO

11   The immediate action of the Press Officer should be to ensure that
     the Press Room is available, that external telephone lines are
     available and that the porters know that when the press arrive they
     are to be TAKEN to the Press Room.

12   Experience has shown that if a Press Room is not provided problems
     can arise from reporters and/or photographers wandering around the
     hospital, talking to anyone and everyone to gather information.
     This can result in wrong and sensitive information being published,
     upsetting relatives and possibly police enquiries.      Also staff
     needed urgently elsewhere may be delayed or hindered.   By having a
     Press Room and releasing information in it regularly, reporters are
     encouraged to remain in or close to the Press Room: those teirpted
     to wander may miss the release of vital news.

13   It should be noted that photographers may wander anyway.         On
     arrival at a hospital photographers will be content to take
     pictures of ambulances arriving with the injured.   They will also,
     at this time, happily take pictures of hospital spoksesnen reading
     out statements.   Following this they will want to take pictures of
     the injured in wards and may start to wander.    Staff will need to
     be briefed to be on the lookout for unfamiliar people, either with
     cameras or with bulges under their coats and to ESCORT anyone who
     has "lost his way" etc, back to the Press Room.

14   If more than one hospital receives patients then:-

     (1)   The   same procedure    MOST     be   adopted   at   ALL   receiving
            hospitals.




MAPAAD                             - 31 -
      (2)   A central co-ordinating Press Office MJST also be set up,
            probably manned by the Regional PRO and his staff.       This
            office will be external to the hospital(s) thus relieving
            workload on the hospital(s) switchboards, enabling them to
            function more easily.    It will also reduce the workload on
            hospital Press Officers by providing national and regional
            media with basic information from one source.         It is,
            therefore, essential that the Co-ordinating Press Office is
            kept fully up-to-date with information including any proposed
            press releases prior to any action being taken.

     Security

15   If the Major Accident has been, or is suspected of having been,
      caused by terrorism or crime (bombs or firearms), the police will
      inpose a degree of security around the hospital.         This will
      increase even more if police officers have been involved; in this
      event the police will probably stop everyone except essential
      personnel frcm entering the hospital, and they may control the
      press "at the gates".     This will throw a burden on the Press
      Officer because the press will telephone the hospital incessantly
      for information.                                        j \c

16   If terrorism or crime is suspected the police will send a liaison
      officer to the hospital to co-ordinate police activities.     This
      officer may also act as press officer.  In these circumstances the
      police will maintain contact with their headquarters, the highest
      ranking police officer in the district and with the casualty line
      switchboard (Casualty Enquiry Bureau) which should be diverting
      calls away from the hospital.

17   It will be essential for the hospital Press Officer to get to know
      the police liaison officers as quickly as possible including the
      senior uniforaed police officer in charge.

18   The police should be involved in press releases, with co-operation
      the press work can be handled satisfactorily to suit both the
      Hospital and the Police requirements.    The hospital Press Officer
      has a considerable role to play whatever the circumstances and
      he/she must ensure that it is carried out, taking account of any
      particular sensitivities or special requirements.

     Press Briefing

19   Whatever the nature of the Major Accident a press briefing should
      be held as soon as possible, even if it has to be held outside the
     building.

20   It is emphasised that medical confidentiality must be maintained
     and any decision to release information must have prior nedical
     consent.    The Press Officer will need to collate the following
      information:-




MAPAAD                           - 32 -
      (1)   Number of injured received by the hospital

      (2)   Type of injuries(even if only in general terms to start with)

      (3)   Treatment being given     (number being operated on, receiving
             minor care, etc)

     (4)    Time hospital was told to expect casualties

     (5)    Time first casualties arrived

     (6)    Details of numbers of staff on duty, of medical teams on
             standby, of routine operations cancelled and other background
             information

     (7)    Brief resume of the hospital's Major Accident plan, what time
             it was put into action and the consequences for other
             departments and the hospital

     (8)    Divide injured between men and women, children under 16 and
             the nature (broadly) of their injuries, whether retained in
             hospital or discharged

     (9)    State if any patients have been transferred elsewhere either
             for specialist treatment (neurosurgery) or because hospital
             could not cope

21   Prepare a statement (with the aid of the Regional PRO if present)
      around these facts but consult with the police liaison officer if
      one is present, particularly of the incident involves terrorism or
      crime.

22   The Unit General Manager or his Press Officer will be expected
      to:-

     (1)    Read the statement to reporters and photographers

     (2)    Repeat the statement first to radio interviewers and then two
             or three times more to television reporters

     (3)    Fix a time for a further briefing (this should be fairly soon
             if events are developing rapidly as they usually do in a
             major accident).

     (4)    Inform the Co-ordinating Press Office, if applicable.

     Phase Two - The Next Few Hours

23   Answer any telephone calls frcm the press using the facts and
     figures already drawn up for the first press briefing. These calls
     will be mainly frcm local daily or evening newspapers or news
     agencies asking for additional details about anyone involved in the
     incident who may be resident in their circulation areas.       If a



MAPAAD                              - 33 -
     Co-ordinating Press Office has been established        many   of   the
     regional and national media can be referred to it.

24   If circumstances allow, establish a link with the medical and
     nursing   staff  dealing   with   casualties   to  ensure complete
     reliability of the information on treatment and injuries.

25   Prepare the second press briefing. If the incident has been caused
     by terrorism or crime the Press Officer will need to clear the
     release of information with the police liaison/press officer.

26   If possible provide-

     (1)   Details of patients - names, addresses and ages (bearing in
           mind need for any confidentiality)

     (2)   Details of extent of injuries and treatment given

     (3)   Details of numbers of deaths, emergency operations, intensive
           care cases and patients sent heme

     (4)   Inform the Co-ordinating Press Office, if applicable

27   If there have been any deaths, the details required by the media
      will include the time of death, how long the dead person survived
      on the operating table, how many medical and nursing staff fought
      to save the patient etc but see 29 below.

28   It is stressed that the police will not confirm names of the dead
      until positive identification has been made and the n e s t t k i n
      informed.

29   As victims are     brought in and treated, the press will ask to
      interview them.    The press will also want to interview the staff
      treating the injured.    Check security withpolice and obtain the
      agreenent of the consultant concerned.

30   Seme minor casualties may be willing to be interviewed.    Sane will
      not.   Some, although unwilling to be interviewed, may be prepared
      to give information to pass on to the press who will almost
      certainly use it as "quotes" from the casualty concerned.

31   If possible, ask key staff members to give interviews to the press.
      First-hand accounts reduce the risk of wrong information being
      given and afford an accurate - and favourable - impression of the
      hospital and its staff.

32   Finally, arrange more press briefings for later that day. if there
      is nothing new to be said, inform the press but premise an updating
      briefing as soon as possible.      Inform the Co-ordinating Press
      Office, if applicable.




MAPAAD                           - 34 -
     Phase Three - The Next Day awards

33   Reporters will want to speak to those casualties admitted to
      hospital.   Photographers will want to take pictures.   Check with
      the police since either may Seriously breach police security (such
      as when a patient might fear for his/her own safety or are
      witnesses to a crime) this should only be arranged, provided the
      doctor confirms that the patient is sufficiently able to do so and
      the patient agrees.

34   To minimise problems for patients and staff, it is advantageous to
      arrange a "Press Hour" whan the press will be allowed to come in
      onto the ward and speak to patients and take pictures.        Sane
      patients might agree to speak but not have pictures taken. Ensure
      that their wishes are observed.

35   Consult medical and nursing staff on those patients fit enough to
      talk and ask staff to talk to the press on how they coped with the
      pressures of the emergency and to give details of injuries and hew
      these were treated.

36   Speak to the patients personally to establish if they are prepared
      to talk to the press and have their pictures taken.     Try to group
      these in one part of the ward. This will give peace to those who
      are unwilling to take part and also there is less likelihood of
      photographers "accidentally" taking pictures of people who do not
      wish to be photographed.   If possible screen off that part of the
      ward containing patients who do not wish to speak to the press.

     Press Hour .

37   Reporters will have very good reasons for requesting that they be
      allowed to do their interview first.   Everyone, it seems, has a
      deadline withitt tte next half hour.    Whatever arrangements you
      make, control them firmly.

38   Allow the photographers to go ih first.   If there is a large group
      of photographers, perhaps ten or more, split them into two groups.
      Give each group at least five minutes each to take pictures and
      then escort than away.

39   Next, admit newspaper reporters.    Give them 10 to 15 minutes.

40   N&w adnut radio reporbsris.   Give than 10 to 15 minutes.

41   Lastly, admit TV crews.    Admit one crew at a time for 10    minutes
     each.    Deal only with the BBC News (national or regional)    and ITN
      (or the local independent company if ITN is not present).    Other TV
      interests, possibly international stations, will be able      to gain
      film footage frcm BBC and ITN.

42   By the time the TV crews are due to go in, patients might be
     getting irritable, tired, uncomfortable or distressed. if this



MAPAAD                             - 35 -
     happens, admit only one TV crew for a single interview.       The
     resulting film should be "pooled" by the TV stations - they don't
     like it but the alternative is no film at all.  A variation is to
     admit one reporter but two film crews.   Again, the TV crews will
     not like it, but again the alternative is no coverage at all.
     Generally, TV crews in these circumstances will co-operate fully.
     A film crew is usually four people - reporter, cameraman, lights
     man and sound man.

43   After the Press Hour, there should be no need for further press
     access to the casualties except in special circumstances.        A
     relative of a casualty might ask that a local newspaper has access
      to a particular patient or Royalty or senior Government Ministers
     may wish to visit.    The advice at paragraphs 34 to 37 should be
     observed as appropriate.

44   Normally,    once   full    access   has been  given   and   the
      interviews/pictures have been obtained, the press interest will
      flag and another story will take over.

     Hospital Needs

45   During the course of a Major Accident the hospital may wish to use
     the media to help the casualties or assist in the smooth running of
     the hospiital.   Blood donors might be required urgently, perhaps
     with a particularly rare blood group.   The media will happily use
     this information and broadcast it, but they will wish to knew why
     the blood is needed and who is involved etc.    The media can also
     notify the public (out-patients) of changes to clinics etc but they
     will wish to know why eg. are the medical teams so exhausted, busy
     or whatever to carry out their clinics the following day and so on.
     Inform the Co-ordinating Press Office, if one has been activated,
     such appeals might be issued from it on behalf of all hospitals
     involved.

46   Do not hesitate to achieve the hospital's objectives via the madia
      if it is considered that is the right and quickest way of achieving
      them. The media will willingly co-operate.

47       CONTACTS: Regional Public Relations Officer - Derek Hull
                   Business telephone Sheffield (0742) 306511 Ext 441/551
                   Home telephone Sheffield (0742) 303392

     RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS


48    HM (56 ) 58 - Information to the press about the conditions of
                    patients.
     HC (77) 1 - Health Service Arrangements for dealing with major
                    accidents.

49   A MEDIA CHECK LIST TO A MAJCR ACCIDENT CR EMERGENCY IS GIVEN AT
     APPENDIX 1



MAPAAD                             - 36 -
                                                            APPENDIX 1 TO
                                                            SECTION 8

MEDIA CHECKLIST TO A MflJCR ACCIDENT

First Phase

Contact Public Relations Staff                      ( )

Liaise with Senior Ambulance Officer                ( )

Meet the Police -

         Senior Uniformed Officer                   ( )
         Liaison Officer                            ( )
         Press Officer                              ( )

Arrange press briefing                              ( )

Gather information -

         Number of injured                          (   )
         Sorts of injuries                          (   )
         Treatment being given                      (   )
         Time hospital went on alert                (   )
         Time first casualties received             (   )
         Numbers/staff on duty, medical teams etc   (   )

Prepare press statement                             ( )

Hold first press briefing                           ( )
Second Phase

Mate direct contact with -

      Ambulance staff                               ( )
      Medical staff                                 ( )
      Nursing staff                                 ( )

Arrange second press briefing                       ( )
Gather information -

      Confirm with police what can be released      ( )
      Confirm number of injured                     ( )
Give details of victims -

     Names                                          (   )
     Addresses                                      (   )
     Ages                                           (   )
     Occupations                                    (   )
     Injuries of each                               (   )
What treatment given                                ( )



MAPAAD                              A Pl-8
Give details of -

     deaths                                          ()
     emergency operations                            ()
     ITU oases                                       ()
     those being retained in hospital                ()
     those being sent hone                           ()

If there have been deaths -

      confirm time of death(s)                        ()
      length of time patient(s) survived              ()
      number of medical and nursing staff involved   ( )

Arrange interviews with staff/minor casualties       ()

Will there be further press briefing(s) -

      today                                           ()
      tonight                                         ()
      tomorrow morning                                ()

Third Phase

Arrange a press hour                                 ( >

Speak to -

      ambulance staff                                 ()
      doctors                                         ()
      nurses                                          ()
      patients                                        ()

Cteck patients willing tobe interviewed               ()

Agree time and day for press hour                     ()

Inform the press, radio and main television media    ( )

Press Hour

Press photographers (5-10 minutes)                    ()

Press reporters (10-15 minutes)                       ()

Radio reporters (approx 5 minutes)                    ()

TV crews (at least 30 minutes)                       ( )




MAPAAD                              AP2-8
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY                                                             ANNEX 'A' TO TRHA MAJOR
                                                                                            ACCIDENT PROCEDURES
LISTED HOSPITALS

Major Accident and Emergency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover



 HEALTH AUTHORITY (HA)     HOSPITAL, ADDRESS      LOCATION             TYPE OF SERVICE       BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL AREA SERVED
                           AND TEL NO


DERBYSHIRE

 North Derbyshire HA     Chesterfield & North    2 miles east of 24 hour + Flying Squad     North and Central Derbyshire but part of
                         Derbyshire Royal Hosp   C1field on A632                            High Peak District is served by Stockport
                         Calow Chesterfield      C'field                                    Royal Infirmary, Wellington Road South
                         (0246) 77271            Bolsover Road                              TN (061) 4807441.

Southern Derbyshire HA   Derbyshire Royal      City Centre         24 hour + Flying Squad   South and Central Derbyshire but
                         Infirmary London Roac                                              Swadlincote area served by Burton District
                         Derby (0332) 47141                                                 Hospital, Belvedere Road, Burton on Trent
                                                                                            TN (962) 66333


LEICESTERSHIRE

Leicestershire HA         Leicester Royal        City Centre       24 hour + Flying Squad   All of Leicestershire. Also provides an
                          Infirmary                                                         alternative casualty receiving hospital
                          (0533) 541414                                                     for najar accidents occurring in the
                                                                                            Oxford & W Midlands Regions where these
                                                                                            occur close to the Leicestershire boundary


LINCOLNSHIRE
North Lincolnshire HA     Lincoln County Hosp    City              24 hour + Flying Squad   North Lincolnshire and East of the Newark/
                          Sewell Road Lincoln                                               Grantham rail line
                          (0522) 29921                                                      except: an area in the north which is
                                                                                                     served by Grimsby and Scunthorpe.
South Lincolnshire HA    Pilgrim Hosp Sibsey                       24 hour                  South Lincolnshire (under review)
                         Road Boston                                                        except: a) South of South Witham &
                         (0205) 64801    . „                                                Bourne - (Peterborough District Hospital)
                                                 1............          ...............

                                                                 A-1
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

LISTED HOSPITALS

Major Accident and Bnerqency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover



 HEALTH AUTHORITY (HA)     HOSPITAL, ADDRESS       LOCATION         TYPE OF SERVICE        BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL AREA SERVED
                           AND TEL NO


 South Lincolnshire HA    Pilgrim Hosp   Sibsey    City           24 hour                  contd/...
                          Road Boston                                                      b) Grantham, area west of the Newark/
                          (0205) 64801                                                        Grantham rail line; area between
                                                                                              Grantham and South Witham and Bourne -
                                                                                                (Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham)

                                                                                           c) Area east of the Newark/Grantham rail
                                                                                              line - (Lincoln County Hospital)


NOTTINGHAMSHIRE

Bassetlaw HA              Bassetlaw DGH                           24 hour + Flying Squad   North Nottinghamshire (under review)
                          Worksop (0909) 472831

Central Nottinghamshire   Mansfield & District                    24 hour + Flying Squad   Central Nottinghamshire (under review)
HA                        General Hospital

Nottingham HA             University Hospital                     24 hour + Flying Squad   Nottingham; plus parts of Lincolnshire:-
                          Queen's Medical Centre                                           ie a) Grantham
                          Nottingham                                                           b) West of the Newark/Grantham rail
                                                                                                  line
                                                                                               c) Area between Grantham and South
                                                                                                  Witham and Bourne


SOUTH YORKSHIRE

Barnsley                  Barnsley DGH Gawber                     24 hour + Flying Squad   Barnsley
                          Road Barnsley
                          (0226) 86122
                                                                                           1
                                                                                           ............................     1
                                                              A-2
TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

LISTED HOSPITALS

Major Accident and Bnerqency Department Providing 24 Hour Cover



 HEALTH AUTHORITY (HA)       HOSPITAL, ADDRESS     LOCATION         TYPE CF SERVICE             BROAD GEOGRAPHICAL AREA SERVED
                             AND TEL NO


 Doncaster                Doncaster Royal                          24 hour + Flying Squad   Doncaster       (under review)
                          Infirmary
                          (0302) 666666

 Rotherham                Rotherham DGH                            24 hour                  Rotherham
                          Moorgate Road
                          Rotherham
                          (0709) 62222

 Sheffield                Royal Hallamshire Hosf                   DAY
                          Glossop Road                              0900 - 2000 hours           Sheffield
                          Sheffield (0742) 26484                  ■ + Flying Squad

                          Northern General Hosp                    DAY
                          Harries Road Sheffield                   0900 - 2000 hours        Sheffield
                          (0742) 387253                            + Flying Squad
                                                                   NIGHT ROTA
                                                                   Mon - Royal Hallamshire
                                                                   Tues - Northern General
                                                                   Weds - Northern General
                                                                   Thur - Royal Hallamshire
                                                                   Fri - Royal Hallamshire
                                                                   Sat - Northern General
                                                                   Sun - Royal Hallamshire




1July 1985 JAC/JW
                         I                                                                  i                      ..

                                                              A-3
                                                                       ANNEX 'B' TO TRHA
                                                                       MflJCR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES



DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY FOR MflJCR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

GENERAL TERMS                            i-


                                                             '

Ambulance Control:                                          The permanent office (manned 24
                                                            hours) which receives all demands
                                                            for ambulance resources in the
                           "%-                              county, co-ordinates and allocates
                           ',;.V                            the demand to stations or vehicles.

Casualty Enquiry Bureau:                                A bureau set up by the police to
                                                        maintain    a   list  of   casualties
                                                        resulting from a Major Accident
                                                       riindluding casualties dealt with at
                                                        the    site   without   referral   to
                                                        hospital and to answer all initial
                                   ■J-A                 enquiries regarding casualties.

Emergency Services:                                         The ambulance, fire,    police    and
                                                            coastguard services.

Major Accident:                                   ; ? For health service purposes a Major
                                                       Accident is one which because of the
                                                       number         and    severity    of    live
                                                       casualties         it produces     requires
                                                       special arrangements.              In this
                                                       document the generic term "Major
                                                 '■!'i'^A(tJcsL<5ent?- is taken to embrace any
                                                       accident,         incident    or    disaster
                                                       resulting in a large number of
                                                       casualties          and    involving     the
                                                       Ambulance,          Police,     Fire     and
                                                       Emergency Medical Services.
                                     .        . t ,      ^
SITE TERMS

Ambulance Incident Officer:                                 The officer of the ambulance service
                                                            responsible for the co-ordination of
                                                            that service at the scene of a Major
                                                            Accident.

Ambulance and Medical                                   The   location -#of 5 the    Ambulance
  Communications Point:                                 Incident   Officer    and   the   Site
                                                        Medical Officer and the focal point
                                                        for   all    medical,    nursing   and
                                                        ambulance staff at the scene of the
                                                        Major Accident.

Ambulance Loading Point:                                    The place          at the scene of
                                                            a Major Accident where ambulances
                                                            are loaded.



MAPAAD                                                B-1
Site Msdical officer:                 The nedical officer with overall
                                      medical responsibility at the scene
                                      of a Major Accident who will liaise
                                      with   the    ambulance    and   other
                                      emergency services.     He should not
                                      normally be a member of the Flying
                                      Squad or a mobile medical and
                                      nursing team.

Ambulance Parking Point:              The place designated at the scene of
                                      a Major Accident where arriving
                                      ambulances    park  so    that   the
                                      attendant can report arrival, thus
                                      avoiding congestion at the entrance
                                      to the site or at the ambulance
                                      loading points.

Casualty Clearing Station:            A post set up at the Major Accident
                                      by the Ambulance Incident Officer,
                                      in liaison with the Site    Medical
                                      Officer to sort casualties and
                                      direct their evacuation.

Chief Site Nurse:                     The most senior nurse with overall
                                      nursing responsibility at the scene
                                      of a Major Accident where two or
                                      more mobile nedical and nursing
                                      teams   are    required  or   where
                                      circumstances create a need for her
                                      presence.

Plying Squad:                         The team sent to the scene of a
                                      Major   Accident   usually   at   the
                                      request of the ambulance service.

Stretcher Bearer Assembly Points:     The    places    designated   by the
                                      Ambulance Incident Officer where
                                      volunteer    stretcher   bearers can
                                      assemble    to   be   directed where
                                      required.

HOSPITAL TERMS

Ambulance Liaison Officer:            The ambulance officer responsible
                                      for providing radio camnunications
                                      and for the supervision of ambulance
                                      service activity and liaison at a
                                      hospital receiving casualties frcm a
                                      Major Accident.

Casualty Assessment Officer:          A doctor who will receive and assess
(sometimes termed the Triage          all casualties as soon as they enter
 Officer)                             the hospital and decide the priority



MAPAAD                          B-2
                                        of treatment.

Consultant incharge of Major          The     consultant     (usually     the
Accident procedures                   consultant in charge of the A & E
                                       Department) who is nominated to be
                                       responsible for co-ordinating all
                                       hospital     nedical      arrangements
                                       relating to Major Accidents.

Hospitals

(1)         - Listed Hospitals:         Hospitals listed by the Regional
                                        Health   Authority   as   adequately
                                        equipped to receive casualties on a
                                        24 hour basis; most are also able to
                                        provide,   when required, a Site
                                        Medical Officer, chief Site Nurse
                                        and a Flying Squad.

(2)         - Designated Hospitals:     The first listed hospital to be
                                        alerted by the ambulance authority
                                        to receive casualties in the event
                                        of a Major Accident.

(3)         - Supporting Hospitals:     The listed hospitals nominated to
                                        support the designated hospital in
                                        dealing with casualties from a Major
                                        Accident.

Hospital Information centre:            A centre at a hospital, set up by
                                        the General Manager, to      collect
                                        information about casualties at the
                                        hospital and pass it to the Police
                                        casualty Enquiry Bureau. The centre
                                        will also deal with callers enquir­
                                        ing about casualties and      handle
                                        follow-up telephone enquiries about
                                        specific patients.

Triage/Sorting:                         Assessment  of   casualties   into
                                        priority for treatment/removal to
                                        hospital.




MAPAAD                            B-3
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN
           AMBULANCE SERVICE

          MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN

February 1985
             W ith the Compliments o f the

            Metropolitan Ambulance Officer




South Y^rkshiire^Metiropol^ta^1Ambulance Service
O U U L II ■ -----------------
Ambulance Service H.U.
 "Fairfield"
 Moorgate Road
 Rotherham S60 2BQ
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                     MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN


Introduction

A major incident is a situation that we can never predict, it can occur
at any place at any time. Hie object of this plan is to enable us to
deal with any incident in an organised professional way, by each and
every mentoer sticking to their own job and knowing exactly what their
role is.

Hie Ambulance Service has more problems regarding manning levels than
the other two Emergency Services especially at night, the weekends and
Bank Holidays. This problem alone makes the construction of a plan
such as this a major task due to the difficulties that can occur in
contacting off duty personnel. Hie plan has been designed to be simple,
easy to read and each duty itemised so individuals can concentrate on
the areas that concern than and all unnecessary information left out.

Attention must be drawn to the following factors
                                                                 ?
Hie colour of Safety Helmets will denote the duties anc^rankiof the
wearer i.e.                                            ^    '

1.   Arrbulance Personnel transport        =   White
     Leading Arrfoulance Person            =   White with Black Band
     Emergency Support Team (FootSquads) =     Yellow
     Ambulance Officers                    =   Blue

2.   All personnel must ensure that their H. V. jacket and suitable
     footwear are taken to the scene of any major incident with other
     items of personal safety equipment.

It is most important that the Incident Officer remains in or close to
the Conmunications Vehicle, this being the centre for directing gnd
monitoring the whole operation. He must also ensure that a V.H.F. R/T
Handset (which will be marked) is given to the first available crew
that depart for the designated hospital so it can be handed over to the
Liaison Officer who will be on duty.

Ambulance crews must remain with their vehicles at all times, their
role at a major incident is transportation and Ambulance Nursing whilst
mobile, all rescue and treatment duties will be performed by the
Emergency support team which are Arrfoulance Personnel without ambulances.

Delegated officers will be issued with a U.H.F. R/T Handset to enable
canrnunications to be made via the mobile Control.

The support and cannunication vehicle will be based at Headquarters, this
vehicle will contain all the necessary equiorient and drivers will be
allocated by Control.

To enable the plan to run efficiently, it is essential that all personnel
concentrate on the objectives and check list of their individual role.
MAJOR INCIDENT/CATASTROPHE PLAN




Definition


A Major Incident/Catastrophe is any situation whereby the normal
day to day running of the service is impeded due to the nurrber
of casualties requiring treatment and transportation, creating the
need for extra operational resources frcm our own or other services.


Objective

To instigate a methodical plan of action, and to organise the
ambulance service resources to provide


     a)   Sufficient resources for the effective handling, treatment
          and transportation of casualties.


    b)    To provide and set up an efficient control and ccnmunications
          system.


    c)    To ensure a minimum disruption of the normal day to day service.


    d)    Establish a close liaison with other emergency services.
 DUTIES OF FIRST CREW ON SCENE


 Objective

 Hie anbulance attendant or L/A who is first on scene of an incident will
 assune the responsibilities for:-

 1.    The initial assessment of the situation.


 2.    The instigation of the ambulance service major incident plan.


 3.    The management and organisation of the ambulance personnel until
       relieved by a more senior officer.


 NOTE:-

Ibis ambulance is to remain a conniunications vehicle, the rear doors
should be closed and secured to prevent any unauthorised patient loading
until released for operationa1 duties by the incident officer.




                             Check List

           H.V. JACKETS AND SAFETY HELMETS MUST BE TORN


             Driver                                          Attendant


1.    Radio arrival on scene and                  1.   Go forward, assess number
      confirm exact location.                          of casualties.
2.    Locate and infoim control of                2.   Identify priority hazards.
      a) Best approach/access.
      b) Other services present or                3.   Report findings to control.
          required.
      c) Request permission for                   4.   Establish sights for:-
          E.R.C. Channel.
                                                       a)   Antoulance parking area.
3.    Switch off:-                                     b)   Control/Caununications
                                                            vehicle parking area.
      a) Engine                                        c)   Casualty clearing post.
      b ) Lights                                       d)   Arrbulance loading
      c) Heaters                                            point.
4.    Switch on:-                                 5.   Liaison with other services.
      Blue rotating roof beacon.

5.    Secure rear doors.

6.    Remain with the vehcile.
 INCIDENT OFFICER



 Objective


 Organise ambulance personnel into setting up working groups, monitoring
 their effectiveness and to liaise with other services.


 Check List


 1.   Liaise with the temporary Incident Officer and evaluate the present
      situation.

 2.   Establish

      a)   Casualty clearing post.

      b)   Ambulance parking area.

      c)   Ambulance loading point.

      d)   First aid equipment point.

 3.   Delegate ambulance officers to manage the established posts.

 4.   Establish ccranunications with the on site control vehicle.

 5.   Ensure that R/T handsets are distributed to the appointed officers.

 6.   Liaise with the police and fire service Incident Officers.

 7.   Supervise and co-ordinate the ambulance service operations fran
      mobile control.

 8.   Close down the ambulance operations at the completion of the incident.

9.    Supervise the collection and re-distribution of equipment.

10.. Supply a written report to the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer of
     all relevant points raised during the incident.
emergency support t e am officer



Organise, manage and despatch the team as required, to diagnose, treat
and advise on the extraction of injured casualties.



Check List


1.   Ensure support/ccninunications vehicle is mobile frcm Headquarters.


2.   Collect R/T Handset frcm Ccnmunications Vehicle.


3.   Muster the team and issue protective clothing frcm the support
     vehicle.


4.   Liaise with the Incident Officer and report ready for operations.


5.   Liaise with other Bnergency Services.


6.   Ensure the safety of his team at all times.


7.   Manage the using of specialised ambulance rescue equipment.


8.   Obey instructions given by senior Fire Officers in dangerous
     situations.


9.   Ensure all support team equipment is accounted for, after the
     termination of the major incident.
EMERGENCY SUPPORT TEAM WILL:


At the scene of a major incident carry out efficiently the principles
of Arrbulance Aid and assist with lifting and handling as directed
by the Emergency Support Team Officer.



CHECK LIST


1.   On notification of a major incident proceed to scene by one
     of the following methods (ensure suitable footwear and H.V.
     jacket is taken with you).


     a)   Hone to scene via own transport, or other methods.

     b)   Station to scene via own transport or ambulance vehicle.

     c)   Mobile, ambulance vehicle.   Control to be informed as to
          method of travel.

2.   Report to Energency Support Team Officer where you will be issued
     with a yellow helmet and boilersuit (major incident clothing).

3.   Ensure major incident clothing is worn with H. V. jacket on top.

4.   Carry out instruction as deligated by Emergency Support Team Officer.
CASUALTY CLEARING POST OFFICER


Triage and nurse casualties, arranging for their hospital transportation.


CHECK LIST


1.   Ensure collection of R/T Handset and triage labels from support/
     caimunications vehicle.


2.   Survey location for suitability - in conjunction with Incident Officer.


3.    Liaise with Mobile Antoulance Team Support Officer and Ambulance
     Loading Point Officer.


4.   Identify and label triage casualties.


5.   Ensure specialised equipment is released and casualties are placed
     on green sheets.


6.   Check, nurse and reassure casualties.


7.   Ensure economical distribution of Anfoulance First Aid equipment.


8.   Record casualties on relevant forms.
AMBULANCE LOADING POINT OFFICER


Objective:-


Organise and control the flow of ambulance vehicles, between the
parking and loading points, supervising the handling, loading of
patients, and establish a record system of patients and their
destinations.


CHECK LIST


1.   Ensure that a R/T Handset is issued from the support/connunication
     vehicle.

2.   Survey the Ambulance Loading Point site for suitability and
     hardstanding, in conjunction with Incident Officer.

3.   Establish R/T contact with Casualty Clearing Point and Antoulance
     Parking Point officers.

4.   Act on the request of Casualty Clearing Point officer for
     ambulance vehicles.

5.   Allocate patients to designated hospitals.

6.   Establish a record system of patient details and hospital
     destinations.

7.   Maintain up-to-date information via control of the hospital
     availability.

8.   Inform Incident Officer and record any changes in hospital
     availability.

9.   Remain in station until released by the Incident Officer.
 ambulance parking OFFICER




 CHECK LIST


 *'    5   L   “       R /T HandSet 13 ° ° lle c te d     ^ P P o rt/c o m u n ic a tlo n s



       a^?yirOT5mSSn1S 1ScSntaw fiSding “ d manoeuvrlt«
      S    ?       ^   Parklng 01                 vehicles in the order of

4.    Instruct drivers to turn off all electrics.

5.    Ensure all crews remain with their vehicles.

6 . Organise refresbnents/meal breaks for                  during latent periods.
7.    Ensure petrol tanks are at least i fnii
      canpleted and in s t ^ t                                                        *


      typJr0fr^ i c l e Pt ] S e?c3t0 Ambulance fading Point dependant on
                                    requested by Antoulance loading Point officer

9-                 S r S r S n ?      S £ £ ?     radl° Watch           instructed
STATION OFFICER WILL:


At the notification of a major incident supervise the call out
procedures of station personnel ensuring the efficient turn out
of vehicles as directed by Control and to undertake any further
requests given by Control or Senior Officer. The Station Officer
will not proceed to the incident unless instructed to do so by
a Senior Officer in conjunction with the Control Superintendant.



CHECK LIST


1.   Call out an L/A.


2.   Proceed to station instigate and supervise call out procedures.


3.   Ensure efficient vehicle turn out.


4.   Ensure that the station closest to the incident is open for
     petrol, showers and other facilities.


5.   Undertake further instruction as given by Control or Senior
     Officer.
MOBILE CONTROL OFFICERS


At the scene of a major incident ensure efficient cotnnunications, record
relevant details on log sheets provided to produce a caiplete history of
all events at the scene. Maintain close liaison with Incident Officer
in order to carry out necessary request.




1.   Collect support/cannunication vehicle from Headquarters.

2.   Proceed to scene and set up connunications vehicle on approved
     site, and next to or in line with police and Fire Service
     corrrnunications vehicle. Blue beacon to be switched on and left
     on throughout the incident.

3. Issue R/T Handsets to appropriate officer.

4. Ensure good coranunications via mobile Control; R/T Handsets UHF
    and VHF; and base Control.

5. Liaise with and constantly update Incident Officer.

6. Record relevant details on log sheets provided.

7. Issue batteries for R/T Handsets as required.
     CONTROL OFFICER



 The objective of Control in the event of a major incident
 to ensure the efficient call out and deployment of S r S L e l
 the effective mobilisation of vehicles, good connWicatiS2
 the accurate recording of all details, and t o ^ S e ?o
 procedures as dictated by Service Policy.



 CHECK LIST


 1.     Enter details on A.S.I.


 2.    Deploy nearest available vehicle.


3.     Await stop message, although if obvious, instigate
       major incident plan.                          g xe

       i.e.   Call out check list.
              Mobilisation of support/communications vehicle with R6 Cbntrol


4.     Deploy personnel and vehicles as required.


5.     Record all relevant details.


6.    Maintain communications until mobile Cbntrol is set up and
      requested.CaiimniCate t0                Control as and when
LIAISON OFFICER WILL:


At the notification of a major incident supervise the arrival and
departure of axitoulances at the designated hospital ensuring
Control is constantly updated and relevant details are recorded.




CHECK LIST


1.   Proceed to designated hospital, contact Base Control on
     arrival via telephone.


2.   Liaise with Casualty Officer/Hospital Administrator.


3.   Assess approach, parking and exit for arrbulance vdiicles
     at Hospital Departments.


4.   Ensure efficient unloading/loading and turn round of
     vehicles.


5.   Record patient No's, details on service form and update
     mobile Control on hospital state.


6.   On receipt of handset ccnmunicate with Mobile Control.
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE MhTKQPQLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE


                   INCIDENT CALL COT CHECK LIST




1                                                 Time   Remarks



1       Officer I/C Control

1       Hospital No. 1

        Hospital No. 2


        One Station Officer - Call Out

I       One ADO - Incident Officer

1       One R6 Support Team Officer

        R6 Control -

1       R5 Control -
1
        One R6 - Hospital Liaison
1
1       One R6 Loading Officer

!       One R6 Casualty Officer
1
I       One R6 Parking Officer
[
1       Duty Mechanic


    ACMAO


    CMAO

!
L   Other Ambulance Service
    -




    If appropriate officer cannot be contacted, implement a substitute i.e. R5 for
    D. 0. C. C., L/A for R6 etc.
1                               ___
               SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE



]              INCIDENT LOG SHEET
1
|

I


     TIME   FRCM     MESSAGE                          ACTION    TIME




j
j
!




I


\
%
1
|

1
J
—

 !
 1
1i
i



;




!


     "
—




     '
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE



             MAJOR INCIDENT FORM




                 Sex
Fleet No.                No. of Patients     Details of Injured Personnel
            M            Per Vehicle         Other Remarks
Sheffield Health Authority




 MAJOR
DISASTER
      PLAN

    issued: July 1986
               MAJOR DISASTER PLAN REVISIONS



REVISION NO.   DATE   PAGE NO.   TITLE OF REVISION DATE REVISED SIGNATURE
                                                     IN PLAN
                          SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                          NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL

                            MAJOR DISASTER PLAN


                                  CONTENTS

                                                                  PAGE

SECTION I.    MAJOR DISASTER PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD                1-3
              What is a Major Disaster?                             1
              Notification                                          1
              District Hospitals Control                            1
              Distribution Principles                               1
              Accident & Emergency Services in Sheffield            2
              Site Medical Officer/Mobile Team                      2
              Incidents Involving Dangerous Chemicals               2
              Incidents Involving Radioactive Substances            3

SECTION II.   MAJOR DISASTER PLAN FOR THE NORTHERN
              GENERAL HOSPITAL - SUMMARY OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES     4-15
              Preparation of the Hospital                           4-6
              Control Arrangements                                   7
              Screening of Casualties                                8
              Staff Response                                         9
              Access to Hospital Site                                9
              Maps showing Patient Flow and Departments           10-11
              Essential Internal Telephone Numbers                12-13
              Procedure to be Followed in the Event of Major
              Disaster Plan being implemented at the
              Royal Hallamshire Hospital                          14-15

SECTION III. PROCEDURES FOR INDIVIDUAL STAFF, WARDS AND
             DEPARTMENTS                                          16-38
             Switchboard Operators                                16-19
             Nurse in Charge of Accident & Emergency Department     20
             Senior Nurse on Duty for the Acute Services          20-21
             Nurse in Charge of Ward 60                            21
             Assistant Matron, Operating Theatres or Deputy        22
             Medical Staff                                        22-23
             Hospital Control Team                                24-25
             Hospital Administrator and Staff                     25-29
             Medical Records Department                           29-30
             Distribution Services Department                      30
             Blood Bank Senior Chief MLSO or Deputy                31
             Superintendent Physiotherapist or Deputy             31-32
             Superintendent Radiographer or Deputy                 32
             Unit Pharmaceutical Officer or Deputy                32-33
             Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD)             33-34
             Hospital Chaplains                                   34-35
             Group Principal Social Worker or Deputy               35
             Higher Senior Anatomical Pathology
             Technician or Deputy                                  35
             Linen Services Manager or Deputy                     35-36
             Supplies and Stores Staff                            36-37
             Catering Department                                  37-38
S e c t i o n I.

MAJOR DISASTER PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD

WHAT IS A MAJOR DISASTER?

There is no standard definition, but for hospitals this is generally an
accident for which the number and severity of live casualties require
special arrangements to be made.


NOTIFICATION

The declaration of a Major Disaster will be made by one or other of the
Emergency Services, the most likely of these being the Ambulance Service.
Notification will be made to the Switchboards of the receiving hospitals.
However, if large numbers of severely injured casualties arrive without
notice at the Accident and Emergency Department, the procedure may be put
into action locally on the instructions of the senior doctor present in the
Accident and Emergency Department.


DISTRICT HOSPITALS CONTROL

The choice as to which hospitals are to be initial receiving centres for
casualties will be made by SYMAS, depending on a range of factors including
the location of the accident, the number of casualties involved, and the
nature of the accident. It is possible that SYMAS will select neighbouring
hospitals outside Sheffield, e.g. Rotherham or Barnsley, together with only
one of the Sheffield hospitals, i.e. Northern General Hospital or Royal
Hallamshire Hospital. If the Northern General Hospital is selected, it.
will still be necessary for the Northern General Hospital Switchboard to
notify the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard that the Major Disaster
Plan is being put into operation at the Northern General Hospital. In the
event of a Major Disaster in which the Royal Hallamshire Hospital is
designated as the receiving hospita.1 for casualties the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital switchboard will notify the Northern General Hospital switchboard
and the limited action described on pages 14 and 15 of this document will
be taken. A District Hospitals Control point will be established at the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital by a Senior Administrative Officer to provide
co-ordination of Sheffield hospitals and communications with other services
and Districts. Local hospital control points will be set up in each
hospital.

DISTRIBUT ION PRINCIPLES

The District Hospitals Control at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital will be
responsible for the distribution of casualties if direction of the
Ambulance Service is required.
ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES IN SHEFFIELD

The Accident and Emergency Departments at the Northern General Hospital and
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital are open every day between 9.00 am and 9.00
pm.

Overnight, between 9.00 pm and 9.00 am, one Accident and Emergency
Department remains open as follows:-

         Monday         Royal Hallamshire Hospital
         Tuesday        Northern General Hospital
         Wednesday      Northern General Hospital
         Thursday       Royal Hallamshire Hospital
         Friday         Royal Hallamshire Hospital
         Saturday       Northern General Hospital
         Sunday         Royal Hallamshire Hospital

One hospital will not normally be expected to take more than 25 seriously
injured casualties likely to require admission before the other hospital
takes an equal number.

CHILDREN will be taken with adults to the receiving hospital in the first
instance. Children will not be taken direct, to the Children's Hospital.

SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAM

Should a Site Medical Officer or Mobile Team be considered necessary, SYMAS
will make the request to the hospital which is not receiving the casualties
of the Major Disaster. The Senior Nurse on duty for the Acute Services will
be contacted and will liaise with the Consultant General Surgeon of the
firm on take and the Consultant Anaesthetist of the firm on take. If the
Senior Staff indicated above accede to the request, specific members of the
Hospital Mobile Team will be identified, and the Senior Nurse on duty will
contact SYMAS to indicate agreement and obtain further information. The
Team will usually comprise a minimum of one Anaesthetist, one Surgeon and
two trained Nurses, who will be sent out first to assess the situation and
will call for more assistance if necessary. A vehicle equipped with certain
basic supplies will be provided by one of the Emergency Services for
transporting the Mobile Team. Further specialised equipment, and protective
clothing is held at both hospitals in readiness to be taken out by the Site
Medical Officer/Mobile Team if appropriate.

INCIDENTS INVOLVING DANGEROUS CHEMICALS

It is possible that a Major Disaster may involve patients who have been
injured or contaminated with toxic or hazardous substances. Specific
guidance to NHS staff is given in the Trent Regional Health Authority
Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures, a copy of which is available in
the Accident and Emergency Department. Advice on dealing with patients
involved in such incidents can also be obtained by contacting Dr. C.C.
Harling, Consultant Occupational Physician.




                                   - 2 -
INCIDENTS INVOLVING RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

Any incident involving radioactivity may give rise to casualties who, as
well as being contaminated, will require treatment for their injuries. The
Royal Hallamshire Hospital is designated as the hospital prepared to accept
contaminated casualties from Sheffield and the surrounding Districts.

Where the need for life-saving treatment appears to override the need for
decontamination, ambulance crews (in liaison with their control) must take
the casualty to the nearest Accident and Emergency Department, even though
it may not be designated to receive contaminated casualties. This
situation may arise in Sheffield if the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
and Emergency Department is closed and casualties are received first at the
Northern General Hospital.  In this event arrangements must be made with
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital to obtain advice and assistance in the
decontamination of casualties and staff.  Initial guidance is contained in
the Trent Regional Health Authority Guidelines on Major Accident
Procedures, a copy of which is available in the Accident and Emergency
Department.




                                   - 3 -
S e c t i o n II,
MAJOR DISASTER PLAN FOR THE NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL - SUMMARY OF GENERAL
PRINCIPLES.

PREPARATION OF THE HOSPITAL

             Switchboard

             Telephone operators will notify a range of staff that the Major
             Disaster Plan is in operation. With the exception of staff
             responding to Fire or Cardiac Arrest calls, all other calls through
             the Switchboard will be ignored, until completion of the call out
             sequence.

             Bleep holders will be alerted by an emergency bleep signal - a
             rapid sequence of three bleeps - and should report as instructed in
             their particular section of the Major Disaster Plan.

             The staff contacted by switchboard will communicate with other
             staff to fulfil a cascade system as indicated on pages 18 and 19 of
             this Plan.

             Accident and Emergency Department

             See 1 on map, page 10

             The Department will be cleared of patients as quickly as possible.
             Patients who are able to go home, will be directed to Outpatients
             Area 1 Ambulance Waiting Area to await their own or Ambulance
             transport home. See 11 on map, page 11. Patients whose condition
             is such that they cannot be discharged home, will remain.

             Portering Staff will be sent to the department to assist with
             moving equipment and manning lifts.

             Incoming casualties will be brought to the Ambulance Entrance of
             the Accident and Emergency Department for assessment. See 2 on map,
             page 10. Clerical staff will establish an emergency documentation
             point inside the Ambulance Entrance.

             The Walking Wounded Entrance of the Accident and Emergency
             Department will be locked. See 3 on map, page 10.

             Orthopaedic Clinic

             See 4 on map, page 10.

             The clinic cubicles, consulting rooms and waiting areas will be
             cleared to allow the establishment of the Hospital Control in
             Suite B, Administrative Base in Suite C and Nursing Base in Suite
             A. The Sister's office will be cleared to allow the establishment
             of the Police Liaison Base, see A on map, page 10. The Plaster Room
             and Treatment/Disposal Room will be cleared to allow the
             establishment of a temporary Mortuary, see B on map, page 10.




                                        - 4 -
Accident and Emergency X-Ray Department

See 5 on map, page 10.

The Accident and Emergency X-Ray rooms and associated waiting areas
will be cleared of patients to allow X-Rays of Major Disaster
casualties to be taken.

A documentation point will be established at the reception desk.

Mobile Team

A team will be sent to the scene of the accident only if requested
by SYMAS and acceded to by the Senior Nursing and Medical Staff on
duty.

Equipment for the team is located at the Ambulance Entrance
to the Accident and Emergency Department.

G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department

See 6 on map, page 10.

The department will be cleared to receive Non-Urgent casualties
requiring minor treatment or rest and those awaiting transport
home.
A documentation point, will be established at the reception desk.

Operating Theatres

All routine operations will cease.

Wards

Ward 60 (Day Case, Dental and Orthopaedic - 34 beds) will be
cleared of patients and prepared for casualties requiring
admission. See 7 on map, page 10.

A documentation point will be established on the ward.

A senior nurse manager will supervise arrangements to prepare other
wards to accept patients transferred from Ward 60 and, if
necessary, to accept casualties admitted from the Major Disaster.

Outpatients Areas 1 & 2

All Outpatient Clinics will cease so that Clinical staff can be
released to assist in the Major Disaster. Patients whose condition
is such that they cannot be discharged home, will remain.

Outpatient Area 1 - Third Reception Area

Will be used as a base for the Press. Statements will be issued
through the Administrative Base only. See 12 on map, page 11.




                           - 5 -
Staff Snack Bar at Level C

Will be used for relatives of casualties. Social Workers and
Chaplains will be based here. See 13 on map, page 11.

Appliance Clerk's Office - A & E Department

Will be used as the Ambulance Liaison Base.
See 8 on map, page 10.

Orthopaedic Library
Will be used as a Reporting Point for Nursing Staff who do not have
specific duties in the Plan. See 9 on map, page 10.

Orthopaedic Laboratory

Will be used as a Non-nursing Staff Reporting Point for those
staff/volunteers who do not have a specific duty to perform in
their Departmental Plan.
See 10 on map, page 10.




                             - 6 -
CONTROL ARRANGEMENTS

        Hospital Control

       Situated in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, where the Senior
       General Surgeon, Matron and Unit General Manager or their deputies
       will direct the whole hospital response.

        Administrative Ba:se

        Situated in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C, where an Administrator
        will co-ordinate the support services and allocate essential tasks.

        Nursing Base

       Situated in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite A, where a senior nurse
       will co-ordinate the nursing services.

       Medical Control

       In addition to the Senior General Surgeon in Hospital Control, in
       certain areas there will be a Medical Controller who will have
       complete authority in that area. These Controllers will liaise
       with Hospital Control.

         Resuscitation Controller - based in the Accident and Emergency
         Department. This will be the Consultant Anaesthetist on duty.

         Surgical Controller - based initially in Ward 60. This will be
         the Consultant General Surgeon on duty under whom all patients
         will be admitted unless specifically transferred to another
         Consultant. Operating lists and priorities will be decided by
         the Surgical Controller.

         Operating Theatre Controller - based in the Operating Theatres.
         Appointed by the Surgical Controller to supervise work in the
         Operating Theatres in conjunction with the Senior Nurse on duty
         in Theatres.

         Minor Injuries Controller - based in the G & M Wing Physiotherapy
         Department. This will be the Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon on
         duty.




                                   - 7 -
SCREENING OF CASUALTIES

The Senior Doctor in charge of the Accident and Emergency Department will
assess casualties on arrival at the Ambulance Entrance. Patients will be
graded into the following categories

IMMEDIATE          requiring resuscitation:
                   will be taken to resuscitation stations
Red Label          within the Accident and Emergency Department.

URGENT             requiring admission and surgery;
                   will be transferred to Ward 60 in the first
Blue Label         instance. The ward will have been cleared by
                   nurses and medical staff to prepare for
                   casualties requiring admission. Other
                   wards may be cleared by a senior nurse
                   manager on duty for the Acute Services
                   to accept patients transferred from Ward 60
                   and, if necessary, to accept casualties
                   admitted from the Major Disaster.


NON-URGENT         requiring minor treatment or rest:
                   will be transferred to the G & M Wing
Green Label        Physiotherapy Department.

DEAD               will be held in the Orthopaedic Clinic
                   Plaster Room.
White Label        Individual identification of bodies will
                   take place in the adjoining Treatment Room.

All casualties will be documented on arrival.

An index of casualties will be kept showing the initial disposal of
casualties.




                                    - 8 -
STAFF RESPONSE

In the event of a major disaster, local radio stations will broadcast a
message asking all staff who are on-call to report for duty immediately, as
follows

        "You are tuned to Radio Sheffield/Hallam. Here is a special
        announcement for staff of the Northern General and Royal
        Hallamshire Hospitals, Sheffield.

        There has been a major accident. All staff on call for the Northern
        General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals should report for duty
        immediately.

        Members of the public are asked NOT to telephone the hospitals or
        Radio Sheffield/Hallam. A telephone number, to which enquiries
        may be made, will be announced very soon.

        No volunteers or blood donors are required at this stage. A
        separate announcement will be made if their assistance is needed
        later."

Nursing Staff who are off duty should remain at home and report at normal
duty time unless specifically called in.

Non-nursing staff who are off duty should proceed to the hospital, entering
by the Herries Road entrance, and report as follows:-

        Staff with specific duties in the Plan - go to your department and
        report to the senior person on duty.

        Staff without specific duties in the Plan - report to the
        Orthopaedic Laboratory for instructions.

DO NOT TELEPHONE THE HOSPITAL - The Switchboard will be inundated with
calls.

ACCESS TO THE HOSPITAL SITE

        Barnsley Road Entrance

        Access will be restricted to Emergency vehicles, e.g. SYMAS,
        Police, Fire Service and Accident and Emergency Medical Staff.

        Do not park outside the Accident and Emergency Department - it will
        be required for Emergency vehicles. Use the staff car park on the
        on the access road leading uphill from the Barnsley Road entrance.

        Herries Road Entrance

        All other staff and visitors should use the Herries Road entrance
        and park in the Herries Road car park. Do not park in the
        Physiotherapy Yard, Acute Wing ward yards or outside the Accident
        and Emergency Department.

        Herries Road Stores Entrance

        This will be closed to all traffic.




                                   - 9 -
                                             Non-Urgent
                                             Treatm ent
                                               Centre


           Basement Corridor



LEVEL D
                               I
                               Ray Dept.




                                     Non-Nursing S taff
 — iCXHX                               Reporting Point




                                          F9jio]
                                   Nursing Staff
                                   Reporting
                                   Point




               Nursing Base                        Surgical Controller

               Hospital
               Control
                                                   Admission Ward
                                                   _/             _


Administrative Base




                          10
LEVEL C



          Relatives* Base




           Patient
           Discharge
           Area


              Press Base
ESSENTIAL INTERNAL TELEPHONE NUMBERS

 1.   Hospital Control - Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B         4869

 2.   Administrative Base - Orthopaedic Clinic,Suite C       4056

 3.   Nursing Base - Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite A             4868

 4. Accident & Emergency Department:

      Ambulance Liaison -Appliance Clerk's Office            4820
      Reception                                              4743
      Resuscitation                                          4873
      Sister                                                 4741
      Assistant Matron                                       4894
      Consultant                                             4870

 5. Porters:

      Front Hall, General Wing - Portering Base              4864
      Distribution Services Manager                          4924

 6. Pharmacy:

      Dispensary                                             4753
      Medical Gases                                          4503
      Unit Pharmaceutical          Officer                   4751

 7. Haematology:

      Blood Bank                                              4246

 8. Operating Theatres:

      Reception, Theatres 1-6                                 4596
      Corridor,    Theatres 1-6                          4593/4365
      Reception, Theatres 7-11                                4204
      Corridor,    Theatres 7-11                         4934/4935
      Assistant. Matron                                       4819

 9. Ward 60                                                   4096

10. G & M Wing Physiotherapy:

      Reception                                               4858
      Superintendent                                          4857

11. Medical Controller - Assistant Matron
                         (Night Duty) Office Ward 60          4116

12. Nursing Staff Reporting Point - Orthopaedic Library       4443

13. Non-nursing Staff Reporting Point - Orthopaedic
                                        Laboratory (Lobby) 4592




                                      - 12 -
14. X-Ray Department:

      Main Department - Reception                      4726
      A/E X-Ray Department - Reception                 4553
      Superintendent                                   4727

15.   Mortuary                                         4307

16.   Police Liaison Base - OrthopaedicClinic Sister   4057

17.   Relatives Base - Staff Snack Bar,Level C         4132

18.   Consultant Occupational Physician                4161




                                   - 13 -
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE EVENT OF MAJOR DISASTER PLAN BEING
IMPLEMENTED AT THE ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL

In the event of a Major Disaster in which the Royal Hallamshire Hospital is
designated as the initial receiving hospital for casualties, the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard will notify the Northern General Hospital
Switchboard.

1.   PROCEDURE FOR SWITCHBOARD OPERATOR

      On receipt of the notification from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
      Switchboard, the following people must be informed immediately

               (i)     Unit General Manager - Mr. R. Akroyd

              (ii)     Matron - Miss J.M. Day

             (iii)     Senior General Surgeon - Mr. K.T.H. Moore

              (iv)     Senior Nurse on duty for the Acute Services

                (v)    Consultant Anaesthetist on take

               (vi)    Consultant Surgeon on take

             (vii)     Accident & Emergency Consultant

            (viii)     Accident & Emergency Anaesthetist

       The message to be given to the above people is "The Royal Hallamshire
       Hospital have implemented their Major Disaster Plan. "

       The Northern General Hospital Major Disaster Plan will not be put
       into effect at this stage. However, Hospital Control will be set up
       by the Unit General Manager, Matron and Senior General Surgeon in
       readiness to receive further communications from the District.
       Hospitals Control. The other staff indicated in the above list will
       prepare to follow the Major Disaster Plan if called upon to do so.

2.   PROCEDURE FOR HOSPITAL CONTROL TEAM

       a)   Procedure for Senior General Surgeon or Deputy

              (i)     Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and inform the
                      telephone operator when you are in position; you will be
                      joined by Matron and the Unit General Manager.

             (ii)     Continue to act as Medical Controller of the procedure at
                      the Northern General Hospital, as influenced by the
                      overall situation in Sheffield, which will be co-ordinated
                      by the District Hospitals Control at the Royal Hallamshire
                      Hospital.




                                       - 14 -
      b)   Procedure for Matron

             (i)   Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and join the
                   Medical Controller.  Inform the telephone operator when
                   you are in position.

      c)   Procedure for the Unit General Manager

             (i)   Go immediately to Hospital Control and inform the
                   telephone operator when you are in position.

            (ii)   Set up Hospital Control with internal telephones,   Direct
                   Exchange lines, stationery, etc.

The District Hospitals Control is responsible for the distribution of
casualties and, if it is decided that the Northern General Hospital will
begin to receive casualties, the District Hospitals Control will inform the
Hospital Control Team at the Northern General Hospital.  In this event the
Unit General Manager will implement the full Major Disaster Plan by
informing the Switchboard Operator to commence the call-out sequence with
the message "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".




                                   - 15 -
Section III.

PROCEDURES FOR INDIVIDUAL STAFF, WARDS AND DEPARTMENTS

SWITCHBOARD OPERATORS

General

1. Maintain a comprehensive list of essential staff and check it for
   accuracy on the final day of each month.

2. In the event of a Major Disaster, the operator(s) on duty are most
   likely to receive information from SYMAS or from the Royal Hallamshire
   Hospital prefaced with the words "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".
   If the instruction originates from the Northern General Hospital Control
   the words used will be "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".

3. Whatever the source of the message, log the words used and time
   received.

4. Log the response to the call out sequence given below.

5. The call out procedure given below is a cascade system. The number of
   calls to be made by the operator is limited. Further calls will be made
   by the nominated individuals in each department or specialty.

6. The call out procedure given below involves only the Northern General
   Hospital Switchboard and (except where indicated) is applicable at all
   times on all days of the week.

Call Out Sequence

1. Increase level 9 facility by acting upon instructions contained in the
   sealed envelope marked "Major Disaster Plan - level 9 facilities".

2. Make contact with the following and give the message "Implement the
   Major Disaster Plan". No other information is necessary.

    a)    Accident and Emergency Department Receptionist (If Accident, and
          Emergency Department closed, proceed to (b))

    b)    Senior Nurse Manager on Duty for Acute Services.

    c)    Duty SHO in General Surgery

    d)    Duty SHO in Orthopaedic Surgery

    e)    Duty 1st on call Anaesthetist

    f)    Hospital Administrator or on call Administrator

    g)    Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard (only if
          initial notification does not originate from
          Royal Hallamshire Hospital)




                                    - 16 -
    h)   Medical Records Officer

    i)   Off duty Switchboard Operators

    j)   Head Porter or Duty Porter

    k)   Senior Chief Haematology MLSO or MLSO on call for Blood Bank

    1)   Superintendent Physiotherapist or Physiotherapist on call

    m)   Superintendent Radiographer or Radiographer on call

    n)   Unit Pharmaceutical Officer or Duty Pharmacist

    o)   CSSD Manager

    P)   Hospital Chaplain

   q)    Social Worker

The above will initiate further communications along their cascade as
detailed in flow chart.




                                   - 17 -
                                              FLOW CHART FOR IMMEDIATE COMMUNICATION
Telephonist
a)       •A & E Reception:                                   •Nurse i/c A & E'                     ■A & E Consultants

                                                             -A & E medical staff on duty

b)       ■Senior Nurse Manager on duty                       ■Ward 60
          for Acute Services
                                                              Theatres, bleep no 192
                                                              ITU
                                                             ■A & E Consultants
                                                                    (during A & E closed nights)

                                                              Matron
                                                              Ward 66                              •Ward 65

                                                              Ward 64                              -Ward 63

                                                              Ward 62                              -Ward 61


c)        Duty SHO in General Surgery                        •Registrar in General Surgery
                                                             ■Consultant in General Surgery

d)       ■Duty SHO in Orthopaedic Surgery.                   ■Registrar in Orthopaedic Surgery     Staff needing to use hospital

                                                             -Consultant in Orthopaedic Surgery    telephone handsets to make
                                                                                                   external calls may do so by
e)       -Duty 1st on call Anaesthetist                       Senior Registrar in Anaesthetics
                                                                                                   using the code #6 555
                                                              2nd on call Anaesthetist
                                                                                                   followed by the external
                                                              Consultant Anaesthetist
                                                                                                   number desired.

f)       ■Hospital Administrator                              Unit General Manager
          or on call Administrator
                                                             ■All other Administrators

g)        -Royal Hallamshire Hospital
           Switchboard (only if initial
           notification does not originate
           from Royal Hallamshire Hospital)
                                       FLOW CHART FOR IMMEDIATE COMMUNICATION

h)   ■Medical Records Officer                         -Other Medical Records Staff

i)   ■Off duty Switchboard Operators                  -All other off duty Switchboard Operators

j)   Head Porter or Duty Porter                       •Distribution Services Manager
                                                      -Head Driver

k)   ■Senior Chief Haematology MLSO                   Blood Bank MLSO
      or MLSO on call for Blood Bank
                                                      Senior Chief Haematology MLSO
                                                      Consultant Haematologist

     Superintendent Physiotherapist                   Other Physiotherapists
     or Physiotherapist on call

m)   Superintendent Radiographer                     -Junior Radiologists
     or Radiographer on call
                                                      Consultant Radiologists

n)   Unit Pharmaceutical Officer                     •Other Pharmaceutical Staff
     or Deputy Pharmacist

o)   CSSD Manager                                     Other CSSD Staff                    Staff needing to use hospital

P)   Hospital Chaplain                                                                    telephone handsets to make
                                                      Other Chaplains
                                                                                          external calls may do so by
q)   Social Worker ---                                Other Social Workers                using the code #6 555
                                                                                          followed by the external
                                                                                          number desired.
NURSE IN CHARGE OF ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT

1.   Notification of a Major Disaster will be made by the Switchboard
     Operator to the Reception Desk.

2.   Inform all staff present in the department, including A & E
     Consultants.

3.   Issue Major Disaster action cards to available staff.

4.   Commence 'Cascade' for informing off-duty staff.

5.   Ensure all Waiting areas are cleared of patients as quickly as
     possible.

6.   Patients requiring transport home to be directed to Outpatient Area 1
     Ambulance Waiting Area.

7.   Ensure Documentation Stations are set up in Ambulance Entrance (Triage
     Area).

8.   Inform Nursing Base (Orthopaedic Clinic Suite A) of current staffing
     levels and number of additional staff required.
     If Nursing Base has not yet been established, inform Senior Nurse on
     duty for Acute Services.

9.   Direct flow of patients as follows:-
     Incoming patients - via Ambulance Entrance (West Door).
     Patients for admission to Ward 60 - via X-Ray corridor.
     Minor Injuries to Physiotherapy Department - via link corridor through
     Main X-Ray Department.

SENIOR NURSE ON DUTY FOR THE ACUTE SERVICES

1.   On being informed by the Switchboard Operator that the Major Disaster
     Plan is in operation the Senior Nurse will proceed to the Orthopaedic
     Clinic, Suite A, to commence establishment of the Nursing Base.

2.   The Senior Nurse will ensure communication of the Major Disaster
     declaration to those indicated in the Flow Chart (page 18, item b).

3.   In the first instance the Senior Nurse will be aware of the requirement
     to provide nursing support to:-

     a)   Areas immediately affected by the Major Disaster.

     b)   Existing patients within the hospital.

4.   From available nurse staffing rotas, identifying staff on-duty, the
     Senior Nurse will send additional staff immediately to the following
     areas:-

     a)   Accident & Emergency Department - for resuscitation points as
          directed by the Nurse in charge of the department.

     b)   G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department - to assist the Casualty
          Officers in the treatment of minor injuries. This team will be
          assisted by the Physiotherapists.




                                    - 20 -
5.   Identify a member of the nursing staff to supervise arrangements for
     the preparation of the other wards to accept patients transferred from
     Ward 60 and, if necessary, to accept casualties admitted from the Major
     Disaster.

6.   Check/confirm and, if necessary, identify nurse staffing availability
     to:-

     a)   Operating Theatres

     b)   Intensive Care areas

     Ensure that nurse 'supervisors' are available in these key areas.

7.   Identify and inform 4 trained nurses (to include 1 Senior Sister or
     Charge Nurse) of the possibility of their requirement to be members of
     a Mobile Team to attend at the scene of the Major Disaster.

8.   As Nurse Managers become available, the Senior Nurse will deploy to the
     areas of need, until such time as the Hospital Control directs
     otherwise. Assign a Nurse Manager to the Nursing Staff Reporting Point
     (Orthopaedic Library) to ensure appropriate deployment of nurse
     volunteers.

9.   The Senior Nurse will establish and maintain communication with Medical
     and Administrative colleagues throughout the initial stage of the
     procedure, i.e. prior to and during the establishment of the
     Administrative Base and Medical Control, leading to the establishment
     of the overall Hospital Control.

NURSE IN CHARGE OF WARD 60

1.   Notification of a Major Disaster will be made by the Senior Nurse on
     duty for Acute Services.

2.   Inform all staff present on Ward.

3.   Set up immediately 14 beds to receive initial casualties (8 DaySurgery
      and 6 Dental beds).

4.   Ensure that Oxygen points are established to 14 beds and that drip
     stands are available.

5.   Set out the equipment from the MAJOR DISASTER BOX to cover 14 beds.

6.   Wait for Medical staff to clear remaining beds.

7.   Keep Nurse Manager informed of bed occupancy and staffing levels.

8.   Replenish supplies of Pharmacy and CSSD.




                                    - 21 -
ASSISTANT MATRON OPERATING THEATRES OR DEPUTY

1.   Notification of a Major Disaster will be made by the Senior Nurse on
     duty for Acute Services.

2.   Inform all staff present in Theatres 1-11.

3.   Commence 'Cascade' for informing off-duty Nursing staff and Operating
     Department Assistants.

4.   Cancel all list cases, in conjunction with the Operating Theatres
     Controller.

5.   Allocate staff to cover all theatres, as follows:-

     a)   Nurses to prepare theatres

     b)   ODAs to prepare Anaesthetic rooms

     c)   Recovery Nurses to return list cases to their wards

6.   Receive operating lists when prepared and make out theatrecards.

7.   Allocate cases to theatres and inform staff.

8.   Ensure adequate supplies of CSSD, linen, drugs and   blood.

9.   Inform Nursing Base of current staffing levels and   number of   additional
     staff required.

MEDICAL STAFF

The following instructions provide for the initial situation; they can be
altered at any time as directed by Hospital Control.

Junior staff assist their Consultants, but in the absence of the Consultant
at one of the locations, they may have to assume increased responsibility,
having first informed Hospital Control.

ANAESTHETISTS

Assemble outside the Plaster Room in the Accident and Emergency Department.
The senior Anaesthetist directs staff as required to:-

1.   A & E Resuscitation Points.
     The duty Consultant Anaesthetist will act as Resuscitation Controller.

2.   Ward 60 and ITU.

3.   Operating Theatres.

4.   G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department.




                                       - 22 -
ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY OFFICERS

Assemble in the Accident and Emergency Department.

1.   The senior doctor on duty will grade casualties on arrival at the
     ambulance entrance.

2.   Other officers will be directed by this senior doctor or the
     Resuscitation Controller to:-

     (a)   Treat patients already in the department, if this is necessary.

     (b)   A & E Resuscitation Points.

     (c)   G & M   Wing Physiotherapy Department.

SURGEONS (General, Gynaecology, Orthopaedic,
         Plastic, Dental, Thoracic)

The Senior General Surgeon will join Hospital Control. All other surgeons
if called upon to assist assemble in Ward 60, Assistant Matron (Night Duty)
Office.

The Surgical Controller will direct staff as required to:-

1.   A & E Resuscitation Points.

2.   Ward 60 and ITU.

3.   Operating Theatres.

4.   G & M Wing    Physiotherapy Department. TheConsultant   Orthopaedic
     Surgeon on    duty or deputy will act as Minor Injuries Controller.

PHYSICIANS

If called upon to assist assemble in Ward 60, Assistant Matron       (Night Duty)
Office to be directed by Surgical Controller.

RADIOLOGISTS

Assemble in the Radiology Department office.

Give support as required in Ward 60, ITU and the Radiology Department.

BACTERIOLOGISTS, CHEMICAL PATHOLOGISTS,
HAEMATOLOGISTS AND HISTOPATHOLOGISTS

The Consultants in charge will be informed by their Scientific Officers.

HOUSE PHYSICIANS AND HOUSE SURGEONS

1.   Assemble in Ward 60, Assistant Matron (Night    Duty) Office.

2.   Clear wards of unoperated patients, patients waiting to go home or
     otherwise fit. These patients will be identified and subsequently the
     senior nursing staff will arrange for them to be transferred to the
     designated waiting areas.

3.   Report to the Surgical Controller on Ward 60 for further duties.




                                      - 23 -
HOSPITAL CONTROL TEAM

The Hospital Control Team is responsible for directing the whole hospital
response to a Major Disaster, liaising with District Hospitals Control and
dealing with media statements and press conferences. The Team comprises
the Senior General Surgeon, Matron and the Unit General Manager or their
deputies. Hospital Control is located in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B.
Messengers and clerks will be provided as necessary.

1. Procedure for Senior General Surgeon or Deputy

       (i)   Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and inform the telephone
             operator when you are in position; you will be joined by Matron
             and the Unit General Manager.

      (ii)   Check with the following sections that Medical staff are in
             position:-

                        Accident and Emergency Department
                        Ward 60
                        G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department

     (iii)   Continue to act as Medical Controller of the procedure at the
             Northern General Hospital, as influenced by the overall
             situation in Sheffield, which will be co-ordinated by the
             District Hospitals Control at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

      (iv)   Be prepared if necessary to call upon the assistance of doctors
             in Gynaecology, Plastic Surgery, Dental Surgery, ENT Surgery,
             Cardiothoracic Surgery and in General Medicine.   In the event of
              their assistance being required, instruct the Switchboard
             Operator to communicate accordingly with the doctors concerned.

2.   Procedure for Matron

       (i)   Go to the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite B, and    join the Medical
             Controller.   Inform the telephone operator   when you are in
             position.

      (ii)   Check that the Senior Nurse on duty for the Acute Services has
             identified the requisite number of nurses for the teams listed
             below:-

                        Accident & Emergency Department

                        G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department

     (iii)   Check that a Senior Nurse on duty has been sent to supervise the
             clearance and preparation of Ward 60 to receive casualties
             requiring admission.

      (iv)   Check that arrangements are made to prepare other wards for
             accepting inpatients transferred from Ward 60 or casualties from
             the Major Disaster requiring admission.

       (v)   Check that Nursing Base is established in the Orthopaedic
             Clinic, Suite A, so that off-duty staff may be requested to
             report for work as required.




                                     - 24 -
3.   Procedure for the Unit General Manager

       (i)     Go immediately to Hospital Control and inform the telephone
               operator when you are in position.

      (ii)     Set up Hospital Control with internal telephones, Direct
               Exchange lines, stationery, etc.

     (iii)     Ensure that Administrative Base is established in the
               Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C, so that the non-medical and
               non-nursing support services may be co-ordinated from this
               point.

      (iv)     Ensure availability of up-to-date casualty information for
               compilation of media statements and preparation of press
               conferences.

HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR AND STAFF
(See also section headed 'Hospital Control')

1.   The Administrative procedure requires the availability at the hospital
     of the Unit General Manager and at least three Administrators with full
     knowledge of the Major Disaster Plan.

     Keep an up to date list of the telephone numbers of the Unit General
     Manager; Administrative staff and secretaries; Catering and Linen
     Service Managers; Mortuary staff; Unit Personnel staff and secretaries;
     Security, Fire and Works Officers; Stores and Supplies staff; Cashiers;
     District Officers.

2.   FUNCTIONS

     (a)   Hospital Control

             The Unit General Manager or most senior Administrator available
             will direct the whole hospital response from this point.

     (b)   Administrative Base

           The next most senior Administrator will be assisted by at least
           two other Administrators and will be responsible for co-ordinating
           the services listed overleaf from the Administrative Base. The
           responsible officers for the services listed will report to the
           Administrative Base.

3.   NOTIFICATION AND INITIAL RESPONSE
     - During Office Hours

     It is the responsibility of the first Administrator contacted to ensure
     that the Unit General Manager and all Administrators are notified.

     (a)     Hospital Control

             The Unit General Manager or the most senior Administrator
             available goes immediately to Hospital Control. He ensures that
             the Hospital Control is set up and notifies the District Hospitals
             Control at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital when the Hospital
             Control is operational.




                                      - 25 -
   (b)    Administrative Base

          The next most senior Administrator available goes immediately to
          the Administrative Base. He will ensure that the Administrative
          Base is set up and will be assisted by at least two other
          Administrators.

   - Outside Office Hours

   It is the responsibility of the Administrator on-call to contact the
   Unit General Manager and all other Administrative staff. All available
   staff will leave for the hospital immediately.

   (a)    Hospital Control

          The first person to arrive at the hospital will set up Hospital
          Control and await the arrival of the Unit General Manager or
          deputy.

    (b)   Administrative Base

          The second person to arrive at the hospital will set up the
          Administrative Base, report his arrival to Hospital Control and
          await the arrival of the next most senior Administrator. All
          other available Administrative staff will report on arrival to the
          Administrative Base and will assist the Administrator in charge
          with the co-ordination of the services listed below.


SERVICES CO-ORDINATED BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE BASE

          Distribution Services

          Responsible Officer:    Distribution Services Manager
          Key Tasks           :   To ensure the availability of
                                  staff, equipment and vehicles
                                  for the following duties:-
          Portering

          Responsible Officer:    Head Porter or Deputy
          Key Tasks           :   Assist with setting up casualty
                                  reception and other emergency
                                  patient areas; organise internal
                                  movement of patients; ensure
                                  availability of equipment from
                                  Major Disaster store rooms.

          Car Parking

          Responsible Officer:    Head Porter or Deputy
          Key Tasks           :   Ensure access to Accident and
                                  Emergency Department is kept clear
                                  and that flow of vehicles is
                                  maintained by means of barriers
                                  and emergency signposting.
                                  Administrative Base will request
                                  assistance from the Police Liaison
                                  Officer if required.




                                    - 26
Transport

Responsible Officer:    Head Driver or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of all vehicles
                        for use in moving staff and
                        emergency supplies to emergency
                        patient areas as required.

Medical Records and Patient Documentation

Responsible Officer:    Medical Records Officer or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Set up casualty documentation
                        system; maintain up to date
                        information on casualties.

Switchboard

Responsible Officer:    Switchboard Supervisor or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Notification of essential staff;
                        maintenance of communications;
                        call in additional telephonists
                        if required.

Catering

Responsible Officer:    Catering Manager or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Ensure supply of refreshments
                        and meals to emergency patient
                        areas, wards, relatives and staff,


Linen

Responsible Officer:    Linen Services Manager
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of emergency
                        supplies of linen.

Messengers

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base
Key Tasks           :   Carrying messages and documents
                        between Hospital Control,
                        Administrative Base and other
                        key points in the hospital.

Secretarial and Clerical

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base
Key Tasks           :   Provide clerical services
                        as required.

Patients' Property and Valuables

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base/Cashier
Key Tasks           :   Ensure safe keeping and
                        recording of patients' property
                        and valuables.




                           - 27 -
Public Relations and Press Information

Responsible Officer:    Hospital Control
Key Tasks           :   Ensure that Press and members
                        of the public assemble in
                        appropriate locations; provide
                        information to Hospital Control
                        for use in formal press statements
                        and press conferences.

Mortuary

Responsible Officer:    Higher Senior APT
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of Mortuary
                        facilities for deceased patients.
                        Collect information in conjunction
                        with MRO for Coroner's Office.

Supplies

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Assistant
                        (Supplies and Stores)
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of emergency
                        supplies from Stores.

Volunteers

Responsible Officer:    Administrative Base
Key Tasks           :   Assign member of staff to Non-
                        Nursing Staff Reporting Point
                        (Orthopaedic Laboratory) who will
                        ensure appropriate deployment of
                        staff and non-staff volunteers
                        and non-nursing staff who do not
                        have a specific duty but offer
                        help, e.g. in Relatives Base,
                        Transport, Messenger Service.

Blood Bank

Responsible Officer:    Principal MLSO
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of blood
                        supplies to emergency patient
                        treatment areas; liaise with
                        Regional Blood Transfusion
                        Centre and Administrative Base.

C.S.S.D.

Responsible Officer:    CSSD Manager or Deputy
Key Tasks           :   Ensure availability of sterile
                        supplies to emergency patient
                        treatment areas; receive information
                        from Nurse in charge of theatres;
                        liaise with Administrative Base.




                          - 28 -
           Hospital Chaplains

           Responsible Officer:     Full-time Hospital Chaplain
           Key Tasks           :    Co-ordinate ministry as
                                    appropriate to patients and
                                    relatives; provide support to
                                    Social Workers in setting up
                                    and running the Relatives Base.

           Pharmacy

           Responsible Officer:     Unit Pharmaceutical Officer
                                    or Deputy
           Key Tasks            :   Ensure availability of adequate
                                    supplies of drugs, dressings and
                                    medical gases to emergency patient
                                    treatment areas; liaise with
                                    Administrative Base.

           Social Work

           Responsible Officer:     Group Principal Social Worker
                                    or Deputy
           Key Tasks            :   Ensure the setting up and running
                                    of the Relatives Base in conjunction
                                    with Chaplains; maintain up to date
                                    list of patient information in
                                    conjunction with the MRO; deal with
                                    enquiries from relatives; maintain
                                    contact with Police Liaison Officer,
                                    Hospital Chaplains and
                                    Administrative Base.

MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT

1.   The Medical Records Officer or Deputy will be notified by the
     Switchboard.

2.   Medical Records Officer will notify a member of staff at home who, by
     arrangement, will telephone other Medical Records staff to call them
     into the hospital.

3.   Staff on arrival will report to the Accident and Emergency Reception
     Desk, take the next available Action Card and act accordingly.

4.   A list of patients will be maintained with details of immediate
     disposal.

5.   Further disposal/discharge of patients will be recorded wherever
     possible.

6.   Medical Records Officer is responsible for:-

     a)   Maintenance of an up-to-date list of volunteer personnel.

     b)   Maintenance of appropriate Major Disaster documentation.

     c)   Training of volunteer personnel in Major Disaster
          documentation procedures.




                                     - 29 -
     d)   Ensuring that all documents are available in the assessment area
          and that clerical staff document patients as they arrive.

     e)   Ensuring that immediate disposal of patients is recorded.


DISTRIBUTION SERVICES DEPARTMENT

1.   Implementation of Major Disaster Plan will be by the Head Porter or
     Senior Porter on Duty, receiving a telephone from the Switchboard. The
     Switchboard will use the words"Implement the Major Disaster Plan".

2.   On receipt of the call the Porter will contact colleagues in the
     following order:-

               a)   Distribution Services Manager
               b)   Head Porter          ) who will call in
               c)   Deputy Head Porters ) other Porters
               d)   Senior Driver or Driver(s) available who will
                    call in other transport Staff and inform them
                    of the initiation of the Major Disaster Plan
                    using the same words as the Telephonist,
                    i.e. "Implement the Major Disaster Plan".

     On receipt of this message staff will report to the G & M Wing Front
     Hall.

     If one or more staff detailed above are unavailable, proceed to the
     next one(s) on the list, do not delay.

3.   On reporting to the G & M Wing Front Hall the most senior Porter will
     despatch Porters as follows:-

               3 to Accident and Emergency Department.
               3 to man lifts in OPD/Ward Block, using keys
                 obtained from the keyboard in the Head Porter's
                 office to lock off lifts for manual over-ride.
               2 to Theatres.
               1 to G & M Wing Physiotherapy.
               1 to remain on Front Hall.

     All other Porters to be despatched to collect all available wheelchairs
     and trolleys to Accident and Emergency and take major disaster linen,
     stretchers, poles, etc. from Laundry and store-room outside Head
     Porter's office (key obtained from the keyboard in the Head Porter's
     office), then to report to the Orthopaedic Laboratory for further
     instruction.

4.   Transport Staff will report to the Transport Office and await
     instructions.




                                     - 30 -
BLOOD BANK SENIOR CHIEF MEDICAL
LABORATORY SCIENTIFIC OFFICER OR DEPUTY


1.   Always maintain a list of personnel at hospital switchboard, and for
     use within the department.

2.   Check blood supply and liaise with Regional Blood Transfusion Centre
     (Telephone: Sheffield 424242).

3.   Assemble available Medical Laboratory Scientific Officers and
      inform appropriate Medical Staff. After 1700 hours on weekdays or
     during weekends and Bank Holidays, notification will be to the
     Haematology Scientific Officer on call who is responsible for
     ensuring that all other Technical and Medical Staff are contacted.

4.   Send Scientific Officer with Gp A, B and 0 supply to Outpatient
     Area 1 Blood-taking Room. Urgent cases will be ABO grouped for
     uncross-matched blood transfusion if necessary.

5.   Organise supplies of rapid and routine cross-matched blood to
     Ward 60 or other cleared wards as requested. Give ample warning to
     Regional Blood Transfusion Centre in event of stock depleting. If
     transport is required, contact Administrative Base.

SUPERINTENDENT PHYSIOTHERAPIST OR DEPUTY

 1. Maintain list of staff telephone numbers for use within the
     department and by staff at home.  It will be the responsibility of the
     person initially alerted to contact other members of staff indicated on
     the list.

 2. Assemble staff in the G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department.

 3. Supervise clearance of Physiotherapy Department and prepare for
    patients with Minor injuries. Patients awaiting transport home after
    treatment should go to the staff room.

 4. Detail a Physiotherapist to control the patient waiting area and
    the flow of patients for diagnosis, treatment or discharge.

 5. Direct doctors to deal with lying, sitting and walking cases in
    various rooms. Supply radiography request forms.

 6. Send to C.S.S.D. for panniers containing syringes, sutures and
    dressing packs.

 7. Send to Pharmacy for lotions (Hibitane), local anaesthetic
    (1% Lignocaine), bandages, strapping, plaster of paris bandages,
    Tetanus Toxoid.

 8. If required, anaesthetic equipment is available in Radiology
    Department.



                                  -31-
9. Isolate noisy patients.

10. Put out mattresses on floors if necessary.

11. Ensure that patients are seen by a Medical Records Clerk before
    discharge home.

SUPERINTENDENT RADIOGRAPHER OR DEPUTY


 1. Maintain an up to date list of personnel including Clerical
    Staff, copies of which should be available for each member of
    staff to use for cascade call-out.

 2. Assemble staff and notify all medical staff in the department. After
    1700 hours on weekdays or during weekends and Bank Holidays initial
    notification will be to the 'on call' Radiographer based in the
    department. Further contact will be established in the manner
    prescribed in the list and that person will be responsible for
    alerting the remainder of the team.

 3. Cancel routine investigations.

 4. Send first team to the A & E Department and prepare X-Ray rooms to
    receive casualties from the Major Disaster.

 5. Send second team to prepare rooms in the Main X-Ray Department to
    receive patients with minor injuries from the G & M Wing Physiotherapy
    Department.

 6. Send third team with mobile machine to Ward 60 for first, in-patients.

 7. Send fourth team with mobile machine to G & M Wing Physiotherapy
    Department for manipulation of minor fractures and application of
    plaster under general anaesthetic.

 8. Send fifth team to Theatre when required.

 9. Radiologists will supervise teams in Accident and Emergency
    Department, Ward 60 and Main X-Ray Department.

10. Assign available Clerical staff from within department to set up
    documentation point for Accident and Emergency X-Ray Rooms.

UNIT PHARMACEUTICAL OFFICER OR DEPUTY

 1. Always maintain list of personnel at hospital switchboard, and
    for use within the department.

 2. Assemble staff. After 1700 hours on weekdays or during weekends and
    Bank Holidays, the switchboard will contact the on-call Pharmacist.
    it will be the responsibility of the person initially alerted to contact
    other members of staff indicated on the list.




                                 -32-
3. Arrange for adequate supplies of the following items in order of
   priority to Accident and Emergency Department, Physiotherapy Department
   and Ward 60.

            a)   Intravenous fluids, Sodium Chloride 0.9%
                                     Haemaccel

            b)   Analgesics, Morphine 10 mg injection
                             Co-Dyramol tablets

            c)   Antibiotics, Ampicillin
                              Flucloxacillin
                              Metronidazole
                              Cefuroxime injection

            d)   Antiemetics, Prochlorperazine injection 25 mg/ml

            e)   Tetanus Toxoid

            f)   Local anaesthetic agents (1% Lignocaine
                                           and Prilocaine 1/2%)

            g)   Medical gas supplies to A & E Department,
                 Theatres and Physiotherapy Department.

                 (Physiotherapy Department will send for
                 dressings and drugs almost immediately to
                 Pharmacy and CSSD).

4. Prepare to supply additional dressings and plaster of paris bandages.

5. Prepare to obtain supplies from other hospitals if necessary.        It may
   be necessary to alert the Pharmacists at other hospitals.

CENTRAL STERILE SUPPLY DEPARTMENT (CSSD)

1. Implementation of the Major Disaster Plan will be by the CSSD Manager,
   or most senior member of staff on duty receiving a telephone call from
   Switchboard.  If no members of the CSSD are on duty the Switchboard
   will telephone the most senior person available, ringing them in the
   following order until they are able to contact a member of staff

            a)   CSSD Manager

            b)   CSSD Deputy Manager

            c)   Chargehands in order as notified to Switchboard.

            The Switchboard will use the words       "Implement   the
            Major Disaster Plan".

2. On receipt of the call the Manager will inform staff on duty.  If call
   is received when department is closed the Manager will ring colleagues
   as detailed on the list which they hold at home and in the department.




                                  -33-
3. On receiving the call members of staff will report to the CSSD entering
   the hospital via the Herries Road entrance.

4. On arrival staff will report to the Sterile Store which will be used as
   the CSSD Base (internal telephone number 4454).

5. If the CSSD is closed the first member of staff to arrive will collect
   keys from Theatres 1-6, go to department and unlock it. Switch on
   power and start trial run on two autoclaves.
                                                .1

6. The second and other members of staff to arrive will check that
   the emergency panniers have been collected from the bottom of
   the stairs leading to Theatres 1-6. If not collected take to
   Physiotherapy Department those panniers marked "Physiotherapy
   Department" and Ward 60 those panniers marked "Ward 60".

7. At regular intervals visit Accident and Emergency Department, Ward 60
   and Physiotherapy Department to assess supply needs and collect soiled
   items for reprocessing.

8. Most senior member of staff on duty to monitor and call in, as
   necessary, extra staff to enable Theatres and Departments involved to
   be supplied with their requirements.  If the telephone does not have
   level '9' access, dial ff 6555 followed by the telephone number.

9. Issue extra stocks on demand and deliver as necessary.

10. If the CSSD Manager or Deputy are not initially available, attempts
    should be made at regular intervals to contact them.


 HOSPITAL CHAPLAINS


 1. The whole-time Chaplain will maintain a li$t of personnel at hospital
    switchboard.

2. Switchboard will alert the Duty Chaplain who is responsible for
   contacting other Chaplains.

3. Assemble in Staff Snack Bar, Level C, from where ministry to patients
   and relatives will be co-ordinated.        -i/

4. Chaplains will be assigned to:-

             (a)   Accident and Emergency Department

             (b)   Ward 60 or other cleared wards - to minister to
                    those urgent casualties awaiting operations
                   etc.

             (c)   Staff Snack Bar, Level C - tp work    alongside
                    the Medical Social Workers in giving support
                    to the relatives who will be directed here.




                                  -34-
 5. The whole-time Hospital Chaplain will act as co-ordinator and
    should advise colleagues where he is based.  If he is required
    urgently, the Chaplain carries a Bleep.

 6. Subject to availability,   the Chaplains will endeavour to visit the
    G & M Wing Physiotherapy   Department to see those With 'Minor' injuries.

GROUP PRINCIPAL SOCIAL WORKER OR DEPUTY

 1. The switchboard at Northern General Hospital will contact Group
    Principal Social Worker or deputy from a list of personnel provided
    and updated by the Group Principal Social Worker.

 2. The Group Principal Social Worker or deputy will contact a minimum of
    three Social Workers and one Clerk from the list of staff held by them
    to provide a social work servive within the hospital.

 3. The Social Work Staff will be based, with the Chaplain, at the Staff
    Snack Bar (Level C). Their duties will include:-

    3.1   Answering enquiries from next of kin regarding people
          admitted to Northern General Hospital in conjunction
          with the Police Liaison Officer.

    3.2   Seeing patients and/or their relatives regarding non-medical
          problems of patients in liaison with the Hospital Chaplain.

    3.3. In particular, liaise with the Chaplain for counselling of
         bereaved relatives.

   3.4    Keeping minimal records of people seen and action taken.


HIGHER SENIOR ANATOMICAL PATHOLOGY TECHNICIAN OR DEPUTY

 1. The Higher Senior APT or deputy will be notified of
    the Major Disaster by Administrative Base.

 2. Open up the Mortuary and prepare the Fridge Room.

 3. Receive bodies from the temporary Mortuary in the
    Orthopaedic Clinic.

 4. Complete documentation relating to the body.

 5. Arrange for \riewing of bodies if required.

 6. Deal with enquiries from the Police, Medical Records,
    Administrative Base.

LINEN SERVICES MANAGER OR DEPUTY

 1. The Linen Services Manager or Deputy will be notified of the Major
    Disaster by Administrative Base. A register of staff telephone numbers
    must be maintained for use within the department.


                                   -35-
2. Open up and prepare the stock of emergency linen.

3. Contact Administrative Base for an assessment of the number of
   casualties involved, areas requiring extra linen and arrangements
   for transport.

4. Bring in additional staff as required.    The telephone must be manned
   at all times.

5. Visit the Accident & Emergency Department
             G & M Wing Physiotherapy
             Theatres
             Ward 60
             ITU
   to assess the need for extra linen.

SUPPLIES AND STORES STAFF

 1. Always maintain list of Stores and Supplies personnel and home
    telephone numbers within the department and ensure that this
    information is also kept by Administration.

 2. In the event of the Major Disaster Plan being implemented during
    working hours assemble all available Stores and Supplies personnel at
    the Herries Road Store. At all other times the Storekeeper Clerk or
    Senior Storekeeper will be contacted by an Administrator. Itwill be
    the responsibility of the person initially alerted tocontact other
    members of staff indicated on the list and instruct them to report to
    the Herries Road Store.

 3. Inform Administrative   Base when you have arrived at the Herries Road
    Store. Remain in the    Stores building with at least one member of
    Stores/Supplies staff   designated as a messenger in order to deal with
    problems of supply to   any   department.

 4. Demands are likely from:-

                Accident & Emergency Department

                Orthopaedic Clinic (Hospital Control)

                Operating Theatres

                Physiotherapy Department (G & M)

                Ward 60

                I.T.U.

                Catering Department

                Portering/Distribution Services




                                  -36-
 5.   While waiting for such demands, check the Major Disaster Plan to
      remind yourself of the activities in these departments and, if in
      difficulty, contact the Administrative Base for advice.

CATERING DEPARTMENT

 1. Upon being called from the hospital by Administrative Base the Catering
    Manager or Deputy Catering Manager will, before leaving their home,
    call at least one other Catering Manager.

 2. Upon arrival at the hospital those called out. will report to the
    Administrative Base, in the Orthopaedic Clinic, Suite C, and check
    catering requirements.

3. The first Catering Manager to arrive will then obtain the keys to the
   Staff Snack Bar, which are located in the Switchboard, and unlock all
   access doors to the Snack Bar.

4. The first Catering Manager will assess the availability of the
   following products:-

                  Tea Bags                Disposable   Cups
                  Instant Coffee              "        Dinner Plates
                  Sugar                       "        Cutlery
                  Milk                        "        Side Plates
                  Soup Mix
                  Bread
                  Margarine
                  Sandwich Fillings
                  Eggs
                  Sausages
                  Baked Beans
                  Frozen Chips
                  Bacon
                  Biscuits

5. If additional supplies are required the second Catering Manager to
   arrive should obtain these from the Geriatric Wing Dining Room and
   Kitchen, the keys for which are located in Sister'sOffice, Ward 38.

6.     The second Catering Manager should make arrangements to supply
      refreshments to the G & M Wing Physiotherapy Department where people
      with minor injuries are to be treated.

 7. The first Catering Manager should set up the servery counter to serve
    hot beverages, biscuits, sandwiches and soup.

8.     The second Catering Manager will assist in sandwich preparation and set
      up for the preparation of meals.

9. The first Catering Manager will serve on the counter, whilst the second
   prepares meals.




                                   -37-
10. Where Catering Staff are already on duty in the Staff Snack Bar, they
    should be given specific duties to carry out. If necessary they should
    be asked either to   stay at work beyond the end of their shift or be
    allowed to go home and subsequently to return to work, if deemed
    necessary.  It should be remembered that they must only use the pay
    'phones if they need to make any telephone calls.

11. One hour after being called out the first Catering Manager should visit
    the Administrative Base to ask if the persons manning the base, or any
    others, require any form of catering service delivering to them and
    this should be provided without adversely affecting the availability of
    catering staff in the Snack Bar.

12. If at any time the   resources of the Snack Barappear to be stretched,
    the first Catering   Manager must either inform the Administrative Base
    and/or arrange for other Catering Managers to be called out.




                                 -38-
        Printed by
Sheffield Health Authority
      Printing Works
  Middlewood Hospital
   SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY




nMMSHIRE
HOSPITAL

  MAJOR
 DISASTER
   PLAN

     ISSUED:   SEPTEMBER 1988
                         MAJOR DISASTER PLAN REVISIONS



                                                                  DATE REVISED SIG N ATURE
     R E V IS IO N NO.   DATE   PAGE NO.   T IT L E OF REVISION
                                                                    IN PLAN




I
1I
 i
 r         ....... .
                                                  CONTENTS

                                                                      PAGE

SECTION 3     S o c i a l Work D e p a r t m e n t .                  24
(Continued)   P h y s io th e ra p y Department.                      24-25
               O r t h o p a e d i c A p p l i a n c e Ma k e r s .   25
               O pe ra ting Department A s s i s t a n t s .          25
               C haplains of a l l Denominations.                     25
               Security S taff.                                       25-26
               Laundry.                                               26
               C a te rin g Department.                               26
               D e p a r t m e n t o f E s t a t e s Management.      26 - 27

SECTION 4.    INFORMATION RELATING TO INCIDENTS INVOLVING
               CONTAMINATION BY CHEMICALS OR RADIOACTIVITY.           28-30
               D a n g e r ou s C h e m i c a l s .                   28
               Radioactivity.                                         28-30
                                                SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                                                ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL

                                                      MAJOR DISASTER PLAN

Th i s document c o n t a i n s d e f i n i t i v e i n f o r m a t i o n on t h e r e s p o n s e o f t h e Royal
Hal 1a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l t o a m a j o r a c c i d e n t .

I t ha s been p r e p a r e d f o l l o w i n g c o n s u l t a t i o n    w i t h a l l i n t e r e s t e d p a r t i e s and
s h o u l d be g i v e n t h e w i d e s t c i r c u l a t i o n t o e n s u r e a l l a p p r o p r i a t e members of
s t a f f a r e f u l l y c o n v e r s a n t of t h e i r r o l e int h e e v e n t of a major                 accident.

T h i s p r o c e d u r e i s s u p p l e m e n t e d by d e p a r t m e n t a l a c t i o n c a r d s ( i s s u e d s e p a r a t e l y )
p r e p a r e d t o g i v e e ac h s t a f f member c o n c e r n e d p r e c i s e d e t a i l s o f h i s r o l e .

C l a r i f i c a t i o n may be s o u g h t o r amendments s u g g e s t e d v i a t h e H o s p i t a l
Adm inistrator.

                                                               CONTENTS

                                                                                                         PAGE

SECTION        1.     MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE INSHEFFIELD.                                            1- 3
                       What i s a Major A c c i d e n t ?                                               1
                       N otification.                                                                   1
                       D i s t r i c t H ospitals Control.                                              1
                       D istribution P rinciples.                                                      2
                       S i t e Medical O f f i c e r / M o b i l e Teams.                              2-3

SECTION        2.     OUTLINE OF THE ORGANISATION OF THE
                       ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL IN THE EVENT
                       OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT.                                                            4_8
                       P r e p a r a t i o n o f t h e H o s p i t a l as soon as t h e
                      A l e r t i s Received.                                                          4_6
                      Control P o i n t s .                                                            6_7
                       I n i t i a l Assessment & T re atm ent.                                        7-8

SECTION        3.     DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONALPOLICIES.                                                9- 27
                      Switchboard.                                                                     10-11
                      A c c i d e n t & Emergency D e p a r t m e n t Medical
                      Staff.                                                                           11-12
                      Me di c a l S t a f f .                                                          12- 13
                      Anaesthetic S ervices.                                                           13-14
                      Nursing A d m in is tra tio n .                                                  15-16
                      Unit A d m i n is t r a t o r .                                                  16-18
                      Medi cal R e c o r d s D e p a r t m e n t .                                     18
                      X-Ray D e p a r t m e n t .                                                      19
                      H a e m a t ol og y & Blood Bank.                                                20-21
                      Portering.                                                                       21-22
                      T.S.S.U./C.S.S.D.                                                                22
                      Ph a r ma c y .                                                                  22- 23
                      E. C. G. D e p a r t m e n t .                                                   23
                      E.E.G. Departm ent.                                                              23
                      C l i n i c a l Chemistry.                                                       23
                      P o s t Mortem T e c h n i c i a n s .                                           23
                                               MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE

                           SECTION 1         MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD

                       (This Paper b r i e f l y d e s c r i b e s the arrangements agreed
                         a c r o s s S h e f f i e l d and i s i n t e n d e d t o s u p p l e m e n t t h e
                                       d e t a i l e d p l a n s a t e ac h H o s p i t a l . )

                                              WHAT IS A MAJOR ACCIDENT?

T h e r e i s no s t a n d a r d d e f i n i t i o n , b u t , f o r h o s p i t a l s t h i s i s g e n e r a l l y an
a c c i d e n t whe r e t h e number and s e v e r i t y o f l i v e c a s u a l t i e s r e q u i r e s s p e c i a l
a r r a n g e m e n t s t o be made.

                                                         NOTIFICATION

I t i s n o r m a l l y d e c l a r e d by t h e Ambulance C o n t r o l b u t c o u l d a l s o be d e c l a r e d by
o t h e r Emergency S e r v i c e s , and n o t i f i c a t i o n i s t o t h e S w i t c h b o a r d ' s o f a l l
d e s i g n a t e d m a j o r a c c i d e n t h o s p i t a l s (Royal H a l l a m s h i r e and N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l
H o s p i t a l s in S h e f f i e l d ) .    The S w i t c h b o a r d O p e r a t o r r e c e i v i n g t h e c a l l s h o u l d
n o t i f y t h e N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l H o s p i t a l t o e n s u r e t h a t t h e me s s a ge i s r e c e i v e d .

However , on s i t e , t h e Major A c c i d e n t p r o c e d u r e s h o u l d n o t be p u t i n t o e f f e c t
u n t i l c o n f i r m e d by e i t h e r : -
            C o n s u lta n t in A & E
            S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r in A & E
            S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r in S u r g e ry .

The s w i t c h b o a r d o p e r a t o r s h o u l d c o n t a c t t h e above m e n t i o n e d s t a f f i n t h e o r d e r
shown and t h e f i r s t one t o be c o n t a c t e d w i l l l i a i s e w i t h t h e a mbul a nc e s e r v i c e
t o o b t a i n more p r e c i s e d e t a i l s o f t h e i n c i d e n t .   This do c to r w i l l decide whether
o r n o t t o i mp l eme n t t h e Major A c c i d e n t P r o c e d u r e .      The s w i t c h b o a r d o p e r a t o r w i l l
t a k e no a c t i o n t o i mp l eme n t t h e p r o c e d u r e u n t i l i n s t r u c t e d t o do so by one of
t h e above m e n t i o n e d m e d i c a l s t a f f .

A l t e r n a t i v e l y , i f l a r g e number s o f s e v e r e l y i n j u r e d c a s u a l t i e s a r r i v e w i t h o u t
n o t i c e a t t h e A c c i d e n t & Emergency D e p a r t m e n t t h e C o n s u l t a n t i n c h a r g e may p u t
the procedure into action lo c a lly .

                                              DISTRICT HOSPITALS CONTROL

To p r o v i d e c o - o r d i n a t i o n o f S h e f f i e l d H o s p i t a l s and c o m m u n i c a t i o n s w i t h o t h e r
s e r v i c e s and a r e a s , a c e n t r a l p o i n t w i l l be manned i n t h e G e n e r a l M a n a g e r ' s
o f f i c e a t t h e R.H.H.            Local h o s p i t a l c o n t r o l s w i l l be s e t up s e p a r a t e l y a t t h e
Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l and t h e N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l H o s p i t a l .
                                                DISTRIBUTION PRINCIPLES

The f i r s t p a t i e n t s w i l l   be t a k e n t o t h e r e l e v a n t A c c i d e n t Dept as shown b e l o w : -

9 . 0 0 a . m. t o 8 . 0 0 p .m . d a i l y                                         Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l
                                                                                    ( e x c e p t wher e a c c i d e n t o c c u r s
                                                                                    c lo s e to the Northern
                                                                                    General H o s p i t a l ) .

8 . 0 0 p. m. t o 9 . 0 0 a . m. e ac h n i g h t                                    The h o s p i t a l whose A c c i d e n t
                                                                                     and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t i s
                                                                                     r o t a t e d t o be open a f t e r 9 . 0 0
                                                                                     p.m. a c cording t o the
                                                                                     following r o t a : -

                                                                                     Monday                  R.H.H.
                                                                                     Tu e s d a y            N.G.H.
                                                                                     Wednesday               N.G.H.
                                                                                     Thursday                R.H.H.
                                                                                     Friday                  R.H.H.
                                                                                     Saturday                N.G.H.
                                                                                     Sunday                  R.H.H.


One h o s p i t a l w i l l n o t n o r m a l l y be e x p e c t e d t o t a k e more t h a n 25 s e r i o u s l y
i n j u r e d c a s u a l t i e s l i k e l y t o r e q u i r e a d m i s s i o n b e f o r e t h e o t h e r t a k e s an e q u a l
number .

The D i s t r i c t H o s p i t a l C o n t r o l w i l l be r e s p o n s i b l e f o r t h e d i s t r i b u t i o n of
c a s u a l t i e s by l i a i s o n w i t h t h e Ambulance S e r v i c e whe r e n e c e s s a r y .

C h i l d r e n w i 11 be t a k e n w i t h a d u l t s t o t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a d u l t A c c i d e n t and
Emergency D e p a r t m e n t ( a t l e a s t i n i t i a l l y ) .  C h i l d r e n w i l l n o t be t a k e n d i r e c t t o
the C hildren's H o sp ita l.


SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAMS

A m e d i c a l and n u r s i n g t e a m o r S i t e Medical O f f i c e r w i l l n o t be a u t o m a t i c a l l y
despatched to the s i t e of a major a c c i d e n t .                        However, s h o u l d m e d i c a l and n u r s i n g
a s s i s t a n c e be r e q u i r e d by t h e Ambulance S e r v i c e i n t h e l i g h t o f t h e p a r t i c u l a r
c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h e Me di c a l C o n t r o l l e r s a t t h e Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l and t h e
N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l H o s p i t a l w i l l make a p p r o p r i a t e a r r a n g e m e n t s i n t h e l i g h t o f t h e
p a r t i c u l a r n e e d s and s t a f f i n g r e s o u r c e s .     The m o b i l e t ea m w i l l n o r m a l l y be s e n t
f ro m t h e h o s p i t a l n o t a c c e p t i n g t h e i n i t i a l c a s u a l t i e s and any f u r t h e r t eams
r e q u i r e d w i l l be s e n t on a r o t a t i o n a l b a s i s .         The Ambulance S e r v i c e p r o v i d e s a
v e h i c l e w i t h c e r t a i n b a s i c s u p p l i e s f o r t r a n s p o r t i n g a m e d i c a l and n u r s i n g t eam
and f u r t h e r s p e c i a l i s e d e q u i p m e n t , s u p p l i e s and p r o t e c t i v e c l o t h i n g a r e h e l d i n
r e a d i n e s s a t both h o s p i t a l s .       On a r r i v a l a t t h e s i t e t h e s e n i o r p e r s o n on t h e
m e d i c a l t e a m wi l l e v a l u a t e t h e s i t u a t i o n and a c t as S i t e Medical O f f i c e r .               He
mus t c o n t a c t t h e Ambul ance I n c i d e n t O f f i c e r and w i l l n o r m a l l y l o c a t e h i m s e l f a t
t h e Ambulance S e r v i c e C o mm u n i c a t i on s P o i n t .




                                                                - 2 -
The S i t e Medical O f f i c e r i s r e s p o n s ib le f o r : -

1.       Formulating a c a s u a l t y ev acu atio n plan in c o l l a b o r a t i o n with the
          Ambulance I n c i d e n t O f f i c e r .

2.       Arranging f o r t h e a tt e n d a n c e of f u r t h e r medical   and n u r s i n g t ea ms i f
          required.




                                                          - 3 -
             SECTION 2.,     OUTLINE OF THE ORGANISATION OF THE
                           ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                        IN THE EVENT OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT

PREPARATION OF THE HOSPITAL AS SOON AS THE ALERT IS RECEIVED
ID     A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t   ~

         The D e p a r t m e n t w i l l be c l e a r e d o f p a t i e n t s b e i n g t r e a t e d as
         quickly           as p o s s i b l e .      They w i l l be s e n t home, t o a w a r d , o r t o
         t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t , i f t h e y r e q u i r e t r a n s p o r t home.
         When t h e y l e a v e t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t , on t h e a r r i v a l of
         t h e i r t r a n s p o r t , t h e y w i l l d e p a r t v i a t h e Medical S c h o o l , ' B'
         F l o o r ( n o . 6) e x i t .       A c c i d e n t and Emergency S t a f f w i l l be
         a l l o c a t e d f o r p a t i e n t a s s e s s m e n t and t r e a t m e n t .

         S e c u r i t y S t a f f wi l l p la c e n o t i c e s o u t s i d e the Department, to the
         e f f e c t t h a t i t i s c l o s e d b e c a u s e o f a m a j o r a c c i d e n t , and i n
         C l a r e m o n t C r e s c e n t , and w i l l l o c k a l l d o o r s i n t h e D e p a r t m e n t
         except those to the Orthopaedic Cl i n i c .

         The S w i t c h b o a r d w i l l d i v e r t G. P. r e f e r r a l c a l l s away f rom t h e
         hospital.         Those t h a t a r e on t h e i r way i n wi l l e n t e r t h e h o s p i t a l
         v i a B F l o o r e n t r a n c e and go s t r a i g h t t o t h e w a r d .

         A c c i d e n t and Emergency X-Ray p a t i e n t s w i l l            go back t o t h e
         department.

         ( I f t h e a l e r t i s r e c e i v e d i n t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency
         D e p a r t m e n t by e i t h e r t h e r e d t e l e p h o n e o r r a d i o , t h e p e r s o n
         r e c e i v i n g t h e c a l l s h o u l d i n f o r m t h e S w i t c h b o a r d t o commence t h e
         procedure.)

(ii)     Orthopaedic Cl i ni c

         The O r t h o p a e d i c C l i n i c w i l l be c l e a r e d t o r e c e i v e c a s u a l t i e s .
         P a t i e n t s w i l l e i t h e r go home o r t o t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t
         i f t r a n s p o r t is r e q u i r e d , a t the a p p r o p r i a t e time leaving the
         h o s p i t a l a t t h e Me di c a l School e n t r a n c e .       C l i n i c s h e e t s w i l l be
         s e t t o one s i d e i n o r d e r t h a t p a t i e n t s may be s e n t new
         appointments.

(iii)    Physiotherapy

         P a t i e n t s t o r e t u r n t o t h e i r wa r d s o r t o rooms B48 & B45 f o r
         o u t-p a tie n ts waiting fo r t r a n s p o r t.         O t h e r o u t - p a t i e n t s s h o u l d be
         s e n t home i m m e d i a t e l y .

( i v)   Theatres

         Operations wi l l         c e a s e - no more p a t i e n t s t o go t o t h e a t r e s f rom
         wards.




                                               - 4 -
( v)       Wards

           J u n i o r Me di c a l S t a f f w i l l a s s e s s t h e i r p a t i e n t s i n p r e p a r a t i o n
           for discharge.               Patients for discharge, if requiring tra n sp o rt
           w i l l g a t h e r i n t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t wh e r e t h e y w i l l be
           m o n i t o r e d by N u r s i n g S t a f f who wi l l r e q u e s t a d d i t i o n a l v o l u n t a r y
           s e r v i c e s v i a Main R e c e p t i o n i f n e c e s s a r y .       Ward G2 w i l l be
           c l e a r e d by P o r t e r i n g S t a f f who w i l l t r a n s f e r p a t i e n t s t o wa r d s El
           and E3 f o r a s s e s s m e n t b e f o r e d i s c h a r g e o r t r a n s f e r t o o t h e r
           wards.          Ward G2 wi l l be a v a i l a b l e f o r t h e r e c e p t i o n of m a j o r
           accident p a tie n ts .           I f f u r t h e r wa r ds r e q u i r e d a t any s t a g e , a
           g e n e r a l s u r g i c a l ward w i l l be c o n s i d e r e d .

(vi)       Portering S taff

           P o r t e r s wi l l t a k e c o n t r o l , using l i f t keys, of both p a t i e n t
           movement l i f t s one t h e a t r e l i f t and one p a s s e n g e r l i f t , h o l d i n g
           them i n r e a d i n e s s f o r movement o f p a t i e n t s .     One t h e a t r e l i f t t o
           r e m a i n u n d e r c o n t r o l of t h e a t r e s . B Floor T heatres then to
           c o n t a c t P o r t e r s Lodge f o r any p a t i e n t movement r e q u i r e d .

           T r o l l e y s f ro m T r a n s i t Ward and t h e r e m a i n d e r o f B F l o o r w i l l        be
           a s s e m b l e d i n t h e O r t h o p a e d i c De pt , e n t r a n c e .

           C a r e t r o l l e y s w i l l be r e s e r v e d f o r p a t i e n t s r e q u i r i n g X-Rays i f
           p o s s i b l e . A d d i t i o n a l s h e e t s w i l l be o b t a i n e d f rom t h e l a u n d r y and
           t a k e n t o Ward G2.

           Ward G2 w i l l      be e v a c u a t e d .

( vi i )   Documentation

           At t h e a s s e s s m e n t p o i n t members o f t h e Me di c a l R e c o r d s D e p a r t m e n t
           w i l l commence d o c u m e n t a t i o n , p a s s i n g a copy o f t h e i n f o r m a t i o n
           r e c e i v e d t o b o t h t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t C o n t r o l
           and h a v i n g a copy r e a d y f o r c o l l e c t i o n by r u n n e r f o r t h e B F l o o r
           Control.

           The P o l i c e w i l l s e t up t h e i r own d o c u m e n t a t i o n p r o c e d u r e room in
           B306 s i t e d i n t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency s t a f f o f f i c e s .

           The A d m i n i s t r a t i o n w i l l e n s u r e d e t a i l s o f p a t i e n t s g o i n g home v i a
           t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t a r e c o l l a t e d and p a s s e d o n t o t h e
           Community N u r s i n g O f f i c e r .

(viii)     Muster Po in t

           N u r s i n g V o l u n t e e r s w i l l r e p o r t t o N u r s i n g A d m i n i s t r a t i o n on B
           Floor.        Those s t a f f and v o l u n t e e r s w i t h no d e s i g n a t e d a r e a t o
           r e p o r t t o w i l l go t o t h e A s s i s t a n t A d m i n i s t r a t o r s ' O f f i c e , Room
           B164, w h e r e an A d m i n i s t r a t o r w i l l a l l o c a t e d u t i e s .




                                                   - 5 -
     ( i x)    R e la t iv e s

               R e l a t i v e s wi l l be d i r e c t e d t o t h e B F l o o r e n t r a n c e where t h e
               A d m i n i s t r a t o r on d u t y w i l l g i v e i n f o r m a t i o n t h a t has be e n
               t r a n s f e r r e d f rom t h e d o c u m e n t a t i o n p o i n t .   R e l a t i v e s w i l l be
               m a r s h a l l e d i n t h e A F l o o r O u t - P a t i e n t W.R.V.S. W a i t i n g A r e a .

     (x)       Press

               The P r e s s w i l l be d i r e c t e d t o t h e Co mmi t t e e Room whe r e t h e
               A d m i n i s t r a t o r on d u t y a t t h e R e c e p t i o n Desk w i l l keep them
               informed of t h e u p - t o - d a t e s i t u a t i o n .

     (xi)      Car P a r k i n g

                The P o l i c e w i l l c o n t r o l t h e a r e a a r o u n d t h e h o s p i t a l .      Staff
                s h o u l d p a r k a t a d i s t a n c e and walk v i a C Road.

     (xii)     Waiting L i s t P a t i e n t s       not yet admitted

                The s e w i l l be s e n t home by t h e A d m i s s i o n s S t a f f a f t e r
                i n s t r u c t i o n s from Nurs ing Co ntrol i f n e c e s s a r y .


     ( x i i i ) General N o t i f i c a t i o n of S t a f f

                A r r a n g e m e n t s e x i s t f o r n o t i f y i n g Ra di o S h e f f i e l d and R a di o Hal lam
                of t h e need t o b r o a d c a s t p r e - a r r a n g e d m e s s a g e s a s k i n g s t a f f t o
                re p o rt to the h o s p ita l.



2.   CONTROL POINTS

     Three h o s p i t a l c o n tr o l p o i n t s wi l l     be s e t up as f o l l o w s ( i n a d d i t i o n t o
     the D is tr ic t Control) :-

      (i)      The H o s p i t a l C o n t r o l i n t h e H o s p i t a l A d m i n i s t r a t o r ' s   O f f i c e whe r e
               t h e G e n e r a l Ma nage r , Chai rman o f t h e Medical S t a f f Co m m i t t e e , t h e
               Mat r on and t h e H o s p i t a l A d m i n i s t r a t o r , o r t h e i r d e p u t i e s , w i l l
               d ir e c t the H o sp ita l's response.                An e x - d i r e c t o r y t e l e p h o n e number
               with six l in e s is a v a i l a b l e in t h i s a re a .

      (ii)     A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t C o n t r o l whi ch w i l l be
               e s t a b l i s h e d i n A c c i d e n t and Emergency A d m i n i s t r a t i o n . This wi l l
               be s t a f f e d by t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n s u l t a n t , A s s i s t a n t
               Mat r on ( A c c i d e n t and Emergency) o r d e p u t y and an A d m i n i s t r a t i v e
                A ssistant.

      (iii)     T heatre Control wi l l             r e m a i n and t h e normal e me r ge nc y p r o c e d u r e s
                wi l l c o n tin u e .

                Also t h e f o l l o w i n g a g e n c i e s w i l l    s e t up t h e i r own c o n t r o l s i n t h e
                hospital:




                                                        - 6 -
      (i)       The Ambulance S e r v i c e w i l l e s t a b l i s h a c o n t r o l by a p p o i n t i n g a
                 l i a i s o n o f f i c e r t o be s i t u a t e d i n t h e Ambulance O f f i c e B80.

      (ii)      The P o l i c e w i l l e s t a b l i s h a c o n t r o l f o r t h e i r own d o c u m e n t a t i o n
                p u r p o se s u s i n g , i f n e c e s s a r y , t h e Non-Accident Area.              A telephone
                 l i n e s e p a r a t e f rom t h e Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l S w i t c h b o a r d may
                be i n s t a l l e d i n t h a t a r e a , ( B3 0 6 ) .


3.    INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT

     An a s s e s s m e n t t eam c o n s i s t i n g o f t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency S e n i o r
     R e g i s t r a r , O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r o r R e g i s t r a r of t h e d a y , t h e
     O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r House O f f i c e r and S i s t e r ( o r S t a f f Nur s e ) f rom t h e
     O r t h o p a e d i c / A c c i d e n t and Emergency De p a r t m e n t w i l l a s s e m b l e t o g e t h e r
     w i t h a d o c u m e n t a t i o n t ea m p r o v i d e d by t h e Me di c a l R e c o r d s D e p a r t m e n t a t
     t h e O r t h o p a e d i c C l i n i c e n t r a n c e and w i l l d i r e c t c a s u a l t i e s as f o l l o w s : -

     (a)        The s l i g h t l y i n j u r e d t o t h e O r t h o p a e d i c D r e s s i n g A r e a .

     ( b)       The m o d e r a t e l y i n j u r e d t o t h e Cl ea n D r e s s i n g Room.

     (c)        Thos e w i t h m a j o r t r a u m a i n i t i a l l y t o t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n    area with
                t h e T r a n s i t Ward b e i n g us e d as n e c e s s a r y .

     (d)        The dead t o t h e t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y in t h e S e m i n a r Room,
                Orthopaedic Cl i ni c .

     (e)        Camp be ds a r e a v a i l a b l e i n t h e main s t o r e s s h o u l d t h e y be
                r e q u i r e d f o r p a t i e n t u s e on a t e m p o r a r y b a s i s .

     (f)        In c a s e s i n v o l v i n g r a d i o a c t i v e and c o n t a m i n a t e d v i c t i m s ,
                p o l y t h e n e s h e e t i n g s h o u l d be l a i d on t h e main c o r r i d o r f rom t h e
                C a s u a l t y D e p a r t m e n t t o t h e T r a n s i t Ward.       P a t i e n t s s u s p e c t e d of
                b e i n g c o n t a m i n a t e d s h o u l d be t a k e n t o room B123 i n o r d e r t h a t
                t h e y may be s h o w e r e d .

                The F i r e B r i g a d e a l s o have a m o b i l e d e c o n t a m i n a t i o n f a c i l i t y
                avail able if i t is required.

     ( g)      S h o ul d any a d v i c e be r e q u i r e d r e g a r d i n g s e co n d s t a g e a s s i s t a n c e
                f o r r a d i a t i o n c a s e s t h e f o l l o w i n g numbers s h o u l d be c o n t a c t e d : -

                (i)         Working Hours - 0235 24141 e x t .                    4444 o r 4059

                (ii)        Out o f Hours - 0235 24141 e x t .                   5329 o r 5137

     ( h)      In i n c i d e n t s i n v o l v i n g c h e m i c a l s o r p o i s o n s e x p e r t a d v i c e may be
                o b t a i n e d by r i n g i n g e i t h e r : -

                (i)         The N a t i o n a l Chemical Emergency C e n t r e -

                            0235 24141 e x t .          2121             or

                (ii)        Guys H o s p i t a l P o i s o n s C e n t r e - 01 635 9191




                                                        - 7 -
I
I
I                      2
I
I
         TRIAGE.                               PHYSIOTHERAPY

I        MINOR INJURIES.
         TEMPORARY MORTUARY.
         MODERATE INJURIES.
         SERIOUS INJURIES

I
                                                        W   H.V5


                                                     J I

I
I                                                     * RAt
                                                     W R iTlM ft
1                        PLASTER
                           Roonvs

I                                          r                   1
                                                               1 ••i
I                                                                   L _
I
                                * RA7                  6*dA
                                                                                          A«uo«n
                                                                   6306                   iw tfm cfici


I                                                                         1
                                                                                              files      uurM


I                                   63o|



I
                                                                              ttSTEftS
                                                                                                      6*0 if
                                                                              6 to6




I
                                                                          -              ■-     —




i   6 is.*.



i                                          - 8 -


i
                           SECTION 3,       DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONAL POLICIES

1.     Switchboard
2.     A. & E. D e p a r t m e n t Medical S t a f f
3.     Me di c a l S t a f f - G e n e r a l
4.     Anaesthetic Services
5.     Nursing A d m in is tra tio n
6.     Hospital Adm inistration
7.     Me di c a l R e c o r d s D e p a r t m e n t
8.     X-Ray D e p a r t m e n t
9.     Ha e ma t o l o g y
10.    Portering
11.    CSSD/TSSU
12.    Pha r ma c y
13.    E. C. G.
14.    E. E. G.
15.    C l i n i c a l Chemistry
16.    Histopathology
17.    S o c i a l Work D e p a r t m e n t
18.    Physiotherapy
19.    O. A. M' s .
20.    Operating Department A s s i s t a n t s
21.    Chaplains
22.    Security
23.    L a u n dr y
2 4.   Catering
2 5.   E s t a t e s Management




                                                   - 9 -
1.   SWITCHBOARD

     A.     The o p e r a t o r who r e c e i v e s t h e a l e r t t o t e l e p h o n e IMMEDIATELY:-

            (i)       Ambulance C o n t r o l o r P o l i c e on ex d i r e c t o r y number t o
                       c he ck t h e c a l l i s n o t a hoax and t h e n c o n f i r m w i t h t h e
                       Sw itchboard a t t h e Northern General H o s p i t a l .

            (ii)      Inform e i t h e r : -       1 C o n s u l t a n t i n A.&.E.
                                                   2 S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r i n A & E.
                                                    3 S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r in S u r g e ry .

                        The f i r s t of t h e above d o c t o r s t o be c o n t a c t e d w i l l
                        i n s t r u c t t h e s w i t c h b o a r d o p e r a t o r w h e t h e r o r n o t t h e Major
                        A c c i d e n t P r o c e d u r e i s t o be i m p l e m e n t e d .

                        I f t h e s w i t c h b o a r d o p e r a t o r i s i n s t r u c t e d t o i mpl eme nt t h e
                        p r o c e d u r e t h e f o l l o w i n g s t a f f s h o u l d be t e l e p h o n e d .

            (iii)     The S e n i o r A s s i s t a n t Matron o r A s s i s t a n t Matron on                  duty.

            (iv)      A c c i d e n t and Emergency R e c e p t i o n .
                       When D e p a r t me n t c l o s e d A c c i d e n t & Emergency C o n s u l t a n t o r
                       Senior R egistrar.

            (v)       The O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r House O f f i c e r on t a k e .

            (vi)      Cha i r ma n o f t h e Medical S t a f f Co m m i t t e e .

           (vii)      The f i r s t o n - c a l l A n a e s t h e t i s t .

           (viii) Porters'            Lodge.

           (ix)       G e n e r a l S u r g i c a l House S u r g e o n s .                                 ,

           ( x)       On - Ca l l Blood T r a n s f u s i o n       Technician.

            (xi)      On - Ca l l R a d i o g r a p h e r .

            (xii)     On - Ca l l R a d i o l o g i s t .


     B.     A n o t h e r O p e r a t o r on d u t y w i l l   telephone:-

            (i)        Any o t h e r o p e r a t o r a t home t o r e q u e s t h e r t o t e l e p h o n e a l l
                       o t h e r o p e r a t o r s and ask them t o r e p o r t t o t h e h o s p i t a l .

            (ii)       On-call A dm inistrator.

            (iii)      P a t i e n t s S e r v i c e s O f f i c e r o r De put y P a t i e n t s S e r v i c e s
                       O fficer.

            (iv)       O n - Ca l l House S t a f f i n E . N . T . , O r t h o p a e d i c s n o t on t a k e ,
                       N e u r o s u r g e r y , Me d i c i n e and O p h t ha l m i c S u r g e r y .

            ( v)       On-call P h y s i o th e r a p i s t.



                                                    - 10 -
             ( Vi )      Clinical       C h e m i s t r y M. L. S. O. O n - C a l l .

             (vii)       On- Ca l l P h a r m a c i s t .

             (viii)      On - Ca l l E. C. G. T e c h n i c i a n .

             (ix)        H i s t o p a t h o l o g i s t and M. L. S. O. ( a c c o r d i n g t o l i s t ) .

             ( x)        E. E. G. T e c h n i c i a n .

             (xi)        S e n i o r Di n i n g Room S u p e r v i s o r o r C a t e r i n g Ma nage r .

             (xii)       Social      Worker.

             (xiii)      Chaplain.

             ( x i v)    E n g i n e e r o r e me r ge n c y Works C o n t r o l C e n t r e o u t - o f - o f f i c e
                         hours.


2.   ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT MEDICAL STAFF

     (i)     The A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n s u l t a n t o n - c a l l w i l l be
             c o n t a c t e d by t h e s w i t c h b o a r d and w i l l d e c i d e w h e t h e r t o i mp l eme n t
             t h e p r o c e d u r e and w i l l t h e n p r o c e e d t o t h e N o n - A c c i d e n t Un i t
              ( t e l e p h o n e e x t . 2178) i n t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t i n
             o r d e r t o c o - o r d i n a t e t h e r e c e p t i o n , a s s e s s m e n t and t r e a t m e n t o f
             casualties.

             In t h e a b s e n c e o f t h e A c c i d e n t & Emergency C o n s u l t a n t t h e O n - t a k e
             S u r ge o n w i l l u n d e r t a k e t h i s r o l e .

             In t h e a b s e n c e o f a more s e n i o r s u r g e o n t h e S e n i o r House O f f i c e r
             ( A c c i d e n t and Emergency) w i l l b e g i n t h i s t a s k .

     (ii)    The C a s u a l t y O f f i c e r s w i l l c l e a r t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency
             D e p a r t m e n t a s soon as p o s s i b l e .        P a t i e n t s w i l l be s e n t home
             d i r e c t l y a f t e r t r e a t m e n t o r a s k e d t o r e t u r n home and be s e e n by
             t h e i r General P r a c t i t i o n e r .       Any p a t i e n t s r e q u i r i n g t r a n s p o r t
             w i l l be d i r e c t e d t o t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y Gymnasium t o a w a i t
             transport.

             The S e n i o r House O f f i c e r w i l l n o t i f y t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency
             C o n s u l t a n t o f t h e s t a f f i n g s i t u a t i o n , w i l l make a r r a n g e m e n t s t o
             c l e a r t h e d e p a r t m e n t o f p a t i e n t s and man t h e R e s u s c i t a t i o n Area
             and M o d e r a t e l y i n j u r e d a r e a .

     (iii)   The S w i t c h b o a r d w i l l c o n t a c t t h e O r t h o p a e d i c House S u r g e o n
             on d u t y who w i l l i n t u r n i n f o r m t h e O r t h o p a e d i c R e g i s t r a r and
             S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r and C o n s u l t a n t and w i l l t h e n p r o c e e d t o t h e
             assessment p o in t.

             The O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r w i l l j o i n t h e S e n i o r House
             O f f i c e r and t h e S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r i n A c c i d e n t and Emergency a t t h e
             a s s e s s m e n t p o i n t as s oon as p o s s i b l e .




                                                            - 11 -
     (iv)        The A n a e s t h e t i s t o n - c a l l w i l l be n o t i f i e d by t h e S w i t c h b o a r d and
                 w i l l p r o c e e d t o t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t and
                 c a l l i n any a d d i t i o n a l s t a f f r e q u i r e d .

     ( v)        The A c c i d e n t and Emergency S e n i o r House O f f i c e r s w i l l go t o
                 R e s u s c i t a t i o n Area whe r e t h e y wi l l be j o i n e d by t h e O r t h o p a e d i c
                 S e n i o r House O f f i c e r when he becomes f r e e f rom t h e a s s e s s m e n t
                 area.        The A c c i d e n t and Emergency S e n i o r House O f f i c e r w i l l s t a y
                 in the "moderately in ju r e d " a r e a .              As a d d i t i o n a l s t a f f a r r i v e
                 t h e y w i l l be d i r e c t e d by t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n s u l t a n t t o
                 the following a re a :-

                 A      Control P o in t
                 B      Major I n j u r y Area
                 C      M o d e r a t e l y i n j u r e d Area
                 D      Major I n j u r y Area


     (vi)       The A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n t r o l w i l l be e s t a b l i s h e d i n t h e
                A c c i d e n t and Emergency O f f i c e Area ( t e l e p h o n e e x t . 2178) and w i l l
                be s t a f f e d by t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n s u l t a n t , A s s i s t a n t
                Matron ( A c c i d e n t and Emergency o r Deput y) and an A s s i s t a n t
                A dm inistrator.

3.   MEDICAL STAFF - (Non A c c i d e n t and Emergency)

     The o r g a n i s a t i o n o f m e d i c a l s t a f f i n t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency, and
     O r t h o p a e d i c D e p a r t m e n t s w i l l be a t t h e d i r e c t i o n o f t h e A c c i d e n t and
     Emergency C o n s u l t a n t .            The f o l l o w i n g s e c t i o n s g i v e an i n d i c a t i o n o f how
     the area will o p erate.

     (i)        Orthopaedic S t a f f
#
                The O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r House O f f i c e r w i l l be a l e r t e d by t h e
                S w i t c h b o a r d and w i l l i n f o r m t h e O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r ,
                R e g i s t r a r and C o n s u l t a n t and w i l l t h e n go t o t h e a s s e s s m e n t a r e a
                t o a s s i s t t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r .

                 The C o n s u l t a n t w i l l r e p o r t t o t h e n o n - A c c i d e n t U n i t e i t h e r t o man
                 t h e A c c i d e n t and       Emergency D e p a r t m e n t c o n t r o l i n t h e a b s e n c e o f
                 t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n s u l t a n t o r t o work a s s u g g e s t e d by
                 t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n s u l t a n t .              He w i l l make c o n t a c t w i t h
                 o t h e r O r t h o p a e d i c C o n s u l t a n t s as n e c e s s a r y .

                 The O r t h o p a e d i c S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r and R e g i s t r a r h a v i n g been
                 c o n t a c t e d wi l l pro ceed t o t h e O r th o p ae d ic C l i n i c e n t r a n c e t o lea d
                 t h e a s s e s s m e n t t ea m.    At an a p p r o p r i a t e t i m e , t h e O r t h o p a e d i c
                 S e n i o r House O f f i c e r w i l l s u p p o r t t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency
                 S e n i o r House O f f i c e r s i n t h e R e s u s c i t a t i o n Ar e a .




                                                                                                                                I
                                                          - 12 -

                                                                                                                                I
     (ii )      E.N.T.

                 The E . N . T . S e n i o r House O f f i c e r w i l l be i n f o r me d by t h e
                 S w i t c h b o a r d t h a t a m a j o r a c c i d e n t has o c c u r r e d and w i l l p r o c e e d
                 t o Ward G2 t o make a r r a n g e m e n t s and c l e a r t h e ward f o r t h e
                 r e c e p t i o n of c a s u a l t i e s .

     (i i i )   C o n s u l t a n t G e n e r a l S u r g e o n On-Take

                 The C o n s u l t a n t G e n e r a l S u r g e o n o n - t a k e w i l l be i n f o r m e d by h i s
                 House O f f i c e r t h a t a m a j o r a c c i d e n t ha s o c c u r r e d and w i l l r e p o r t
                 t o t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n t r o l and t h e n d e t e r m i n e h i s
                 a p p r o p r i a t e c o u rs e of a c t i o n .

     ( i v)     The Chai rman o r S e c r e t a r y o f t h e Me di c a l              S t a f f Commi t t e e

                 On b e i n g a l e r t e d by t h e S w i t c h b o a r d , t h e Chai rman o r , i f he i s
                 C o n s u l t a n t G e n e r a l S u r ge on o n - t a k e , t h e S e c r e t a r y o f t h e Medical
                 S t a f f Co mmi t te e w i l l r e p o r t t o t h e H o s p i t a l A d m i n i s t r a t o r ' s
                 O f f i c e t o s e t up t h e h o s p i t a l c o n t r o l .

     ( v)       Neurosurgery,          and O p h t h a l m i c S u r g e r y C o n s u l t a n t s

                 The s e s t a f f w i l l be c o n t a c t e d by t h e i r J u n i o r S t a f f and w i l l
                 p r o c e e d t o t h e main t h e a t r e s .

     (vi)       Consultant Physicians

                 The C o n s u l t a n t P h y s i c i a n o n - t a k e w i l l be c o n t a c t e d by t h e
                 R.M.O.and w i l l r e p o r t t o t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t .
                 He w i l l d e t e r m i n e w h e t h e r o r n o t t o c a l l upon h i s c o l l e a g u e s f o r
                 assistance.

     (vii)      Al l J u n i o r S t a f f

                 On b e i n g a l e r t e d by t h e S w i t c h b o a r d , j u n i o r m e d i c a l   s ta ff will:

     (a)        a s s e s s t h e i r i n - p a t i e n t s t o s e e i f t h e y c an be d i s c h a r g e d o r
                 t r a n s f e r r e d and i f n e c e s s a r y i n f o r m t h e i r c o n s u l t a n t s o f any
                 assistance required.

     (b)        r e p o r t t o t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency C o n t r o l i n t h e              Non-Accident
                 Un i t t o be a l l o c a t e d t o d u t i e s i n t h e D e p a r t m e n t .

4.   ANAESTHETIC SERVICES

     (i)        Switchboard bleeps A n a e s t h e t i s t f i r s t ' o n - c a l l ' f o r general
                d u t i e s a t t h e Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l t o go t o t h e A c c i d e n t
                and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t .




                                                             - 13 -
(ii)     The G e n e r a l ' F i r s t O n - C a l l ' A n a e s t h e t i s t b l e e p s t h e S p e c i a l s
         ' F i r s t O n - C a l l ' A n a e s t h e t i s t and d i r e c t s him a l s o t o t h e A c c i d e n t
         & Emergency D e p a r t m e n t .

(iii)     The G e n e r a l ' F i r s t O n - C a l l ' A n a e s t h e t i s t t h e n b l e e p s o r
         t e l e p h o n e s t h e Second On- Cal l ( S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r ) A n a e s t h e t i s t ,
         and f i n a l l y goe s t o t h e A c c i d e n t & Emergency D e p a r t m e n t .

(iv)     The Second On- Ca l l ( S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r ) A n a e s t h e t i s t i n f o r m s t h e
         C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i s t ( G e n e r a l ) On Ca l l f o r t h e Royal
         H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l , b e f o r e l e a v i n g f o r t h e A c c i d e n t & Emergency
         Department.

( v)     The ( G e n e r a l ) C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i s t 'On C a l l ' t e l e p h o n e s t h e
         C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i s t 'On Ca l l * f o r I n t e n s i v e Car e and J e s s o p
         H ospital.

(vi)      The C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i s t I n t e n s i v e C a r e and J e s s o p t h e n   goe s
         d i r e c t l y t o A c c i d e n t & Emergency D e p a r t m e n t o f t h e Royal
         H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l t o s e t up t h e A n a e s t h e t i c C o n t r o l .

(vii)    The C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i s t ( G e n e r a l ) 'On C a l l ' f o r t h e Royal
         H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l t e l e p h o n e s from h i s / h e r home b a s e , s i x
         R e g i s t r a r A n a e s t h e t i s t s and s i x S e n i o r R e g i s t r a r A n a e s t h e t i s t s
         who a r e t o l d t o r e p o r t t o C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i c C o n t r o l (B127 -
         Transit).

(viii)   The C o n s u l t a n t A n a e s t h e t i s t ( G e n e r a l ) On C a l l Royal H a l l a m s h i r e
         H o s p i t a l t h e n p r o c e e d s t o A n a e s t h e t i c Emergency C o n t r o l i n B127
         o f t h e T r a n s i t Ward.




                                                 - 14 -
0“i
       NURSING ADMINISTRATION

       A l i s t of s t a f f     a v a i l a b l e by t e l e p h o n e i s m a i n t a i n e d i n NURSING
      ADMINISTRATION.

      OUTLINE POLICY

      On b e i n g n o t i f i e d o f a MAJOR ACCIDENT t h e S e n i o r Nu r s e i n Cha r ge o f t h e
      Hospital wi l l :

       1.        I n f o r m t h e N u r s e i n c h a r g e o f A c c i d e n t and Emergency, T r a n s i t
                  d e p a r t m e n t , T h e a t r e s (A f l o o r ) and Ward G2.

      2.         I n f o r m S e n i o r A s s i s t a n t Matron ( G e n e r a l M e d i c i n e , S u r g e r y
                  and A c c i d e n t and Em e rg e n c y ) .

      3.         Assume       t h e r o l e o f 2 a bove u n t i l             her a r r i v a l   in H o s p i t a l .

      SENIOR ASSISTANT MATRON ( G e n e r a l M e d i c i n e , S u r g e r y , A c c i d e n t and
      Emergency]"                                ~

      1.          On b e i n g i n f o r m e d o f a MAJOR ACCIDENT p r o c e e d t o N u r s i n g
                  A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and s e t up Nur s e c o n t r o l .

      2.          I n f o r m MATRON, who w i l l              i n f o r m D.N.O. AND D.N.S. Community.

      3.          I n f o r m O r t h o p a e d i c A s s i s t a n t Ma t r o n .

      4.          I n f o r m THEATRE MANAGER.

      5.          A r r a n g e e x t r a N u r s i n g s t a f f f o r ward G2.

      6.          I n f o r m A s s i s t a n t Matron O u t - P a t i e n t D e p a r t m e n t o f Major A c c i d e n t .

      7.          L i a i s e w i t h A s s i s t a n t Mat r on o r De put y i n A c c i d e n t & Emerqency
                  and Ward G2.

      8.         C o - o r d i n a t e N ur sin g s t a f f needs c a l l i n g i n e x t r a s t a f f as
                 n e c e s s a r y and d e p l o y as n e c e s s a r y .

      9.          I n s t i g a t e N u r s i n g A d m i n i s t r a t i o n ACTION PLAN.


      P r o c e d u r e f o r T h e a t r e Manager

      On r e c e i p t o f t h e m e s s a g e       ' M a j o r A c c i d e n t 1: -

      (i)        Contact T heatre Nursing O f f i c e r .




                                                            - 15 -
     ( i '■    L i a i s e with the duty S u r g ic a l             and A n a e s t h e t i c C o n s u l t a n t who w i l l
               be i n T h e a t r e s .

     (iii)     P r o v i d e ba c k up s u p p o r t f o r o t h e r S e n i o r A s s i s t a n t M a t r on s as
               need a r i s e s .

     (iv)      I n f o r m S e n i o r O p e r a t i n g D e p a r t m e n t A s s i s t a n t on d u t y .

6.   UNIT ADMINISTRATOR


     (i)       M a i n t a i n an u p - t o - d a t e l i s t o f t e l e p h o n e numbers o f a l l Un i t
               A d m i n i s t r a t o r s p l u s s u p p o r t i n g c l e r i c a l and s e c r e t a r i a l s t a f f ,
               D i s t r i c t G e n e r a l Manager and A s s i s t a n t G e n e r a l Manager.

     (ii)      Upon h e a r i n g t h a t t h e Major A c c i d e n t p l a n i s i n o p e r a t i o n , t h e
               o n - c a l l A d m i n i s t r a t o r s h o u l d c o n t a c t t h e G e n e r a l Ma nage r , o t h e r
               on-call A dm inistrators, the on-call Administrator for the
               N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l H o s p i t a l , t h e D i s t r i c t G e n e r a l Manager and
               A s s i s t a n t G e n e r a l Manager .

               I f no o t h e r a d m i n i s t r a t o r i s a v a i l a b l e he s h o u l d r i n g admini
               s t r a t i o n , c l e r i c a l and s e c r e t a r i a l s t a f f u n t i l he f i n d s a member
               o f s t a f f t o u n d e r t a k e t h e d u t i e s in i t e m ( i i ) .

     (iii)     The f i r s t R. H. H. A d m i n i s t r a t o r t o be c o n t a c t e d by t h e Duty
               A d m i n i s t r a t o r s h o u l d r i n g down t h e l i s t o f a d m i n i s t r a t i o n
               s e c r e t a r i e s and r e c e p t i o n i s t s f o r a r e a s o n a b l e t i m e .

     (iv)     He s h o u l d t h e n r i n g R a di o S h e f f i e l d and Ra di o Ha l l a m i n o r d e r
               t h a t t h e y p u t o u t t h e p r e - d e t e r m i n e d me s s a ge o v e r t h e a i r b e f o r e
               going to the h o s p i t a l .

     ( v)     The A d m i n i s t r a t o r f i r s t t o a r r i v e i n t h e H o s p i t a l A d m i n i s t r a t o r ' s
               o f f i c e w i l l s e t up t h e h o s p i t a l c o n t r o l e n s u r i n g t h a t t h e
               following s e rv ic e s are o rg an ise d :-

               (a)         C o n t a c t i s made w i t h N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l H o s p i t a l Admini
                           s t r a t o r and t h e P o l i c e a t Sn i g H i l l .

               ( b)        Porterinq Services

                           Head P o r t e r a n d / o r De put y Head P o r t e r c o n t a c t e d and
                           d u t i e s c a r r i e d o u t as l i s t e d .

               (c)         Me di c a l Re c o r ds

                           P a tie n ts ' ServicesO fficer                o r most s e n i o r member     of
                           Me di c a l R e c o r ds S t a f f on s i t e t o e n s u r e d o c u m e n t a t i o n of
                           a l l p a t i e n t s and m a i n t e n a n c e o f a l i s t o f a l l p a t i e n t s .




                                                                -1 6 -
       (d)       Switchboard

                  Ensure t h a t a l l       a v a i l a b l e t e l e p h o n i s t s a r e on d u t y .

       (e)       P.P.A.      (ITU)

                  I n f o r m t h e S e n i o r O.D.A. on d u t y o r on c a l l              f o r t h e ITU.

       (f)       C.S.S.D.

                  Ensure r e s p o n s i b l e o f f i c e r     i s on d u t y .

       (g)       Phar macy

                  Ensure r e s p o n s i b l e o f f i c e r     i s on d u t y .

       ( h)      Li ne n

                  E n s u r e r e s p o n s i b l e o f f i c e r on d u t y ( b y t e l e p h o n i n g h i m / h e r
                  a t home i f n e c e s s a r y ) t o s u p p l y l i n e n t o w a r d s , s t a r t i n g
                  w i t h Ward G2.

       (i)       O.A.M.

                  E n s u r e O.A.M. a r e a v a i l a b l e .

       (j )      Catering.

                  T e l e p h o n e e x t 2577 t o e n s u r e t h a t a r e s p o n s i b l e o f f i c e r
                  i s on d u t y t o p r o v i d e i t s s e r v i c e s as r e q u i r e d .

       (k)       Chaplains.

                  Ensure t h a t a l l H o s p i t a l C h a p la in s a r e informed t h a t th e
                  Major A c c i d e n t p l a n i s i n a c t i o n

       ( 1)       Other A d m i n is t r a t o r s    in t h e D i s t r i c t a re a l e r t e d to
                  provide support.

(vi)   The s e c o n d A d m i n i s t r a t o r t o a r r i v e w i l l man B F l o o r R e c e p t i o n
       and:-

       (a)        E n s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n o f p a t i e n t s r e c e i v e d i s g a t h e r e d by
                  r u n n e r f rom t h e O r t h o p a e d i c D e p a r t m e n t e n t r a n c e i n
                  p r e p a r a t i o n f o r informing r e l a t i v e s a u t h o r i t a t i v e l y .

       (b)        C o n t r o l cr owds t o e n s u r e a d e q u a t e a c c e s s t o l i f t s .

       (c)        S e l e c t and d i r e c t s t a f f v o l u n t e e r s who w i l l m u s t e r in Room
                  B164.

       ( d)       E n s u r e t h a t t h e Co mmi t te e Room i s s e t up f o r t h e P r e s s
                  u s i n g t h e j a c k p o i n t t e l e p h o n e and t h a t t h e P r e s s a r e
                  c o n f i n e d t o t h a t room and f e d w i t h i n f o r m a t i o n as
                  appropriate.

       (e)        E n s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n on p a t i e n t s g o i n g home f rom t h e wa r ds
                  v i a t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t i s c o l l a t e d and p a s s e d on
                  t o t h e Community N u r s i n g O f f i c e .


                                                            - 17 -
     (vii)      The most s e n i o r A d m i n i s t r a t o r o r Manager on s i t e may wi sh t o
                 a l t e r the O fficers o r i g i n a l l y undertaking d u tie s ( v ) - ( v i )
                d e p e n d i n g on t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s a t t h e t i m e .

     ( v i i i ) The t h i r d A d m i n i s t r a t o r t o a r r i v e w i l l man t h e A f l o o r r e l a t i v e s
                 a r e a and keep them i n f o r m e d .

     ( v i i i i ) T h e D i s t r i c t G e n e r a l Manager o r A s s i s t a n t G e n e r a l Manager w i l l
                    s e t up t h e D i s t r i c t C o n t r o l p o i n t s i t e d in t h e Un i t G e n e r a l
                    M a n a g e r ' s O f f i c e and w i l l c a l l t h e D i s t r i c t N u r s i n g O f f i c e r and
                    any o t h e r D i s t r i c t s t a f f he r e q u i r e s t o g i v e a s s i s t a n c e .

7.   MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT

     (i)        P a t i e n t s ' S e r v i c e s O f f i c e r o r Deput y P a t i e n t s ' O f f i c e and
                A c c i d e n t and Emergency R e c e p t i o n w i l l be n o t i f i e d by t h e
                Switchboard.

     (ii)       A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t R e c e p t i o n S t a f f w i l l        notify
                Ad m i ss i o n s O f f i c e .

     (iii)      Admissions O f f i c e S t a f f wi l l          n o t i f y Medi cal R e c o r d s O f f i c e r .

     (iv)       Me di c a l R e c o r d s O f f i c e r w i l l n o t i f y member o f s t a f f a t home, who
                by p r e - a r r a n g e m e n t w i l l t e l e p h o n e o t h e r Me di c a l Re c o r ds S t a f f t o
                c a l l them i n t o t h e h o s p i t a l .

     (v)       S t a f f on a r r i v a l w i l l   r e p o r t t o t h e A d m i s s i o n s O f f i c e on B F l o o r
                and s i g n i n .

     (vi)      S t a f f wi l l th en p roce ed t o t h e a s s e s s m e n t a r e a where t h e y wi l l
                s i g n an a c t i o n c a r d and a c t a c c o r d i n g l y .

     (vii)     The Medical R e c o r d s O f f i c e r i s r e s p o n s i b l e f o r m a i n t a i n i n g a
                Major A c c i d e n t box i n whi c h wi l l be f o u n d a s u p p l y o f f o l d e r s
                c o n t a i n i n g c a s u a l t y c a r d , i d e n t i t y b r a c e l e t , X-Ray r e q u e s t f o r m ,
                blood t r a n s f u s i o n r e q u e s t form, o p e r a t i o n c o n s e n t form,
                a p p r o p r i a t e bag f o r c l o t h i n g and e n v e l o p e f o r v a l u a b l e s .      A MAJAX
                p a t i e n t r e g i s t e r w i l l a l s o be m a i n t a i n e d .

     ( v i i i ) The Medical R e c o r d s O f f i c e r w i l l e n s u r e t h a t a l l doc ume nt s a r e
                  a v a i l a b l e i n t h e a s s e s s m e n t a r e a and t h a t c l e r i c a l s t a f f document
                  p a t i e n t s as t h e y a r r i v e .

     (ix)      A l i s t o f p a t i e n t s w i l l be m a i n t a i n e d wi t h d e t a i l s o f i mm e d i a t e
                disposal.       T h i s i n f o r m a t i o n wi l l t h e n be p a s s e d v i a a r u n n e r t o
                t h e Main H o s p i t a l C o n t r o l .




                                                        - 18 -
8.    X-RAY DEPARTMENT
      /a\     a i i s t 0f s t a f f a v a i l a b l e by t e l e p h o n e i s m a i n t a i n e d i n t h e X"r a y
      0 )     De p a r t me n t s and a t t h e homes o f t h e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t R a d i o g r a p h e r s
              and S e n i o r S t a f f .




                    WORKING HOURS
                                      SWITCHBOARD

                                            I
                                       SUPT/SENIOR RADIOGRAPHER
                                       IN A/0 X-RAY ON 2646


      SUPT/SENIOR RADIOGRAPHER                           RADIOLOGIST IN A/0                          MAJAX CARD -
                                                         X-RAY                                       SUPTS.OFFICE
      ON IN-PATIENT X-RAY




SUPT/SENIOR   CONSULTANT SISTER/STAFF SUPT/SENIOR SETS UP CONTROL
OUT-PATIENT   RADIOLOGIST NURSE IP    CT SCANNERS IN IP STAFF ROOM
              IP X-RAY    X-RAY                   ON 2764
X-RAY




MAJAX CARD- MAJAX CARD- MAJAX CARD-                               MAJAX CARD- MAJAX CARD-
SUPTS OFFICE REPORTING  NURSES                                    SCAN CONTROL SUPTS OFFICE
             ROOM       STATION                                   ROOM         (GWD)

     E                A


                                              - 19a -
                       OUT OF HOURS
                              SWITCHBOARD

ON-CALL RADIOGRAPHER                              ON-CALL RADIOLOGIST
VIA 2646 OR BLEEP                                 AT HOME OR VIA AIR-CALL
                        CALLS 3rd 0/C AT HOME             I
CALLS 2nd 0/C           OR VIA AIR-CALL           CONTACTS A CONSULTANT
(IF NOT IN DEPT,)                                 RADIOLOGIST AND OTHER
                                                  RADIOLOGISTS AS REQUIRI
                        CONTACTS A SUPT.AT
MAJAX CARD -            HOME OR FAILING THAT
SUPT'S OFFICE           ANOTHER SENIOR            ASSEMBLE IN REPORTING
                        RADIOGRAPHER
     B                          I
                                                  ROOM ON C FLOOR

                        USING INFORMATION
                        PROVIDED BY O/C STAFF,    MAJAX CARD -
                        CALLS OUT SUFFICIENT      REPORTING ROOM
                        RADIOGRAPHERS AND D/R
                        TECHS. KEEPS A LIST
                        OF WHO THEY HAVE
                                                       A
1ST ARRIVAL
              ✓         TRIED/FOUND.


                         GOES TO DEPT. TO LIASE
                         WITH SUPT/SENIOR IN
MAJAX CARD -             DEPT.
IP SUPTS OFFICE
(GWD)

\ c /                         - 19b -
9.   HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD BANK
     T P u r i n g nor mal w o r k i n g h o u r s )

        (i)    The t e l e p h o n e o p e r a t o r w i l l i n f o r m t h e b l o o d bank s t a f f t h a t a
               ' M a j o r A c c i d e n t ' ha s o c c u r r e d .

       (ii)    S e n i o r Member o f s t a f f p r e s e n t w i l l      p r oc eed as f o l l o w s : -

               (a)       C o n t a c t t h e Blood T r a n s f u s i o n S e r v i c e and r e q u e s t t h e
                         immediate s u p p l y o f : -

                         20   units     0+
                         20   units     A+
                         20   units.    0-
                         20   units     A-
                         10   units     B+
                         50   units     P l as m a

               (b)       O r g a n i s e an a d e q u a t e s u p p l y o f e q u i p m e n t and m a t e r i a l s
                         (antisera, saline etc.)

               (c)       Organise the s e rv ic e to supply s u i t a b l e and/or compatible
                         b l o o d a c c o r d i n g t o t h e r e q u e s t s CLEARLY made.

     (iii)     When t h e i mm e d i a t e need f o r u r g e n c y h a s p a s s e d , t h e s e n i o r member
               o f Blood Bank S t a f f s h o u l d i n s t i t u t e a " s e a r c h " t o e n s u r e t h a t
               b l o o d and b l o o d p r o d u c t s removed f r o m t h e Blood Bank b u t n o t used
               a r e r e t u r n e d and n o t w a s t e d u n n e c e s s a r i l y .


     HAMEATOLOGY AND BLOOD BANK
     ( Out o f normal w o r k i n g h o u r s )

     General

     A l i s t o f names and t e l e p h o n e numbers o f s t a f f i s                 i ss u e d weekly to
     Switchboard.

     In t h e e v e n t o f a ' M a j o r A c c i d e n t '    th e fo llo w in g procedure of c a l l i n g
     s t a f f s h o u l d be a d o p t e d : -

               I n f o r m t h e p e r s o n who i s a l r e a d y o n - c a l l f o r e me r ge n c y b l o o d
               bank d u t y .        I f t h e p e r s o n o n - c a l l i s a l r e a d y w o r k i n g i n t h e Royal
               H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l Blood Bank, i t i s i m p e r a t i v e t h a t he must be
               a b l e t o t e l e p h o n e o u t . Such o u t g o i n g c a l l s w i l l a c t i v a t e t h e
               procedure.

     Internal

     On r e c e i p t o f t h e ' M a j o r A c c i d e n t ' w a r n i n g t h e p e r s o n o n - c a l l w i l l
     c o n t a c t t h e member o f s t a f f o n - c a l l f o r t h e d i a g n o s t i c h a e m a t o l o g y who




                                                         - 20 -
      w i l l i m m e d i a t e l y t e l e p h o n e t h e Blood T r a n s f u s i o n S e r v i c e r e q u e s t i n g t h e
      i mm e d i a t e d e l i v e r y o f : -

      20 u n i t s 0+
      20 u n i t s 0-
      20     units       A+
      20     units       A-
      10     units       B+
      50     units       P l as m a

      He w i l l     s u b s e q u e n t l y t e l e p h o n e a t h i r d p e r s o n f ro m t h e o n - c a l l         list.

      The t h i r d p e r s o n w i l l t h e n c o n t a c t a f o u r t h p e r s o n f rom home.                      Al l w i l l
      p r o c e e d t o t h e l a b o r a t o r y as q u i c k l y a s p o s s i b l e .

      The s e n i o r member p r e s e n t w i l l              o r g a n i s e w i t h i n t h e Blood B a n k : -

      (a)        th e r e c e p t i o n of samples;

      ( b)       the p r o v is i o n of e s s e n t i a l        equipment ( a n t i - s e r a ,         saline slides
                  e t c .);

      ( c)       O r g a n i s e t h e r a p i d p r e p a r a t i o n and i s s u e o f s u i t a b l e a n d / o r
                 c o m p a t i b l e b l o o d a c c o r d i n g t o t h e r e q u i r e m e n t s CLEARLY made on t h e
                 request.


10.   PORTERING

           (i)   The S w i t c h b o a r d w i l l c o n t a c t P o r t e r s ' Lodge who w i l l i n f o r m t h e
                 Head P o r t e r o r t h e S e n i o r Deput y who w i l l be r e s p o n s i b l e f o r
                 c o n t a c t i n g o t h e r members o f s t a f f .         The A s s i s t a n t Head P o r t e r on
                 t h e P o r t e r s ' Lodge w i l l a l s o i n f o r m Main R e c e p t i o n .

       (ii)      The s t a f f w i l l        r e p o r t t o t h e A s s i s t a n t Head P o r t e r a t t h e P o r t e r s '
                 Lodge .

      (iii)      The A s s i s t a n t Head P o r t e r on d u t y a t t h e P o r t e r s '                 Lodge w i l l       ensure
                 that:-

                  (a)        t h e a sse ssm e n t a re a s a re c l e a r of c h a i r s ;

                  ( b)       s t r e t c h e r s , t r o l l e y s and w h e e l c h a i r s f rom T r a n s i t a r e
                              a v a i l a b l e i n t h e A c c i d e n t and Emergency and O r t h o p a e d i c
                              areas.

                  (c)        P o r t e r s a r e s e n t t o A c c i d e n t and Emergency D e p a r t m e n t t o
                              a s s i s t S i s t e r - i n - c h a r g e w i t h t r a n s p o r t a t i o n of p a t i e n t s .

                  (d)        P o r t e r s a r e s e n t t o Ward G2 t o a s s i s t w i t h t r a n s f e r r i n g and
                              clearing p a tie n ts.                D i s c h a r g e d p a t i e n t s w i l l be t a k e n t o t h e
                              P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t u n t i l t r a n s p o r t h a s be e n a r r a n g e d .

                  (e)        E x t r a l i n e n i s s u p p l i e d t o t h e wa r d s b e g i n n i n g w i t h Ward G2.




                                                                 - 21 -
              (f)       B arrier off A Floor r e l a ti v e s              area.      Main w a i t i n g a r e a f o r
                        u s e by r e l a t i v e s .

              (g)       R e l a t i v e s a r e t a k e n t o t h e A F l o o r Main E n t r a n c e F o y e r in
                        O u t p a ti e n t Department.

              (h)       The P r e s s a r e t a k e n t o t h e Commi t t e e Room.

              (i)       Li ft control           is undertaken.


H .   T.S.S.U./C.S.S.D.

        (i)   An A d m i n i s t r a t o r w i l l   c o n t a c t e i t h e r t h e S t e r i l e S e r v i c e s Manager
              or her deputy

              Mrs. H. L i b b e r t o n
              Mrs. L. E. W r i gh t

              I f n e i t h e r o f t h e a bove a r e a v a i l a b l e t h e A d m i n i s t r a t o r s h o u l d make
              arrangements to c o n ta c t oth er s t a f f .

       (ii)   The f i r s t p e r s o n c o n t a c t e d w i l l t h e n be r e s p o n s i b l e f o r c o n t a c t i n g
              the r e s t of the a v a i l a b l e s t a f f .

      (iii)   S ta ff attending w i l l ,            u n d e r t h e d i r e c t i o n o f t h e most s e n i o r member
              of s t a f f : -

              (a)       give p r i o r i t y to Orthopaedic, Neurosurgical                        and G e n e r a l
                        Surgery instrum ents;

              (b)       e n s u re the d i s t r i b u t i o n of s t e r i l e t r a y s ,    i n s t r u m e n t s and
                        supplem entary packs is con tin u e d ;

              (c)       be a v a i l a b l e on E x t . 2817 t o e n s u r e t h a t C . S . S . D . r e q u e s t s
                        a r e p r o c e s s e d and e x t r a p r o c e d u r e p a c k s and ward i n s t r u m e n t s
                        a r e made a v a i l a b l e ;

              ( d)      advise the Hospital A dm inistrator i f e x tr a instrum ents are
                        r e q u i r e d f ro m t h e C h i l d r e n ' s H o s p i t a l .


12.   PHARMACY

        (i)   The S w i t c h b o a r d w i l l c o n t a c t t h e o n - c a l l P h a r m a c i s t who w i l l     be
              responsible for contacting other available s ta f f .

       (ii)   t h e d e p a r t m e n t has s t o c k s of c e r t a i n     i t e m s whi c h a r e mos t l i k e l y t o
              be i n demand.

      (iii)   P ha r ma c y S t a f f w i l l    d e l i v e r i t e m s on demand.




                                                         - 22 -
 (iv)        P a t i e n t s b e i n g d i s c h a r g e d who r e q u i r e u r g e n t m e d i c a t i o n s h o u l d be
             given p r i o r i t y .

 E. C. G. DEPARTMENT

 (i)        S w i t c h b o a r d w i l l i n f o r m E. C. G. T e c h n i c i a n on c a l l      t h a t a ' Ma j o r
            A c c i d e n t ' has o c c u r r e d .

 (ii)       E. C. G. T e c h n i c i a n s w i l l be a v a i l a b l e in d e p a r t m e n t on b l e e p         nos.
            1 1 0 / 4 9 6 f o r u s e as r e q u i r e d .

 (iii)      Al l o t h e r s t a f f i n t h e I n - P a t i e n t D e p a r t m e n t w i l l     re p o rt to
            g e n e r a l m u s t e r p o i n t f o r d u t i e s as r e q u i r e d .

E. E. G.

S w i t c h b o a r d O p e r a t o r t o c o n t a c t t h e E. E. G. T e c h n i c i a n o n - c a l 1. ( Dr .
Gumpert a r r a n g e s f o r an o n - c a l l r o t a t o be s u p p l i e d t o S w i t c h b o a r d a t
t h e b e g in n in g of each month.)

CLINICAL CHEMISTRY

Major A c c i d e n t Pl a n

I f t h e h o s p i t a l ' s m a j o r a c c i d e n t p l a n i s a c t i v a t e d d u r i n g normal wo r ki ng
h o u r s , s e n i o r s t a f f w i l l o r g a n i s e t h e work o f t h e d e p a r t m e n t as a p p e a r s
t o be a p p r o p r i a t e u n d e r t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s .

O u t s i d e normal w o r ki ng h o u r s , t h e on c a l l MLSO w i l l be i n f o r me d by t h e
h o s p i t a l s w i t c h b o a r d t h a t t h e h o s p i t a l ' s m a j o r a c c i d e n t p l a n has been
put into operation.

I f t h e MLSO i s w i t h i n t h e h o s p i t a l , he s h o u l d a t once t e l e p h o n e a s e n i o r
member o f l a b o r a t o r y s t a f f and i n f o r m him t h a t t h e m a j o r a c c i d e n t p l a n
ha s be e n a c t i v a t e d .      A l i s t o f s e n i o r s t a f f m e m b e r' s t e l e p h o n e numbers
i s h e l d i n t h e Hot A r e a .          I t may be i m p o s s i b l e t o t e l e p h o n e o u t o f t h e
h o s p i t a l v i a t h e d i a l ' 9 ' f a c i l i t y as t h e s w i t c h b o a r d w i l l a l m o s t
c e r t a i n l y be o v e r l o a d e d .   In s uc h c i r c u m s t a n c e s u s e t h e p u b l i c t e l e p h o n e
i n t h e ' F ' o r ' H' f l o o r l i f t h a l l , u s i n g t h e lOp c o i n s h e l d f o r t h e
p u r p o s e s o f t h e "Hot A r e a " .

I f t h e MLSO i s a t home he s h o u l d c o n t a c t a s e n i o r member o f s t a f f b e f o r e
leaving fo r the h o s p i t a l .

When a s e n i o r member o f s t a f f i s i n f o r me d t h a t t h e m a j o r a c c i d e n t p l a n
has been a c t i v a t e d , he s h o u l d i n f o r m a t l e a s t two o t h e r s t a f f members,
i n c l u d i n g t h e Head o f D e p a r t m e n t o r h i s d e p u t y by t e l e p h o n e f rom home,
before leaving for the h o s p ita l.                  All s t a f f so i n f o r me d s h o u l d p r o c e e d
to the h o s p ita l.

POST MORTEM TECHNICIANS

I t i s p o s s i b l e t h a t l a r g e numbers o f dead p a t i e n t s may have t o be
accommodated i n t h e Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l i n t h e e v e n t o f a m a j o r
a c c i d e n t as t h e Ambulance S e r v i c e may n o t have t h e r e s o u r c e s t o t a k e
b o d i e s t o t h e M e di c o - Le g a l C e n t r e a f t e r t h e y have been c e r t i f i e d d e a d .
The f o l l o w i n g a r r a n g e m e n t s w i l l t h e r e f o r e o b t a i n : -
       C a l 1- Out

       The S w i t c h b o a r d w i l l have a l i s t o f H i s t o p a t h o l o g y Me di c a l and
       S c i e n t i f i c S t a f f and M o r t u a r y T e c h n i c i a n s and w i l l r i n g t h e home numbers
       if ap p ro p riate unt i l a response is obtained.

       Duties

       P o s t Mortem T e c h n i c i a n s s h o u l d r e p o r t t o t h e P o s t Mortem S u i t e t o : -

       (i)       r e c e i v e b o d i e s f r o m t h e p o r t e r i n g s t a f f who w i l l b r i n g them f rom
                  t h e h o ld in g a r e a in t h e O rthopaedic C l i n i c .

       (ii)      c o m p l e t e as much o f t h e d o c u m e n t a t i o n r e l a t e d t o t h e body           as
                 possible.

       iii)     ke e p t h e b o d i e s i n o r d e r i n t h e P o s t Mortem S u i t e

       (iv)     a r r a n g e f o r v i e w i n g i n d i v i d u a l l y i n t h e Vi ewi ng Room.

17.   SOCIAL WORK DEPARTMENT

       (i)       The Group P r i n c i p a l       Social      Worker w i l l       be c o n t a c t e d by
                 Switchboard.

       (ii)       Al l a v a i l a b l e s t a f f w i l l be c o n t a c t e d by t h e Group P r i n c i p a l or
                  P r i n c i p a l S o c i a l Worker by t e l e p h o n e f rom home. All s t a f f s h o u l d
                  r e p o r t t o t h e C F l o o r S o c i a l Work D e p a r t m e n t v i a C F l o o r s t a f f
                  e n tr a n c e (door 14).

       (iii)    S t a f f w i l l be d e p l o y e d t o t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t t o a s s i s t
                 s l i g h t l y i n j u r e d p a t i e n t s and d i s t r e s s e d r e l a t i v e s and t o t a k e t o
                 t h e Board Room.

      (iv)      Me di c a l S o c i a l Workers w i l l l i a i s e w i t h S o c i a l S e r v i c e s
                D e p a r t m e n t a r r a n g i n g s e r v i c e s f o r d i s c h a r g e d p a t i e n t s and f o r
                p a t i e n t s r e c e i v i n g m i n o r i n j u r i e s t o t h e i n c i d e n t who a r e a l l o we d
                home.

      (v)       The S o c i a l     Work D e p a r t m e n t c a s h box w i l l be made a v a i l a b l e i f
                 necessary.          The c a s h box i s s t o r e d i n t h e C a s h i e r ' s O f f i c e .

18.   PHYSIOTHERAPY STAFF

      (i)       The o n - c a l l P h y s i o t h e r a p i s t w i l l   be n o t i f i e d by S w i t c h b o a r d t h a t
                 a m a j o r a c c i d e n t has o c c u r r e d .

      (ii)       The o n - c a l l P h y s i o t h e r a p i s t w i l l t e l e p h o n e h e r Head o f D e p a r t m e n t
                 o r Deput y b e f o r e coming t o t h e d e p a r t m e n t and w i l l r e m a i n on
                 bleep.

      (iii)     The Head o f D e p a r t m e n t o r Deput y w i l l              contact all         other s ta f f
                 f rom home.

      (iv)      Al l s t a f f w i l l r e p o r t t o t h e P h y s i o t h e r a p y D e p a r t m e n t and a s s i s t
                with r e t u r n of p a t i e n t s t o wards, flow of p a t i e n t s f o r d i s c h a r g e
                 t o Me di c a l Sc hool e t c .


                                                     - 24 -
       (v)    Requests for physiotherapy will be through the on-call
               Physiotherapist via the switchboard.
19.   ORTHOPAEDIC APPLIANCE MAKERS
      Orthopaedic Appliance Makers are called out as required by the
      Administrator.
20.   OPERATING DEPARTMENT ASSISTANTS
      The Theatre Manager or Deputy is informed by the Nurse in charge of the
      hospital that a 'Major Accident' has occurred and makes contact with
      Theatre Control who in turn inform the Senior Operating Department
      Assistant on duty for the Operating Theatres. He then contacts as many
      members of their staff as possible and ask them to report for duty. The
      Senior Operating Department Assistant inTheatres maintains contact,
      with Theatre Control in order to deploy staff according to need, and the
      I.T.U based Operating Department Assistant allocates staff round the
      hospital after discussion with the Accident and Emergency Department
      C on t r o l .
      The Senior O.D.A. (I.T.U.) on duty or on call will be informed by the
      Administrator and will contact as many members of his staff as possible
      to report for duty.
21.   CHAPLAINS OF ALL DENOMINATIONS
      (i)     The Resident Hospital Chaplain will be contacted by bleep by
              Switchboard. The Resident Hospital Chaplain will then contact
              the part-time Free Church and Roman Catholic Chaplain.
      (ii)    Chaplains will assemble in the Chapel area and await further
               instructions. All three Chaplains carry bleeps.
22.   SECURITY STAFF
      (i)     Staff on duty will receive notification from Accident and
              Emergency Reception.
      (ii)    One man on duty will
              (a)      Lock all entrances/exits other than the Orthopaedic
                        Clinic, C Road, Medical School, B Road, B Road Main
                        Entrance and Out-Patient Department (during weekdays).
              (b)      Unlock the Physiotherapy   Department if it is locked and
              (c)      Place the "Department Closed" signs outside:-
                        the Accident and Emergency Department
                        and on Claremont Place
      (iii)   The second man on duty will remain behind in the office at all
               times to give out keys as required. He will then telephone
               another Security Officer at home and ask him to call in all other
               staff.



                                        - 25 -
      (iv)      All other Security Staff will report to the Administrator   at B
                 Floor Reception to carry out the following duties:-
                (a)    Control Press on B   Floor
                (b)    To be available in Orthopaedic area to take charge of any
                        excess amounts of valuables.
                (c)    To assist with the control of staff/patients on B Floor.
23.   LAUNDRY
      (i)       The Laundry Manager or one of his/her assistants will be
                 contacted by the Administrator.
      (ii)      On arrival at the hospital he/she will liaise with portering
                staff and if necessary will take emergency linen trolleys to
                (a)    Ward G2
                (b)    Transit Ward
      (iii)     He/she will remain available on the Laundry Manager's bleep (469)
                to take linen to other areas as required.
      (iv)      Other Laundry staff who hear of the major accident will report     to
                 the general muster point for duties as required.
24.   CATERING DEPARTMENT
      (i)       The Catering Manager/Assistant Managers will be contacted by the
                 senior person in the kitchen to come to the hospital. The
                 Managers, if available, will at the same time contact Dining Room
                Supervisors and Kitchen Supervisors and any personnel necessary.

      (ii)      Other staff who hear of the accident should report to the
                Catering Department in the first instance but may be re-directed
                to B Floor Reception to give general assistance.
      (iii)     The Department will provide free food and beverages as requested
                by Administration and call staff in as necessary.
25.   DEPARTMENT OF ESTATES MANAGEMENT
      During Normal Working Hours
      In the event of a Major Accident during normal working hours (0900 to
      1720 hours) the Switchboard Operator will contact the emergency works
      no. 2899.
      Clerical Officer - Ext. 2899
      The Clerical Officer receiving the call will contact the most senior
      Unit Works Officer available, by bleep or by telephone.



                                      - 26 -
Unit Works Staff
On being notified, the Unit Works Officer or most senior officer
available shall draw a bleep from the pool in Room B179 and report to
the Majax Control in the Hospital Administrator's Office,B Floor, Royal
Hallamshire Hospital. He will notify the Control Centre of the bleep
number on which he can be contacted if Works support is required, and
then return to his normal duties carrying the bleep.
Outside Normal Working Hours
In the event of a Major Accident outside normal working hours (1720 to
0900 hours) the Switchboard Operator will contact the Works Emergency
Control in the Boiler House (ext. 2332).
Attendant on duty at Works Emergency Control
On receipt of a call stating that a Major Accident has occurred (note
there is no specific code phrase as previously) the attendant on duty
wi 11: -
(i)     bleep the Shift Foreman on duty and inform him that a Major
        Accident has been notified.
(ii)    telephone the 'on-call' Supervisor and notify him that a Major
        Accident has been notified.
(iii)   complete a DW 18 stating "Major Accident Notified".
Shift Foreman
On being notified, the Shift Foreman will report to the Majax Control in
the Hospital Administrator's Office, B Floor of the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital. He will notify the Control Centre of his bleep number on
which he can be contacted if Works support is required, prior to the
arrival of the 'on-call' Supervisor. He will then return to his duties
and obtain a craftsman's bleep to hand to the on-call Supervisor when he
arri v e s .
On-Call Supervisor
On being notified, the on-call Supervisor must proceed immediately to
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, draw a craftsman's bleep from the Shift
Foreman and report to the Majax Control in the Hospital Administrator's
Office, B Floor of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. He will notify the
Control Centre of the bleep number on which he can be contacted if Works
support is required and then leave the Control Centre but remain in the
Hospital, and await any contact.




                               - 27 -
            SECTION 4. INFORMATION RELATING TO INCIDENTS INVOLVING
                  CONTAMINATION BY CHEMICALS OR RADIOACTIVITY
1.   DANGEROUS CHEMICALS
     Expert Advice and assistance can be obtained from:-
     A.       The National Chemical Emergency Centre
              Tel. 0235 24141 ext. 2121
     B.      Guy's Hospital
              Tel. 01 635 9191
     The procedures to follow will be those invoked for any Major Accident
     with the exception that there must be a demarcation line established in
     the Accident and Emergency Department to separate "clean" and "dirty"
     areas in terms of contamination. This also applies to Ambulance
     Personnel who may accidently become contaminated. Blankets and
     stretchers used in the "dirty" areas must not cross the demarcation
     1 ine.
     On stand down from the emergency situation staff engaged on the "dirty"
     side of the demarcation line should use the shower facilities on site or
     alternatively the Fire Brigade may be requested to provide decontamin­
     ation   facilities which may also be used for items of equipment.
2.   RADIOACTIVITY
     Expert advice and assistance can be obtained from:-
     A.      Medical Physics Department
              Weston Park Hospital
              Tel. Tie Line 730-0 or 670222 during normal working hours.
     B.      A.E.R.E.
              Tel. 0235 24141 ext. 4444/4059 (working hours)
              Tel. 0235 24141 ext. 5329/5137 (other hours)
     (i)     An area should be set aside (the "dirty area") for the reception
              of casualties and should be covered with plastic sheeting.
     (ii)    Protective clothing should be issued for all staff who will
              handle the patient.
     (iii) A plentiful supply of paper towels and tissue should be
            avai 1 able.
     (iv)    Large polythene or paper bags will be needed for the collection
              of the patient's clothing and contaminated equipment etc.
     (v)     An area should be cleared where the ambulance can wait   for
              monitoring and possible decontamination.


                                    - 28 -
 (vi)   A limited number of staff should be appointed to handle the
         patient and a person should be designated to log the movements of
         any of those staff who must leave the "dirty" area after the
         casulaties have arrived, in order to minimise the difficulty of
         tracing contamination.
 (vii) If other areas of the hospital become involved in handling the
        patient, e.g. a theatre or intensive care unit, similar
        arrangements should be made for these areas as appropriate.
The following initial decontamination procedure should be followed:-
(i)     Experience has shown that washing with soap and water will
        effectively remove contaminated material from the skin in most
        cases. Initial treatment and any necessary washing to remove as
        much of the suspected contamination as practicable should be done
         in the "dirty" area.

(ii)    Open wounds should be irrigated. Special care needs to be taken
        in the cleaning of areas near the eyes and in preventing the
        spread of possible contamination to other parts of the body.
(iii)   It will usually be possible to seek further expert advice from a
        designated hospital before proceeding beyond the initial
        treatment stage, it is inadvisable to excise wounds unless
        contamination is obvious or unless surgically indicated before
        monitoring assistance is available.
As far as is reasonably practicable, all scattered radioactive material
and contaminated surface materials (e.g. soil, herbage etc.) should be
collected and contained in order to minimise the amount of residual
contamination which may subsequently have to be flushed into sewers or
watercourses. The consent of the Department of Environment Senior
Radiochemical Inspector (tel. 01 273 4014 during office hours and 01 212
7071 during silent hours) should be obtained before any flushing is
undertaken but if decontamination by flushing is urgently necessary
before the Department can be contacted, then sufficient flushing water
should be used to keep the activity of the effluent below the following
limits and the Senior Radiochemical Inspector should be informed of the
action taken as soon as circumstances permit.
1.      500 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge to
        sewers;
2.      50 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge into a
        watercourse.
Incident Reports

In order that the effectiveness of NAIR can be assessed, a brief report
on each incident will be required from the radiation staff involved and
should be sent to the National Radiological Protection Board, Harwell
Didcot, 0X11 0RQ (tel. 023 583 600) as soon as possible. This is in
addition to any police report and should cover the following points:-
1.      Date, location and time of incident.


                               - 29 -
2.    Nature of incident and who reported incident.
3.    Assessment of radiological hazard, whether present   or not.
4.    Nature of assistance given and any difficulties encountered.
5.    Whether Second Stage assistance was sought.
6.    Effectiveness of arrangements.
7.    Outcome of incident.
Casualties exposed to large doses of radiation
It is not intended that the Royal Hallamshire Hospital should treat
casualties affected by a high radiation dose such as might occur^from an
accident at a nuclear power station or Ministry of Defence establish­
ment. Facilities for the treatment of persons suffering from severe
whole body irradiation exist at the following hospitals. Enquiries about
treatment or admission of casualties should be made to the appropriate
officer or department indicated.
(1)   The Hammersmith Hospital,
       Ducane Road,
       London.      W12 OHS.
       Tel. No. 01 743 2030
       (The Duty Medical Registrar)
(2)   The Middlesex Hospital,
       Mortimer Street,
       London.      WIN 8AA.
       (Tel. No. 01 636 8333)
       (The Admitting Medical Officer)
(3)   The Royal Marsden Hospital,
       Fulham Road,
       London.      SW3 6JJ
       (Tel. No. 01 352 8171)
       (The Medical Physics Department)
(4)   The Royal Marsden Hospital,
       Downs Road,
       Sutton,
       Surrey.
       (Tel. No. 01 642 6011)
       (The Medical Physics Department)




                               - 30 -
 TRKNT BiGlONAI HEALTH AUTHORITY                                          /U      f A (jORh/fy
                                                                                    '


 I I
  MEETING OF THE REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHOltlTY IN PUBLIC SESSION

     HELD ON          J 1 A P R 1936

     The following extract from the Minutes o £ the above
     meeting is referred to you for action /




               112.   GUIDELINES ON MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

                      The Authority received a report of the Regional General Manager seeking
                      approval for the circulation of Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures}
                      (TA(86)86). Copies of the document were circulated to Members
                      separately.

:0                    It was
 .A.Costley)
ir action                   RESOLVED THAI the Authority approve the publication of the Regional
                            Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures as appended to report
                            TA(86)86.
                        TEL No.                           21,04,89    12To 2 ^ F ! W

TRENT REC.TONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


REPORT OF THE REGIONAL GENERAL MANAGER


Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures


AIM

1.    This document, which has been circulated to Members only, is
      concerned with providing the best possible major accident
      arrangements by providing a framework which has been agreed by
      the major interested parties (A & E Consultants, Chief Ambulance
      Officers, Fire and Police) who have responsibility for planning
      and ac 11o n .


OBJECTIVES

?,    To   ensure that the role of the NHS (and others) is clearly
      understood and that common (agreed) terminology is adopted to
       prevent confusion and misunderstanding between the Emergency
       Services, Ambulance Service, Hospitals and others who may become
       1nvolved.


 3.   Toprovide a firm basis for co-operation and liaison between the
       NHS, Emergency Services and others.


 4.   To   assist plan writers fcy providing a common TRHA Information manual.


 CONSULTATION

 5.   The contents of the document have been agreed by the Regional     Medical
       Committee - Advisory Sub Committee in Accident and Emergency Medicine
       and the Chief Ambulance Officers.     Chief Constables and Chief Fire
       Officers and others h&ve also been consulted and their comments included.


 RECOMMENDATION


       The Authority is requested to approve the document prior to its wider
       distribution, indicated on page (il).




 JAC/RW
                                TEL No .                                  21,04,89   12=02   P.07


Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
Teb Sheffield (0742) 306511   Telex; 547246 TRHA G   Fax: (0742) 306956
                                                                               tre n t
Your Reference:
Our Reference         JAC/C17/8/1                                              REGIONAL
Pleasee*k for-        Mr J A CoBtley
                                                                               HEALTH
                                                                               AUTHORITY


15 April 1986



District General Managers
Director B.T.S.       (


Dear Colleague

GUIDELINES ON MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURES

The enclosed guidelines were approved by the Regional Health
Authority at its meeting held on 14 April 1986. The document
is now being circulated to the distribution list indicated
on page (i i ).

Following the Brighton Bomb, the Bradford Fire and the
Manchester Air Disaster, the N H S and the emergency services
throughout the U K have been examining their response mechanisms
to seek improvements in the arrangements to react to, and cope with
a mass casualty situation.

In this respect you will be aware that all District Health
Authorities have been requested to review and update their
Major Accident Planning arrangements.  In the course of this
review it became clear that there was a need to produce Regional
Guidelines which would assist plan writers at Unit and DHA
level.

Accordingly this document has been compiled in order to provide
a framework of guidance for those who have respoitibility for
planning and action. The content has been agreed “in consultation
with the Regional Medical Committee - Sub Committee in Accident
and Emergency Medicine and the Chief Ambulance Officers in
the Region. Chief Constables, Chief Fire Officers and others
have also been consulted and their comments have been taken
into account.

The primary objectives of the document               are:-

(1)    To ensure that the role of the NHS (and others) 1 b clearly
       understoood and that common (agreed) terminology is adopted
       to prevent confusion and misunderstanding between the Emergency
       Services, Ambulance Service, Hospitals and others who
       may become involved.

(2)    To provide a firm basis for co-operation and liaison between the
       NHS, Emergency Services and others.

(3)    To assist plan writers by providing a common TRHA information
       m a n u a 1.

                                       (i)           "3*
                             '|^|q                          ^ *ua *yy   1^ •uo   r . uo
                                            s




I should be grateful if you would let me know how   many copies
of the document you require for attribution to Unit General
Managers and cthcrc.


YourB sincerely




y A Costley
Regional Emergency Planning Officer

                       I
                                                                                                                                  <■ ' IAo I
                                                      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                                      HANNIBAL HOUSE
                                                      ELEPHANT AND CASTLE                    LONDON   SE1 6TE
                                                      TELEPHONE 0 1 -7 0 3 6 38 0 e x t


                                                                          TREI^V R_H,.A




                                                                                     J._ J
Your reference




                                                                                               ryi
                                                                                                 I!
                                                          DATE ESC!
Our reference
                                                           - 3 FEB f f l
 To:       R eg io na l      General      M an ag er s                                    INFO TO:
                                                          ACTION TO:
                                                          ~   7T                                         92 J a n u a r y
                                                                                                        29                  198




 MAJOR          I N CI D EN T R ES P O N S E P LA N N I N G

 Following discussion       of RGM(86)21, I agreed to w ri te to you w it h
                                                                                                                                         T
 m or e d etails of what we w er e e x p e c t i n g RHAs to do in r e p o rt in g on
 the s ta te of t heir m aj or incident r es ponse procedures.

  Basic         g u id a n c e      to     h ea l t h     a ut h o r i t i e s   on the a rr an g e m e n t s for
  d e a l i n g w i t h m a j o r acc id en ts              and incidents            of all      types is set
  out         in        Circular             HC(77)1,         w it h         the     suppl em en t       H C( 8 5 ) 2 4
  specifically                  dealing           with         acc id en ts          at     civil           nucl ea r
  ins ta ll at ions.                In addition, D A ( 8 1 ) 9 asked h ea l t h a u t h o r it ie s to
  a pp oi nt H e a l t h E m e r g e n c y P l a n n i n g O ff i c e r s w it h          the p r i m a r y task
  of h e l p i n g        to o r g a n i s e the h ea l t h serv ic e for war: some of these
  a p p o i n t m e n t s have been e x p a n d e d to cover                     other hazards            as well.
  The b a s i c         g u i d e l i n e s set       out in those d oc uments still apply and
  p r o v i d e the n e c e s s a r y f o u n d at io ns to enable Regio na l and District
  Health          Authorities              to     b u i l d plans            for the p a r t i c u l a r hazards
  w h i c h can be a n t i c i p a t e d for                any      one       area,    and     to      m a t c h the
  re so u rc e s and their d ep lo y m e n t w h i c h are a v a i l a b l e locally.

  C h a ng e s in       the o r g a n i s a t i o n      of the         NHS and the i nt ro d u c t i o n of
  r e v is e d m a n a g e m e n t a r r a n g e m e n t s have upset some e s t a b l i s h e d lines
  of      communication            and       r e s p o n s i b i l i t y in m aj or incident response
  planning. Also               recent        incidents             inv ol vi ng   m aj or      o u t b re ak s of
  h o sp i ta l i nf ec ti on        sh ow ed that             some h ea l t h    a ut h o r i t i e s did not
  h av e w r i t t e n     plans c ov e r i n g          this subject           - or     w h er e they were
  a vailable,           they      may      not       be u n i v e r s a l l y    known       nor       do    they
  n e c e s s a r i l y c over m a jo r out br ea ks o c c u r r i n g in the community.

  I would           be      g ra te fu l        therefore       if      you  would                      c o n s i d e r H ea l t h
  A u t h o r i t i e s ’ a r r a n g e m e n t s for r e s p o n d i n g to m a j o r                 incidents wi th in
  your Region, and let me k now by 31 M a rc h

           a.      w h e t h e r t here are s a t i s f a c t o r y written                              plans      for each
           D is tr ic t and for the Region; (or if not how                                               m a n y n eed to be
           developed further);

           b.        w h e t h e r these are  compatible       for     n e i g h b o u r i n g he al th
           a u t h o r i t i e s and other p ub l i c s er vices w h i c h will include the
           police;

           c.     whether   they are m o n i t o r e d     and p r a c t i c e d p e r i o d i c a l l y
           (and    if   so   ho w m an y D i s t r i c t ’s p ra c t i c e s will have taken
           p la ce s ince 1 J uly 1986)


                                                              jr
*   *

E.R.
                d.    whether      a rr an g e m e n t s  exist  t h r o u g h job descriptions,
                etc for i n f o rm in g s taff -         especially      new    a p po in te es - of
                t heir role in a m a j o r incident.

        To assist    in this        review, I   enclose a c hecklist of items w hi ch
        you will w i s h to ens ur e are cove re d by the plans     in your Region-
        this is not e x h a u s t i v e but is intended as a helpful guide.

        I     am      c o n s ci ou s    that    Departmental           g ui da nc e    on the control of
        o u t b r ea ks       of    i nf ection      and     on     r adiation       a cc idents is b e in g
        prepared            or    revised.           In     addition, g ui da nc e on civil defence
        p l a n n i n g is b e i n g r e c o n s i d e r e d p ar t l y to    reflect changes      in the
        G o v e r n m e n t ’s p l a n n i n g assumptions.           However, these need not delay
        the general m a j o r incident p l a n n i n g s t o c k t a k i n g but might require
        existing            plans      to     be   modified         at    a later stage once any new
        g u i d a n c e is published.

        In N o v e m b e r 1985, C h i e f A m b u la nc e O ff ic er s               met to       discuss their
        s e r v i c e s ’ role in m a j o r incident r es ponse p l a n n i n g for the hea lt h
        service: every A m b u l a n c e Serv ic e is known to have                              a plan     and is
        responsible              (in    accordance         w it h HC(77)1) for c o m m u n i c a t i o n s at
        the scene of m a j o r inciden ts and to and from r e c e iv in g hospitals.
        The       R eg i o na l    Ambulance           Officer      or      -     w h e r e their formal role
        e n c o m p a s s e s all haza rd s - the R e g i o n ’s              Health Emergency Planning
        Officer           might,      therefore,          p r o vi de     one s t a r t i n g point for your
        c o n s i d e r a t i o n of this issue.              In    any case            we w o u l d    expect the
        Gene ra l         Managers        at      b ot h  Region        and       D is trict levels to have
        d e s i g n a t e d a s u b o r d i n a t e to    be     r es p o n s i b l e     for    m a jo r incident
        r e sp on se        planning        and      monitoring         as      a formal part of his/ he r
        funct i o n .




                                                                                 A J MERIFIELD ^
                                                                                 D i r e c t o r of R eg ional
                                                                                     Liaison




                                                             £
    .       *
»       -       A.


•       M AJ OR  INC ID EN T       R ES PONSE     P LA NN IN G    IN      THE     H EA L T H        SERVICE C H E C KL IS T   FOR
        G r <5RAL M A NA G ER S

        The f o l l o w i n g list includes some p oi nters to items w hi ch RGMs   will w is h to
        sa ti s fy t h e ms e lv e s are cove re d in m a jo r incident response plans for their
        Region and for e ach District.

        1.       Does the role of     the  Health     Emergency            Planning     O f fi ce r cover war
        p l a n n i n g only, or does it enc om pa ss r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for all hazards?

        2.      Is      one    member     of  s taff  designated    w it h i n   the    h ea l t h    a u t h or it y
        r es p o n s i b l e for m a jo r incident r es ponse   planning       and   p r o c e du re s?        (This
        might be a HEPO function, part of general management, or the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
        of the C h i e f A m b u l a n c e Officer.   RGMs    may  wish       to   know      how     m uch s taff
        r es ource is a l lo te d to this task).

        3.     Does     each     D is trict    and   the     R eg ional H e a l t h A u t h o r i t y have a m a jo r
        incident r es po ns e plan (MIRP); are these                c om pa t i b l e inter na ll y     wit hi n the
        he al th s e r vi ce   b ot h in     the Re gi on and w it h n e i g h b o r i n g Districts /R eg io ns ;
        are they c o m p a t i b l e w i t h other p ub l i c serv ic e plans         - eg      local authority,
        police, fire and the a rmed services.

        4.     Is the Re gi on s at i s f i e d that each D i s t r i c t ’s plan is a de q u a t e to m a t c h
        pot en ti al ha za rds w it h i n the catchment area (paragraphs 5-7 of HC( 77 )1 )?

        5.      Is the R eg io n s a t i s f i e d that the A m b u la nc e S er vices  inthe Region have
        a de qu at e  o p e r a ti on al    arrangements   for      m ajor    incidents ( paragraph 8 and
        A pp en di x B of H C ( 7 7 ) 1 ) ?

        6.      Is the list of d e s i g n a t e d hos pi ta ls wi th in each Region up                           to date and
        does each       hav e internal       o p e r a ti on al a rr an g e m e n t s (paragraphs                 5 and 9 and
        A pp en d i x C to H C ( 7 7 ) 1 ) ?

        7.      Are the M IRPs        in   each D istrict               and     Re gi on        monitored         and u p d at ed
        r e g u l a r l y (par ag ra ph 10 of HC( 77 )1 )?

        8.   Are the   M I R P in each Distr ic t and the Reg io n e x e r ci se d in w hole or in
        part on a regu la r basis: whe n was the     last e xe rc is e   and what a r r an ge me nt s
        are there for future exe rc is es (paragraphs 10 and 11 of H C ( 7 7) 1) ?

        9.   What   arrangements      are t here for    l ia ising     w it h local    authorities,
        police, fire, a rmed s er vices and the p ub l i c u t i l it ie s   wi th in each District
        and the R eg i o n (paragraphs 12 and 13 of H C ( 7 7) 1) ?

        10.       What a rr an g e m e n t s are there for s t af f to be trai ne d                       inthe contents    of
        p lans?         Do all       staff   k no w  about       the   plan        -     whether           involved    in its
        i m p l e m e n t a t i o n or  not?      Are a de q u a t e a r r a n g e m e n t s made         for t ra in in g new
        appointees?

        11. What             arrangements            are t here   for     d e a li ng      w it h      press      and   public
        i m m e d i a t e l y f o l l o w i n g a m a jo r incident?

        12.       Are the       lines of     c o m m u n i c a t i o n b o t h at the scene of the incident                   and
        for d e s i g n a t e d ho sp it al s c l ea rl y laid           down    and  adequatley  monitored                   for
        e f f i c i e n c y ( paragraph 8 and A pp en d i x B of H C ( 7 7) 1) ?

        13.   What a r r a n g e m e n t s are there for m o b i l i s i n g the m aj or incident r es ponse
        plan for occ as io ns w h i c h do not        meet the       c r i t er io n for a m aj or incident?
        For e x a mp le whe n no i mmediate c as ua l t i e s are obvious but m o b i l i z a t i o n plans
        are n ee d e d such as when m o n i t o r i n g clouds of toxic fumes.

        14.  Do the m a jo r incident plans            c over            o cc u r r e n c e s    wi th in      hos pi ta ls   (eg
        such as m a j o r o u t b re ak s of i nf ec tion)?


                                                                 V
                                                                                                                    \\l(


         Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH
         Tel: Sheffield (0 7 4 2 ) 3 0 6 5 1 1   Telex: 5 4 7 2 4 6 TRHA G   Fax: (0 7 42 ) 3 0 6 9 5 6
                                                                                                             trent
         Your Reference:                                                                                     REGIONAL
         Our Reference:
                                                                                                             HEALTH
                              JAC/    C17/24                                                                 AUTHORITY
         Please ask for
                              Mr J A Costley (539)


         Mr A J Merifield
         Director of Regional Liaison
         Department of Health and Social Security
         Hannibal House
         Elephant and Castle
         LONDON SE1 6TE



             12 February 1987


             Dear Mr Meri field

             MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PLANNING
             Thank you for your letter of 29 January 1987.                                    The replies to your
             questions are summarised below:
             (a)     Comprehensive "Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures" were prepared
                     by the HEPO and adopted by the RHA in March 1986.   These were
                     prepared and agreed with the Regional Medical Sub Committee on A & E
                     Medicine (all A & E Consultants in the Region) and Chief Ambulance
                     Officers, also consulted in the preparation of the document were Chief
                     Constables, Chief Fire Officers, British Red Cross and St John
                     Ambulance and the County Emergency Planning Officers in the Region.
                     Using these guidelines DHAs have been reviewing and updating their
                     local plans, to date all Ambulance Service plans have been reviewed
                     and amended to comply with the guidelines five DHAs have so far
                     completed a review of their Major Incident Response Plan for the
                     Listed Hospitals and a further seven are in various stages of the
                     review process.
             (b)     Because of the consultation process explained at (a) above all plans
                     are/will be on completion, compatible with neighbouring health
                     authorities and other public services eg Police, Fire and Local
                     Authorities major disaster plans.

             (c)     When all plans are completed (expected late 1987) it is planned to
                     call for an annual review and update, all DHAs and the Ambulance
                     Service are encouraged to practice important elements of the local
                     plan and it is a requirement that all new staff should receive
                     instruction on it as soon as practicable after taking up appointment.
                     Since 1 July 1986 nine Districts/Ambulance Service have practiced key




                                                                         •2
T R H A 28
       elements of their plan. A further ten exercises are planned during
       1987, these involve police, fire, military and water authorities and
       in some instances the Voluntary Aid Societies.

(d)    Generally key staff are informed of their role in a major accident by
       reference in job descriptions but additionally the "ACTION CARD"
       principle is encouraged which identifies key staff and their required
       response.

Additionally following the Chernobyl incident the RHA is presently
consulting the DHAs in respect of a proposed framework which identifies the
Action, Co-ordination and Role of Key Officers in any future radiation
accidents and it is hoped that this will be agreed shortly.

Yours sincerely




B EDWAR0S
Regional General Manager




cc    J A Costley, Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                                HANNIBAL HOUSE                   Room No
                                                ELEPHANT AND CASTLE LONDON SE1 6TE
                                                TELEX 8 8 3 6 6 9 TELEPHONE 0 1 -7 0 3 6 3 8 0 EXT
                                                GTN (2916)


Your reference
                                                                                   f /
Our reference


    Mr Brian E d w a r d s                                       J)       f t i ~ ’C ,.e , j                                  (/■'   .

    Regional G e n e r a l Manager
    Trent Regional Health Aut h o r i t y                                     pet. *           -7
    Fulwood House
    Old F u l w o o d Road                                                                      /T
                                                                  j) .                                      t       A-<     J •r p
    SHEFFIELD                                                          ^ ,* I      .                i                      •„ 1 /
                                                                           vl, ',*
                                                                        Vff.-)                  '       ‘       *':•   I        ‘    ^
    S1 0 3TH                                                         1        '                                 /
                                                                                                                              9 J une    1987




     MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PLANNING

     1.        I am       g r a t e f u l for your r e s p o n s e to my letter of 29 J a n u a r y .
     Mos t r e g i o n s h a v e n o w r e p l i e d e n a b l i n g us to begin b u i l d i n g      up a
     picture           of     the       overall     state    of     p r e p a r e d n e s s for a range of
     e m e r g e n c i e s w hich might         affect     HAs.           It      is      clear  that many
     Regions are r e v i e w i n g their a r r a n g e m e n t s and in a number of cases
     have a          c lear       vie w    of   the     timing      of      this        process.    Bef o r e
     c o m m e n t i n g on p o i n t s s p e c i f i c to your Region I w o u l d like to make
     some g e n e r a l o b s e rvations.

     General C o m m e n t

     2.   The v a l u a b l e w o r k b e i n g     d o n e by  H E P O s is      clear.        Although
     these p o s t s w e r e e s t a b l i s h e d in 1981 with the s t a t e d prim a r y task
     of civil d e f e n c e p l a n n i n g (for which         the Hom e        O f f i c e m a k e s some
     financial p r o v i sion),          most H E P O s h a v e now taken up the sec o n d a r y
     and wider i m p l i c a t i o n s of        emergency     planning         as      a discipline.
     This in     turn is       in line           with the a l l - h a z a r d s a p p r o a c h favoured
     not only by the p r e s e n t G o v e r n m e n t but intern a t i o n a l l y .

     3.        Thi s b r o a d a p p r o a c h    has       the       advantage        of    d e v e l o p i n g the
     perception           of    emergency           planning           and e n a b l e s p r i n c i p l e s to be
     i d e n t i f i e d an d a p p l i e d c o n s i s t e n t l y .     In   this way          p l a n s can be
     ready for           a r ange of major i n c i d e n t s which may d e m a n d a r e s ponse
     by, or d i r e c t l y affect,              services             to   patients.          (An important
     lesson          of   the     Chernobyl           disaster           is that we can never assume
     e x e m p t i o n from r e p e r c u s s i o n s which may see m r e m o t e ) .

     4.        As    yo u know      the     Department          is   currently  revising        or
     developing guidance              on a n u m b e r of major top i c s in the em e r g e n c y
     p l a n n i n g field.   B e a r i n g in     mind      the   work  this is   likely to
     entail, an d the further a r e a s of w o r k you may h a v e i d e n t i f i e d for
     at tention, it will be imp o r t a n t to weigh c a r e f u l l y         the nu m b e r of
     officers         or    sessions        d e v o t e d to   regional  health    eme r g e n c y
     planning.
 -       *

^ iL r


             ■S.       Comment.s from          Regions sh o w e d that there was an a p p r e c i a t i o n
             that the d i s c i p l i n e of e m e r g e n c y planning,                 and its m a n i f e s t a t i o n
             in specific          a p p o i n t m e n t s ,n eeds    to e x t e n d      down to D i s t r i c t s and
             Units, both to e n s u r e a d e q u a c y of               plans       at      each      l o v e 1 and to
             guarantee compatibility                     and c o o p e r a t i o n   between them and ac r o s s
             b oundaries.         For our part., b e a r i n g in min d the issue                          by the Home
             O f f i c e of    the c o m p r e h e n s i v e E m e r g e n c y P l a n n i n g G u i d a n c e to Local
             A uthorities, we are c o n s i d e r i n g how best a D e p a r t m e n t a l Em e r g e n c y
             P l a n n i n g Unit     c o u l d b r i n g into a s i n g l e focus r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for
             all e m e r g e n c y p l a n n i n g policy, with s p e c i a l i s t a d v i c e from a wid e
             v ari e t y of experts.

             Region S p e c i f i c C o m m e n t s

             6.        1 was        reassured    by your r e s p o n s e as to the c o m p r e h e n s i v e
             s t a t e of p l a n n i n g in Trent region.      It     was p a r t i c u l a r l y  g o o d to
             not e       the      work   on  nuclear     accidents       fol l o w i n g   the C h e rnobyl
             incident;            I understand     that,   your    HEPO      Mr      Costley       has     had
             d i s c u s s i o n s with the D e partment about the p r o p o s e d f r a m e w o r k -

             7.        You m a d e      no ment i o n   of p l a n n i n g for o u t b r e a k s of infection
             in      the       community         or  in hospital.             You     will        recall     that
             d e f i c i e n c i e s in     this area of H A s 1 p l a n n i n g wer e h i g h l i g h t e d in
             the medi c a l p ress last year.                 P e n d i n g further      g u i d a n c e from the
             Department, we             w o u l d like to h a v e a short report on the extent to
             w hich personnel, arid their key r oles for r e s p o n s e to o u t b r e a k s of
             infection, h a v e been i d e n t i f i e d in the Trent Region.




                                                                                       \




                                                 i ,
                                                 i '


                                                                                           A J MERIFIELD
                                                               /
                                 /                                                         D i r ector of Regional
                                                           f
                                                                                             L iaisori
                                                                     /
                                                                        OMw ©v e i j - 'z t A
 FuSwood House, Old Fulwood Road, Sheffield S10 3TH                          t --
 Tel: Sheffield (0742) 630300   Telex: 547246 T R H A G   Fax: (0742)        ^      *t 1* 0 1 * 1 lb
 306956


 Your Reference:                                                                    REGIONAL
 Our Reference:                                                                     HEALTH
               “   Dr I S Johnson (Ext 252)                                         AUTHORITY


17 August 1987

Mr A J Meri field
Director of Regional Liaison
Department of Health & Social Security
Hannibal House
Elephant & Castle
London SE1 6TE

Dear Mr Merifield

MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PLANNING

I am writing on behalf of Mr Edwards in reply to the specific point you
raised in paragraph 7 of your letter dated 9 June regarding outbreaks of
infectious diseases. Since the Stanley Royd outbreak, all districts in
Trent have undertaken a thorough review of their procedures for handling
such outbreaks and have produced their own action plans. In addition six
dictricts have extended this to include outbreaks which occur in the
community, whilst the remainder use current DHSS guidelines. Ten districts
have a standing control of infection committee and in the other two
dictricts provision is made for an appropriate committee to be formed in the
event of a major outbreak. In all cases the proper officer is a key figure
in the control of infection plans. The attached table provides a very brief
summary of the current position; should you wish to study individual action
plans in more detail I will be pleased to arrange for copies to be sent to
you,

Yours si nrprel vr»




Dr I S JohnSorT
Senior Registrar in Community Medicine



Enc


cc Mr B Edwards
   Mr J A Costley
   Dr P R S Gowers




 T.R.H.A. 28
                                              OUTBREAKS OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES

District       Proper Officer   Designation   Ccntrol of Infection   Designation of    Action plan for outbreaks of infection
                                              Ccnmittee?             Chairman          Ccnnunity             Hospital



Barnsley       Dr Oddy          SCM           Yes                     Microbiologist   DHSS guidelines      Own action plan
                                Env Health

N Derbyshire   Dr Feam           SCM          Yes                     Microbiologist   DHSS guidelines      CXrfn action plan

S Derbyshire   Dr Sayal          SCM          Yes                     Microbiologist   CXrfn                Own      "

                                 Env Health

Leicester      Dr Morgan         SCM          Yes                     Public Health    CXrfn                CXrfn
                                 Env Health                           Lab Director

S lines        Dr   Mcllrqy      EMD                                  Consultant       CXrfn                CXrfn
               Dr   Whiteley      SCM         Yes                     Microbiologist
               Dr   Hird        • S Clin MD
               Dr   Loftus        S Clin MD

Sheffield      Dr Todd           EMD          Yes                     Asstn General    DHSS guidelines       CXrfn
                                                                      Manager

Rotherham      Dr Mahaderan      SCM          Yes                     Consultant       DHSS guidelines       CXm
                                 Env Health                           Microbiologist

N lines        Dr Jones          EMD          No                      —                CXrfn                 CXrfn

C Notts        Dr Mousley        EMD          Yes                     being            C un                  CXrfn
                                                                      reconstituted

Nottingham     Dr Mason          SCM          No                      —                DHSS guidelines       CXrfn

Bassetlaw      Dr Allen          EMD          Yes                     EMD              DHSS guidelines       CXrfn   ,,
                                                                                       & own

Doncaster      Dr Stalker        EMD          Yes                     Consultant       CXrfn                 Own ,
                                                                      Microbiologist
            JAC/     C17/24 '■ ' ' ~'
            Mr J A Costley (ext 539)
Addressed to:    District General Manaqers
                 Chief Ambulance Officers
                 Director BTS

22 August 1988

Dear Colleague
MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PLANNING - MONITORING AND REVIEW
You will be aware that in April 1986 the RHA gave its approval to the issue
of Regional Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures, the contents of which
had been agreed in consultation with the Regional Medical Committee - Sub
Committee in Accident and Emergency Medicine, Chief Ambulance Officers,
Chief Constables, Chief Fire Officers and others in the Region.
The Department have recently requested that we initiate a review of Health
Authority arrangements for responding to major accidents. In this regard it
would be helpful to know the following:-
(a)   Date current plans (hospitals and ambulance service) were last reviewed
      and updated and has a copy been sent to the RHA?
(b)   Whether plans are monitored, practiced and updated regularly (and if so
      how many practices have taken place since July 1987)?
(c)   Whether arrangements exist through job descriptions etc for informing
      staff, especially new appointees, of their role in a major accident?
(d)   Whether plans are compatible for neighbouring health authorities and
      other public services including the Police and Fire services.
(e)   Is one member of staff designated for major incident response planning
      and procedures?   (Please identify by name or appointment.)
(f) Is the list of designated hospitals up to date?     (See Annex A of TRHA
    Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures.)
(q) What arrangements are there for dealing with press and public
     immediately following a major accident (see Section 8, page 30 of TRHA
    Guidelines on Major Accident Procedures).
I should be grateful if you would let me have a reply by end of October
1988.
Yours sincerely


  A COSTLEY
Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer

c c : RGM
      ARGM(Admin)
      RMO
Sheffield Health Authority                                              Westbrook House
                                                                        Sharrow Vale Road
                                                                        Sheffield S11 8EU
GENERAL MANAGER
A. P. Mapplebeck, M.A., D.S.A., A.H.S.M.                                Telephone (0742) 670333


Please ask for:
O urref:   A4/1^                           Yourref:   JAC^   ^ C17/24

      14 November 1988


      Mr J A Costley
      Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
      Trent Regional Health Authority




      Dear Mr Costley

      Major Disaster
      Major Incident Response Planning

      I would refer to your letter dated the 22 August 1988 which indicated that
      the Department of Health had requested a review of Health Authority
      arrangements responding to major accidents.

      As requested I detail the Health Authority's response to the questions
      outlined in your letter as follows

      a) The major accident plan for the Northern General Hospital was last
          reviewed and updated during 1986.  It is intended that the plan will
          be reviewed again within the next few months. The plan for the
          Royal Hallamshire Hospital was revised in September 1988. I enclose
          for your information copies of the plan for both these Units.

      b)   Whilst plans are updated on a regular basis no practices have taken
            place in respect of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital since July 1987•
            The Northern General Hospitaldid in fact test the plan within the
            Department in September 1987 and another such practice is due to take
            place shortly. Discussions are currently taking place within this
            Unit as to whether or not a full scale practice should take place
            within the Hospital involving all Emergency Services.

            All new staff directly involved in the major accident procedure are
            fully briefed concerning their responsibilities. Action cards which
            detail a set of instructions to staff are used at the Royal Hallamshire
            Hospital.

            Copies of the plan are submitted to the Police, Fire and Ambulance
            Services and as far as we are aware the Accident Plan is compatible
            with neighbouring Authorities and other public services.

            Royal Hallamshire Hospital - Mr _____________ Principal Administrative
            Assistant.
            Northern General Hospital - Mr N S McKay, Unit General Manager.




      Continued
Mr J A Costley




f)   The information contained within the list of Major Accident and
     Emergency Departments is accurate with the exception of the
     telephone number for the Northern General Hospital which should
     read (0742) 434343.

g)   Areas are designated for both press and the public and individual
     members of the administrative staff are designated to deal with
     enquiries.

Please contact me if you require any further assistance.

Yours sincerely




PrincipaiyAdministrative Assistant
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                          A M B U L A N C E S E R V IC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                               FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                  ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                          TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 361581



                                                                                                   Mr. A. P A G E , F.A.S.I.
                    OUR REF:          J
                                                                                                     CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                    YOUR REF:                                                                        AMBULANCE OFFICER
                    Please ask for:




9th September 1988.


Mr. J. A. Costley,
Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer,
Trent Regional Health Authority,
Fulwood House,
Old Fulwood Road,
SHEFFIELD.
S10 3TH



Dear Mr. Costley,

MAJOR INCIDENT RESPONSE PLANNING - MONITORING AND REVIEW

Further to your letter dated 22nd August 1988, regarding the above, I can
confirm the following on behalf of SYMAS:-

(a)   our current plans were reviewed shortly after our last major incident
       exercise which took place in November 1986;

(b)   plans are monitored and certain aspects are practiced and updated on
       a regular basis. There has not been a practice since 1986, although
       one is planned for the very near future;

(c)   operational staff are briefed regarding their role at major incidents
       at induction courses, post proficiency courses and five year
       refresher courses held at both local and regional level;

(d)   our plans are compatible with neighbouring health authorities and
       other public services including the fire and police. We have
       exchanged plans with other ambulance services;

(e)   the member of staff who is designated responsibility for major
       incidents planning procedures is Mr. D. Trueman, Staff Officer, SYMAS
      H.Q.;
(f)   I have checked the list of hospitals (Annex A) and find it to be
       correct and up to date;

(g)   as SYMAS has its own Public Relations Officer (Mrs. |         \ s*ie
      will be delegated the responsibility for dealing with the press and
      public immediately following a major accident. Mrs.         las
      regular contact with the media throughout South Yorkshire who are
      aware of her position and responsibilities.


                                          o

                                                                                                                  CP65/32586
9th September 1988.


Mr. J. A. Costley,
Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer,
Trent Regional Health Authority.




I hope the above answers the queries you raised in your letter. If I
be of any further assistance in this matter, please do not hesitate to
contact me.

Yours sincerely,




A. Hopkiii^,,
DEPUTY CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
            JAC/IC 17 /1
            Mr J A Costley (ext 539)



Addressed to District General Managers


19 December 1988


Dear Colleague

H C (33)31 EMERGENCY PLANNING IN THE NHS

At the Regional and District General Managers meeting held on
17 November 1988 it was agreed that I would contact you to arrange a
date in January, February or March 1989 to discuss more fully with your
key staff the implications of HC(33)31. Minute No 88/125 refers.

You may agree that in order to obtain maximum value from such a meeting
the attendance should include:

District nominees (contact points, medical and non medical) for liaison
                   and forward planning)
UGMs (particularly acute and community services)
A & E consultant
Chief Ambulance Officer
Nursing Officer
FPC Administrator
LMC GP representative)
County Emergency Planning Officer
VAS (British Red Cross, St John's Ambulance)

Also, subject to y our agreement, it would be my intention to give a
30/40 minute presentation on principles and concepts and to concentrate
on a few main areas, which if developed would co-incidentally strengthen
and be an extension of our normal hospital major disaster procedures
to:
(1)   Maximise our response to a mass casualty situation

(2)   Continue to care for the sick in the community

Please note that I would be happy to fit in with any other arrangements
or suggestions and that I will provide a copy of the Handbook "Emergency
Planning in the NHS" for each of those attending.

To date a meeting has been arranged in:
Leicester             Friday 13 January 1989
Barnsley              Monday 13 March 1989

I look forward to hearing from you in due course.

Yours sincerely




J A COSTLEY
Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer




cc:   Mr B Edwards, RGM
      Dr R Alderslade, RMO
      Mr F J Kenny, ARGM (Arinin)
