L YOXALL - AMBULANCEMAN - BARNSLEY AMBULANCE STATION

Date:   20.4.89

Time:   1215-1306

Duty:   Off Duty

I was on my day off and was going to the match with a friend,
we used the Leppings Lane entrance.

We went through the first gate (wrought iron) at approximately 1445, Police
Officers were closing one side of the gate. I could see that things were
building up, so I closed (on my own) the other side.

Our route was to use the second gate (concertina) which I passed through,
this was closed as soon as I was through and my friend wasn't with  me, so I
waited - it wasn't full in this area and I bought a programme.

I knew that the kop gets full, so I went around to the corner tostand   near
the score-board so I could watch for my friend and the match.

Ten minutes later a surge of people came round the corner. I thought they
must have opened the gate. This was confirmed by my friend who told me
that he had got in on the second opening. I was then able to see       and
the match started.

The loudspeaker was shouting to the people in Leppings Lane - don't push,
don't push, people were already trying to get over the fence, so I stopped
looking at the match.

A police officer ran onto the pitch to stop the game. People in the crowd
didn't realise what was happening, the loudspeaker was saying to the people
on the pitch to get back off.

The next thing I noticed was that some people were trying to resuscitate a
young boy on the pitch. I then decided it was pointless to stand and
watch, so I made my way down to the rear of the Leppings Lane tunnel to
help.

When I reached the area people were laid down, the first person I saw was
dead, with a police officer and a member of the public trying CPR on him.
They asked me if I could help. I tried CPR for a short while, but it
proved fruitless. I explained to them that it was too late for him, so I
moved on to another chap who was laid out. A police officer had already
started to put him on his side, he was also dead.

I checked for patients who were breathing and unconscious to turn them on
to their sides. Quite a few people seemed to know what they were doing and
had already turned themn onto their sides.
SHEET 2 - L YOXALL - AMBULANCEMAN - BARNSLEY AMBULANCE STATION

Many of the patients faces had already been covered up, I uncovered one
young youngster, another young lad was stood near him crying. I asked him
if he knew him, he replied no, but I asked him to stop with him, he shouted
back, he's dead. I replied I know he is but stay with him. Another had
come up and he said he would look after him.

An ambulance came into the gate, I think it was a Sheffield crew, one of
the crew members was trying to resuscitate some-one in the gateway. That
ambulance was loaded up straight away. My main aim was to impress on the
driver how serious things were and to make sure extra ambulances were
coming. I asked him how many were coming, as he was leaving - he shouted
20   .
I spoke to a police inspector and said you had better start getting
casualties down to this gate ready for the ambulances and keep the rest of
the people back into the ground.

I left him straight away, two police officers were kneeling down at a
youngster. As I bent down I could feel a good pulse at the wrist, and I
asked how he was. I said I would get them a stretcher as soon as possible.

As I stood up, supporters were trying to carry a large fan, so I helped
them to carry him to the wall ready for the ambulance.

Police officers were bringing casualties out at this time, I helped one
your lad with chest injuries.

Another ambulance came up the lane, it was L/A__________ I helped them
load a casualty then I turned and got the empty stretcher out and took it
to where I had left the two police officers with the youngster.

We waited for the next ambulance coming up the lane and began to close the
rear doors of the ambulance. L/A          asked me to get on with him to
help, and I attended to one of the patients en-route to the Northern
General Hospital where we were met at the doors.

We decided that on returning one of us would have to stay behind. We
returned and two stretcher and two walking cases and a nurse were placed
into the ambulance. L/A P         ]stayed, he told us to go to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital this time.

On returning to the ground from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital things were
much calmer. L/A            returned to his ambulance and I told him I was
going to get off as there was nothing else to do as a team of doctors (in
civilain dress) were certifying death (1 6 2 0 ).

I returned to the ground and things were calm there as well. So I made my
way home ten minutes later after speaking to several Liverpool fans.

 I returned to the ground to see if I could find       , but I couldn't
 find him. I knew he was alright because some-one had seen him.
