             - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD AMBULANCE STATION


Date:   19.4.89

Time:   1130-1310

Duty:   1000-1800     (Extra crew)

Call Sign:     S102

Crewed with


I was on duty on 15th April 1989 as part of an extra crew rota in for the
football match, and during that morning we did several admission cases,
before being brought back to Middlewood Station on standby at approximately
1330.

From the Station we could see the build up to the match, one thing worried
me, that was the majority of the young men were drinking on their way to
the ground. I expected trouble if they returned after the match and
started fighting outside the ground.

We were watching TV when a news flash interrupted the programme, at the
same time the telephone rang approximately 1510. We were told to proceed
down to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, not on red or urgent, just
proceed down to that entrance to standby nearer the ground.

As we approached Cathcar Lane we could see down to Leppings lane at the
same time we received a call to proceed down to the Sports Hall.

Due to the road network we went down Parkside Road now with the blue lights
on due to the crowds and build up of civilian traffic on Penistone Road.

On arrival at the gate a policeman met us and directed us to the Sports
hall entrance (time from station to Sports Hall approx 3 minutes).

We reversed to the first- aid room at this stage I didn't see any
casualties.

Q.A.M.        1 went into the first-aid room, several people assisted by
Police Officers came limping into the area.

A stretcher case was carried round, I looked into the first-aid room, my
crew member was attending to a patient with a badly fractured arm, the room
seemed full with people having difficulty breathing.

I asked the St John's to blanket the floor area to receive casualties. I
then tried to contact Control, all I managed to obtain was static but could
make out Control O f f i c e r p a y i n g change to Channel 1. I wanted to
update them of the situation.
SHEET 2 -           - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION

I finally made contact with Control and asked for an Officer because we had
an incident that was developing. Control reported back that officers were
present within the ground and would contact them.

More and more casualties came into the area. A large number of Police
Officers rushed out from within the Sports Hall. I knew at this stage we
had a major incident.

Patients were being placed on blankets, an off duty ambulanceman made
himself known to me and offered his help. I carried out a further
examination of the first patients who seemed stable at that time.

A large wave of casualties came, some of the casualties who had come on
stretchers got up and walked, I placed them in one corner out of the way.

The ambulance was moved by QAM         to make more room.

A stretcher with a young person on was brought round, his face was covered
up, the police carrying the stretcher said he was dead. I removed the coat
and examined him, he was dead.

I told them to put him into the Sports Hall. From now on it was a
continual stream of patients on stretchers, boards etc carried into the
area.

The ambulance was stripped of blankets, equipment, dressings.   A woman in a
red track suit asked for the Frac Pacs.

Police Officers began to stay and assist me with the casualties. Urine
came through cracks in the roof as we were performing CPR. I don't think
it was done on purpose but it made conditions unpleasant.

I radioed to ask for assistance from an officer, I was informed that the
casualty clearing point was at entrance 'O' (Thats where I was).

Doctors came and assisted, drips were put up, where the equipment and
doctors came from I don't know.

Patients brought round on stretchers with Police Officers performing CPR.
I used the Pneu-pac on patients for a period of time until it was evident
that they wouldn't respond.

In between CPR attempts, I placed airways into unconscious patients and
turned them into the recovery position.

I could see ambulances pulling in and saw ADO Morley. I made my way
through to him and asked for ambulances, he said that he would send
support.
SHEET 3 -              - AMBULANCEMAN - MIDDLEWOOD STATION

On returning a Police sergeant was sat in the driving seat of the
ambulance. Two cases one with a drip in situ and a Doctor in attendance
and another stretcher case. Mr Hopkins told me to get off to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital.

On arrival the parking was organised and I was directed to the Orthopaedic
department. The doctor stayed at cas to assist.

On clearing the cases we were directed to Netherthorpe Parkway and onto
Herries Road Garage.

Returning the traffic and crowds were extremely heavy with cars at a
standstill.

S/0 Eason at the garage sent us back to entrance ’O'. I then met up with
my crew mate. ACMAO Jones met us and updated us on the situation.

We were returned to Middlewood Station for other duties and to equip the
ambulance. We then did 3 urgent transfers from the Northern General
Hospital to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

We finished at 2145.
