Actus Quintus. Scena Prima.

Enter a Doctor of Physicke, and a Wayting Gentlewoman.

  Doct. I haue too Nights watch'd with you, but can
perceiue no truth in your report. When was it shee last
walk'd?
  Gent. Since his Maiesty went into the Field, I haue
seene her rise from her bed, throw her Night-Gown vppon
her, vnlocke her Closset, take foorth paper, folde it,
write vpon't, read it, afterwards Seale it, and againe returne
to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleepe

   Doct. A great perturbation in Nature, to receyue at
once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching.
In this slumbry agitation, besides her walking, and other
actuall performances, what (at any time) haue you heard
her say?
  Gent. That Sir, which I will not report after her

   Doct. You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should

   Gent. Neither to you, nor any one, hauing no witnesse
to confirme my speech.
Enter Lady, with a Taper.

Lo you, heere she comes: This is her very guise, and vpon
my life fast asleepe: obserue her, stand close

   Doct. How came she by that light?
  Gent. Why it stood by her: she ha's light by her continually,
'tis her command

   Doct. You see her eyes are open

   Gent. I, but their sense are shut

   Doct. What is it she do's now?
Looke how she rubbes her hands

   Gent. It is an accustom'd action with her, to seeme
thus washing her hands: I haue knowne her continue in
this a quarter of an houre

   Lad. Yet heere's a spot

   Doct. Heark, she speaks, I will set downe what comes
from her, to satisfie my remembrance the more strongly

   La. Out damned spot: out I say. One: Two: Why
then 'tis time to doo't: Hell is murky. Fye, my Lord, fie,
a Souldier, and affear'd? what need we feare? who knowes
it, when none can call our powre to accompt: yet who
would haue thought the olde man to haue had so much
blood in him

   Doct. Do you marke that?
  Lad. The Thane of Fife, had a wife: where is she now?
What will these hands ne're be cleane? No more o'that
my Lord, no more o'that: you marre all with this starting

   Doct. Go too, go too:
You haue knowne what you should not

   Gent. She ha's spoke what shee should not, I am sure
of that: Heauen knowes what she ha's knowne

   La. Heere's the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes
of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.
Oh, oh, oh

   Doct. What a sigh is there? The hart is sorely charg'd

   Gent. I would not haue such a heart in my bosome,
for the dignity of the whole body

   Doct. Well, well, well

   Gent. Pray God it be sir

   Doct. This disease is beyond my practise: yet I haue
knowne those which haue walkt in their sleep, who haue
dyed holily in their beds

   Lad. Wash your hands, put on your Night-Gowne,
looke not so pale: I tell you yet againe Banquo's buried;
he cannot come out on's graue

   Doct. Euen so?
  Lady. To bed, to bed: there's knocking at the gate:
Come, come, come, come, giue me your hand: What's
done, cannot be vndone. To bed, to bed, to bed.

Exit Lady.

  Doct. Will she go now to bed?
  Gent. Directly

   Doct. Foule whisp'rings are abroad: vnnaturall deeds
Do breed vnnaturall troubles: infected mindes
To their deafe pillowes will discharge their Secrets:
More needs she the Diuine, then the Physitian:
God, God forgiue vs all. Looke after her,
Remoue from her the meanes of all annoyance,
And still keepe eyes vpon her: So goodnight,
My minde she ha's mated, and amaz'd my sight.
I thinke, but dare not speake

   Gent. Good night good Doctor.

Exeunt.
